Causality-based Feature Selection: Methods and Evaluations
17 Nov 2019

Kui Yu yukui@hfut.edu.cn 
Xianjie Guo 
Lin Liu lin.liu@unisa.edu.au 
Jiuyong Li jiuyong.li@unisa.edu.au 
Hao Wang 
Zhaolong Ling 

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering
School of Information Technology and Mathematical Sciences
Hefei University of Technology
230601Xianjie, HefeiChina


School of Computer Science and Information Engineering
University of South Australia
5095AdelaideSAAustralia


Xindong Wu
Hefei University of Technology
230601HefeiChina


Mininglamp Academy of Sciences
Mininglamp Technology
100084BejingChina

Causality-based Feature Selection: Methods and Evaluations
17 Nov 2019Editor:Feature selectionCausality-based feature selectionBayesian networkMarkov boundary
Feature selection is a crucial preprocessing step in data analytics and machine learning. Classical feature selection algorithms select features based on the correlations between predictive features and the class variable and do not attempt to capture causal relationships between them. It has been shown that the knowledge about the causal relationships between features and the class variable has potential benefits for building interpretable and robust prediction models, since causal relationships imply the underlying mechanism of a system. Consequently, causality-based feature selection has gradually attracted greater attentions and many algorithms have been proposed. In this paper, we present a comprehensive review of recent advances in causality-based feature selection. To facilitate the development of new algorithms in the research area and make it easy for the comparisons between new methods and existing ones, we develop the first open-source package, called CausalFS, which consists of most of the representative causality-based feature selection algorithms (available at https://github.com/kuiy/CausalFS). Using CausalFS, we conduct extensive experiments to compare the representative algorithms with both synthetic and real-world data sets. Finally, we discuss some challenging problems to be tackled in future causality-based feature selection research.

Introduction

Feature selection plays an essential role in high-dimensional data analytics (Guyon and Elisseeff, 2003;Aliferis et al., 2010a;Wu et al., 2013) and it is widely employed in all kinds of machine learning solutions. Feature selection is to find a subset of features from a large number of predictive features for building predictive models for a target or class variable of interest. For example, gene (i.e., feature) selection can identify a small number of informative genes from a high-dimensional gene data set for predicting a disease or directing experimental studies to validate the identified genes (as genetic factors of a disease) in laboratories. Now feature selection is more critical than ever, since a data set with high-dimensionality has become ubiquitous in various applications (Zhai et al., 2014;Yu et al., 2016). In the previous example, a gene expression data set may easily have more than 10,000 predictive features (Saeys et al., 2007). For another example, the Web Spam Corpus 2011 collected approximately 16 million predictive features for malicious web detection (Wang et al., 2012). Almost all machine learning methods may not directly work on data sets of such high dimensionality without feature selection. As a result, in the last two decades, feature selection has been well studied and has achieved great success in reducing computational costs of learning and improving the generalization ability of predictive models .

Existing feature selection methods can be broadly categorized into filter, wrapper, and embedded methods. A filter method is independent of a predictive model, whereas the other two types of methods are predictive model dependent. Due to their independence of predictive models, filter methods are able to achieve fast processing speed and have no bias on specific predictive models. With the rapid increase of high dimensional data, filter methods have been attracting more attentions than ever. In this paper, we focus on causality-based feature selection, an emerging successful type of filter methods. In feature selection, a feature is considered as a strongly relevant feature, or a weakly relevant feature, or an irrelevant feature with respect to a class variable of interest (Kohavi and John, 1997). A classical feature selection method aims to find a subset of relevant features based on the correlations between (predictive) features and the class variable (Guyon and Elisseeff, 2003). In general, correlations do not capture the causal relationships between features and the class variable, but only their co-occurrences. Recent studies have shown that causal features may provide the following potential benefits in feature selection for classification (Guyon et al., 2007;Aliferis et al., 2010a).

• Causal features can improve the interpretability of predictive models (Hofman et al., 2017;Ribeiro et al., 2016). Correlations capture only the co-occurrence of features and the class variable, hence the selected features often do not provide a convincing interpretation for predictions. For example, a strong correlation between yellow fingers (of a smoker) and lung cancer may be found in patient records, making yellow fingers a good predictive feature of lung cancer. However, clearly yellow fingers is not a reasonable interpretation at all for lung cancer. In fact, the causes of lung cancer, such as smoking, can provide a reasonable interpretation for the prediction of lung cancer.

• Causal features can improve the robustness of predictive models (Athey, 2017;Peters et al., 2016;Zhang et al., 2015;Magliacane et al., 2018). Causal relationships imply the underlying mechanism about the class variable and thus they are persistent across different settings or environments. For example, we want to build a predictive model to diagnose lung cancer using historical patient data. Based on the historical data, a predictive model built using non-causal features such as yellow fingers may not Figure 1: An example of a MB in a lung-cancer Bayesian network produce good predictions. This is because nowdays smokers are very careful to hide their smoking habit and do not leave yellow stain on their fingers, and hence the distribution of symptoms presented by patients may become different from that of the historical data. In contrast, if the causes of lung cancer of patients (such as smoking) were selected as the predictive features, a model built on the historical data will be robust.

In recent years, causality-based feature selection has gradually attracted more and more attentions from both machine learning and causal discovery domains (Aliferis et al., 2010a;Guyon et al., 2007;Yu et al., 2018b). Causality-based feature selection methods identify a Markov boundary (MB) or a subset of the MB such as parents and children (PC) (i.e., direct causes and direct effects) of the class variable from a data set. The notion of MB was proposed in the context of a Bayesian network (BN) (Pearl, 2014). If the model generating the data set can be faithfully represented by a BN, then the MB of the class variable is unique and consists of the parents, children, and spouses (i.e., other parents of the class variable's children) of the class variable. Figure 1 gives an example of an MB in the BN of lung cancer (Guyon et al., 2007). The MB of Lung cancer includes Smoking and Gentics (parents), Coughing and Fatigue (children), and Allergy (spouse). As can be seen in Figure 1, the MB of a class variable implies the local causal relationships between the class variable and the features (variables) in its MB. Most importantly, under certain assumptions (to be discussed in Section 2), the MB of the class variable is the minimal feature subset with maximum predictivity for classification since all other features are probabilistically independent of the class variable conditioning on its MB (Pearl, 2014;Koller and Sahami, 1996;.

Since causality-based feature selection explicitly induces the local causal relationships around the class variable and has theoretical guarantees, it becomes a promising direction (Guyon et al., 2007;Aliferis et al., 2010a). In the past decade, many efforts have been made on causality-based feature selection and many algorithms have been proposed (without learning an entire BN structure involving all features in a data set) (Aliferis et al., 2010a;Yu et al., 2018b). The developed causality-based feature selection algorithms provide a new and complementary algorithmic methodology to enrich feature selection, especially for achieving explainable and robust machine learning methods.

To advance the research in causality-based feature selection, a comprehensive review of the state-of-the-art techniques in this area is in need. However, so far, there has not been such a review available. Aliferis et al. (Guyon et al., 2007;Aliferis et al., 2010a,b) proposed a general local learning framework for causality-based feature selection, which are focused on three specific causality-based feature selection algorithms (e.g., MMMB, HITON-MB, and semi-HITON-MB) and their extensions to the BN structure learning, but the work is not a survey paper. Guyon et al. (Guyon et al., 2007) presented a comparison of the motivations and pros/cons of causality-based and classical feature selection approaches at the conceptual level, but again they did not provide a survey of causality-based feature selection algorithms. Recently, Yu et al. (Yu et al., 2018b) discussed some representative causalitybased and classical feature selection algorithms, but the work was focused on developing a unified view to link causality-based feature selection with classical feature selection instead of presenting an extensive review of causality-based feature selection algorithms. There have been some recent reviews on causal inference, such as (Guo et al., 2018;Glymour et al., 2019;Zhang et al., 2017), but they mainly focused on the advances on learning causal relations between features. Meanwhile almost all reviews regarding feature selection focused on classical feature selection methods in the past decades (Guyon and Elisseeff, 2003;. In summary, so far there is little work on a comprehensive review of causality-based feature selection algorithms.

In addition, there is no any open-source toolbox/package which implements existing causality-based feature selection algorithms. An open-source toolbox plays a crucial role for facilitating the development of new algorithms and making comparisons between the new methods and existing ones easy, and it may further promote both scientific and practical studies in machine learning and causal discovery.

In this paper, we make the following contributions to fill the gaps discussed above.

• We extensively review the causality-based feature selection methods, including the two types of causality-based feature selection methods, constraint-based and score-based methods, and the algorithms of distinguishing causes and effects. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt on presenting an extensive survey of causalitybased feature selection and its recent advances.

• We develop the first comprehensive open-source package that implements the representative and state-of-the-art causality-based feature selection algorithms. The package is written in C language, easy to use, and completely open source.

• We conduct a comprehensive empirical evaluation on representative causality-based feature selection algorithms with both synthetic and real-world data sets.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives basic background knowledge. Section 3 reviews constraint-based methods. Section 4 reviews score-based methods. Section 5 discusses the algorithms for distinguishing causes from effects using the outputs of causality-based feature selection algorithms. Section 6 presents the open-source package of causality-based feature selection. Section 7 reports the evaluation results. Section 8 concludes the paper and discusses some open problems.


Markov boundary and Causality-based feature selection

In this section, we first briefly introduce the background knowledge of MB and BN, then we link MB with feature selection.


Bayesian network, Markov boundary, and causality-based feature selection

Let C be a class variable and F = {F 1 , F 2 , · · · , F M } be a feature set including M distinct features. We use F i ⊥ ⊥ F j |S, where i = j and S ⊆ F \ {F i , F j }, to denote that F i is conditionally independent of F j given feature set S, and F i ⊥ ⊥ F j |S to represent that F i is conditionally dependent on F j given S. Let S be any set of variables within V , we use S \V i as the shorthand of S \{V i } and S ∪V i as the shorthand of S∪{V i }. Let V = F ∪C = {V 1 , V 2 , · · · , V M +1 }, V i = F i (1 ≤ i ≤ M ), and V M +1 = C. Let P (V ) be the joint probability distribution over V and G = (V, E) represent a directed acyclic graph (DAG) with nodes V and edges E, where an edge V i → V j denotes that V i is a parent (direct cause) of V j while V j is a child (direct effect) of V i . The triplet V, G, P (V ) is called a BN if and only if V, G, P (V ) satisfies the Markov condition: every node of G is independent of any subset of its non-descendants conditioning on the parents of the node (Pearl, 2014). A BN encodes the joint probability P (V ) over V and decomposes P (V ) into a product of the conditional probability distributions of the variables given their parents in G. Let P a(V i ) be the set of parents of V i in G. Then, we have
P (V 1 , V 2 , · · · , V M +1 ) = M +1 i=1 P (V i |P a(V i ))(1)
In the following, we introduce the key concepts and assumptions related to BN, Markov boundary, and causality-based feature selection.

Definition 1 (Faithfulness) (Pearl, 2014) Given a BN < V, G, P (V ) >, G is faithful to P (V ) if and only if every conditional independence present in P is entailed by G and the Markov condition. P (V ) is faithful to G if and only if there exists a DAG G such that G is faithful to P (V ).

Definition 2 (Causal sufficiency) (Pearl, 2014;Spirtes et al., 2000) Causal sufficiency assumes that any common cause of two or more variables in V is also in V .

Before introducing Markov boundary, we first present the concept of Markov blanket.

Definition 3 (Markov blanket, Mb) (Pearl, 2014) A Markov blanket of the class variable C (M b(C)) in V is a set of variables conditioned on which all other variables are independent of C, that is, for every
V i ∈ V \ (M b(C) ∪ C), C ⊥ ⊥ V i |M b(C).
Clearly, a variable may have multiple Markov blankets. For example, the set of all variables V excluding C is also a Markov blanket of C. In practice, we are often interested in minimal Markov blankets.

Definition 4 (Markov boundary, MB) (Pearl, 2014) If no proper subset of M b(C) satisfies the definition of Markov blanket of C, then M b(C) is called the Markov boundary of C, denoted as M B(C).

Theorem 1 states the uniqueness of MBs and what the MB of a node is in a BN.

Theorem 1 (Pearl, 2014) Under the faithfulness assumption, the MB of a node in a BN is unique and it consists of the node's parents (direct causes), children (direct effects), and spouses (other parents of the node's children).

In a BN, the MB of a node renders the node statistically independent of all the remaining nodes conditioning on the MB (Pearl, 2014), as shown in Proposition 1 below.
Proposition 1 (Pearl, 2014) In a BN, let M B(X) be the MB of node X, ∀Y ∈ V \ (M B(X) ∪ X), X ⊥ ⊥ Y |M B(X) holds.
For example, given the MB of Lung cancer in Figure 1, i.e., Smoking, Gentics, Coughing, Fatigue, and Allergy, Lung cancer is independent of the remaining nodes. Proposition 1 illustrates that learning the MB of the class variable is actually a procedure of feature selection Aliferis et al., 2010a). Koller and Sahami (Koller and Sahami, 1996) were the first to introduce the concept of MBs to feature selection. The work in Yu et al., 2018b) stated that under the faithfulness assumption, (1) the strongly relevant features belong to the MB of the class variable, and (2) the MB is the minimal feature subset with maximum predictivity for classification. Existing causality-based feature selection algorithms aim to learn the MB of the class variable or a subset of the MB (Guyon et al., 2007;Aliferis et al., 2010a).


The general strategy of causality-based feature selection

Forward-backward feature selection is one of the most basic and commonly-used feature selection frameworks. The forward phase of forward-backward selection starts with a (usually empty) set of features and adds features to it, until a given stopping criterion is met, a the backward phase of forward-backward selection starts with a set of features (usually obtained from the forward phase) and then removes features from that set until a stopping criterion is met. Under the forward-backward framework, there are two general strategies for feature selection. The standard forward-backward feature selection (SFBS) strategy (Algorithm 1) starts with a forward phase for selecting a subset of candidate features S and then a backward phase for removing false positives from S. The interleaving forward-backward feature selection (IFBS) strategy (Algorithm 2) performs the froward phase and backward phase alternatively. Specifically, if there are new features added to S at the forward phase, IFBS immediately triggers the backward phase and implements both phases alternatively. Existing causality-based feature selection algorithms adopt either the SFBS or the IFBS strategy, and they employ a selection criterion Φ, such as information gain, independence tests, and score criteria, to add/remove features to/from S. Identify the most informative feature X ∈ F by selection criterion Φ;
6: if Φ(S ∪ X) > Φ(S) then 7: S = S ∪ X and F = F \ X; 8:
end if 9: until no features in F are added to S; 10: //Backward phase: Removing features from S 11: repeat 12:

Find the least informative feature Y ∈ S by selection criterion Φ; Identify the most informative feature X ∈ F by selection criterion Φ; Find the least informative feature Y ∈ S by selection criterion Φ;  GSMB (Margaritis and Thrun, 2000) IAMB  IAMBnPC (Tsamardinos et al., 2003b) IAMB-IP  Fast-IAMB (Yaramakala and Margaritis, 2005) Inter-IAMB (Tsamardinos et al., 2003b) Inter-IAMBnPC (Tsamardinos et al., 2003b) (Ling et al., 2019) EEMB (Wang et al., 2020) MB learning with relaxed assumptions (e.g. the faithfulness assumption or causal sufficiency assumption) KIAMB (Pena et al., 2007) TIE* (Statnikov et al., 2013) SGAI (Yu et al., 2017) LCMB (Liu and Liu, 2016) WLCMB (Liu and Liu, 2016) M3B (Yu et al., 2018c) MB learning with special purpose (e.g. multiple data sets, distribution shift, and weak supervision) MIMB (Yu et al., 2018a) MCFS  MIAMB and MKIAMB  BASSUM (Cai et al., 2011) Semi-IAMB (Sechidis and Brown, 2018) 
11: if Φ(S \ Y ) ≥ Φ(S)

Constraint-based methods

In this section, we will discuss the constraint-based MB learning methods to learn the MB or PC of the class variable, i.e., the methods using conditional independence tests. Constraint-based methods can be categorized into five types: simultaneous MB learning, divide-and-conquer MB learning, MB learning with interleaving PC and spouse learning, MB learning with relaxed assumptions, and MB learning with special purpose. A summary of the representative algorithms of the five types is given in Table 1.

In the following, Section 3.1 presents the basis of constraint-based methods. Section 3.2 gives the brief discussions of the five types of constraint-based methods. Section 3.3 extensively reviews existing constraint-based methods of each type.


Basis of the constraint-based methods

The constraint-based methods are mainly based on Propositions 2 and 3 below. Proposition 2 illustrates the dependent relations between a node and its parents (or children). It states that if V i is a parent or a child of V j in a BN, V i and V j are not independent conditioning on any subsets of V \ {V i , V j }. For example, in Figure 1, there is an edge between Smoking and Lung cancer, and thus Smoking and Lung cancer are not independent given any subsets of the remaining features.

Proposition 2 (Spirtes et al., 2000) In a BN, if node V i is a parent (or a child) of V j ,
then ∀S ⊆ V \ {V i , V j }, V i ⊥ ⊥ V j |S.
Proposition 3 presents the relation between a node and its spouses in a BN. It indicates that if V i is a spouse of V k and V j is their common child, there exists a subset S ⊆ V \ {V i , V j , V k } such that V i and V k are independent given S but they are dependent given S ∪ V j . For instance, Allergy is the spouse of Lung cancer in Figure 1. Allergy and Lung cancer are independent (S is an empty set), but they are dependent conditioning on their common child Coughing. Proposition 3 shows that Allergy (spouse) and Coughing together carry more predictive information about Lung cancer than Coughing only. Proposition 3 also states that spouses of V k consist of all parents of the children of V k (excluding V k ).

Proposition 3 (Spirtes et al., 2000) In a BN, assuming that
V i is adjacent to V j , V j is adjacent to V k , and V i is not adjacent to V k (e.g., V i → V j ← V k ), if ∃S ⊆ V \ {V i , V j , V k } such that V i ⊥ ⊥ V k |S and V i ⊥ ⊥ V k |{S, V j } hold, V i is a spouse of V k .
Existing constraint-based methods adopt either the SFBS strategy or the IFBS strategy, and they employ the statistical independence tests as the selection criteria, denoted as Φ, to add/remove features to/from S as follows.

Given the class variable C, in SFBS (or IFBS), at each iteration, let S be a set of features currently selected, if X ∈ V \ {C ∪ S} and C are conditionally independent conditioning on S (or a subset S ′ ⊂ S), that is, X ⊥ ⊥ C|S (or X ⊥ ⊥ C|S ′ ), X does not provide any predictive information to C conditioning on S (i.e., Φ(S ∪ X) ≤ Φ(S) in SFBS or IFBS). In this case, X is not to be added to S at the forward phase or removed from S at the backward phase.

Five types of conditional independence tests are used by current constraint-based methods, λ 2 test, G 2 test, mutual information for discrete features (McDonald, 2009), Fishers Z tests for continuous features with linear relations with additive Gaussian errors (Peña, 2008), and kernel-based tests for continuous features with nonlinearity and non-Gaussian noise (Zhang et al., 2012).


Overview of constraint-based methods

In the section, we will give a brief overview of the five types of constraint-based methods. The detailed review of the representative algorithms of each type will be presented in Section 3.3.

1. Simultaneous MB learning. Given the class variable C, a simultaneous MB learning algorithm aims to find parents, children, and spouses of C simultaneously, and do not distinguish PC (parents and children) of C from its spouses during the MB learning. As shown   Figure 2, the simultaneous MB learning approach adopts a forward-backward strategy to greedily learn a MB of C by conditioning on the entire candidate MB of C (CM B(C)) currently selected at each iteration. The representative simultaneous MB learning algorithms include GSMB (Margaritis and Thrun, 2000), IAMB , IAMBnPC (Tsamardinos et al., 2003b), Fast-IAMB (Yaramakala and Margaritis, 2005), Inter-IAMB (Tsamardinos et al., 2003b), Inter-IAMBnPC (Tsamardinos et al., 2003b), IAMB-IP , FBED K (Borboudakis and Tsamardinos, 2019), and PFBP . The GSMB algorithm was the first algorithm for learning a MB of the class variable without learning an entire Bayesian network. IAMB and its variants are all the improved versions of GSMB. Inter-IAMB interleaves the forward phase and the backward phase of IAMB. Both FBED K and PFBP are the state-of-the-art variants of IAMB.

Due to the use of the entire CM B(C) currently selected for conditional independence tests at each computation, existing simultaneous MB learning algorithms reduce the number of independence tests, but require more data samples for each test since the number of data samples required is exponential to the size of the conditioning set. Thus the simultaneous MB learning algorithms are time efficient but not data efficient. When the sample size of a data set is not big enough, these algorithms cannot find the MB accurately. The quality of learnt MBs of these algorithms degrades greatly in practical settings due to the limited number of samples. They are expected to perform the best in problems where M B(C) is small.

2. Divide-and-conquer MB learning. The divide-and-conquer MB learning approach aims to reduce the data requirements of the simultaneous MB learning approach. This approach breaks the problem of learning M B(C) into two subproblems: first, learning parents and children of C (i.e., P C(C)), and second, learning the spouses of C (i.e., SP (C)). As for learning P C(C), the divide-and-conquer approach does not use the entire P C(C) as the conditioning set for conditional independence tests when determining whether feature X is a candidate member of P C(C). Instead, it makes use of the subsets of P C(C) which is much smaller than CM B(C) used by the simultaneous MB learning approach when making decisions. Therefore, the divide-and-conquer MB learning approach needs significantly smaller number of samples than the simultaneous MB learning approach. For instance, to determine whether feature X is a candidate member of P C(C), the divide-and-conquer approach explores possible subsets of P C(C). If there exists a subset S ⊆ P C(C) such that X and C are conditional independent given S, this subset exploring process will terminate and X will be discarded and never considered again. However, for the simultaneous MB learning approach, such as GSMB, IAMB, and their variants, the discarded features will be reconsidered many times (for identifying spouses).  (Gao and Ji, 2017a), and CCMB . The main differences between those algorithms lie in the strategies of identifying parents and children of C and the strategies of finding spouses of C, as shown in Figure 3. This figure also presents the general steps of existing divideand-conquer MB learning algorithms (i.e., learning PC and identifying spouses separately), and the PC learning used by the eight representative MB algorithms respectively.

The divide-and-conquer MB learning methods are data efficient but not time efficient. Although they mitigate the problem of the large sample requirement, existing divide-andconquer MB learning algorithms will be computationally expensive when the size of currently selected features becomes large.

3. MB learning with interleaving PC and spouse learning. This approach is an extension of the divide-and-conquer approach. Instead of learning PC and identifying spouses separately, this approach implements the PC leaning phase and the spouse iden-tifying phase alternatively. Specifically, once a candidate member of PC of C is added to the candidate P C(C) at the PC learning phase, this approach triggers the spouse learning phase immediately. The representative algorithms include BAMB (Ling et al., 2019) and EEMB (Wang et al., 2020). The difference between BAMB and EEMB is shown in Figure 4, where we can see that BAMB learns the candidate PC and spouse sets of C and removes false positives from the two candidate sets in one go, while EEMB breaks BAMB into two independent subroutines: learning and pruning.

By interleaving PC and spouse learning, BAMB and EEMB attempt to keep both candidate PC and spouse sets as small as possible for achieving the trade-off between data efficiency and time efficiency. However, due to false PC inclusions, many false spouses may enter the candidate spouse set, leading to a large size of the candidate spouse set, which will degrade the performance of BAMB and EEMB.

4. MB learning with relaxed assumptions. The above algorithms are designed to learn the MB of the class variable under the faithfulness and causal sufficiency assumptions. In fact, both assumptions are often violated in practice.

The theoretical result has stated that if a data distribution satisfies the faithfulness assumption, the MB of the class variable is unique (Pearl, 2014). When the faithfulness assumption is violated, the MB of learnt from the data may not be unique (Pena et al., 2007;Statnikov et al., 2013). To deal with the violation of the faithfulness assumption, some research work has been done for identifying multiple MBs without the assumption, such as KIAMB (Pena et al., 2007), TIE* (Statnikov et al., 2013), SGAI (Yu et al., 2017), LCMB (Liu and Liu, 2016), and WLCMB (Liu and Liu, 2016). KIAMB was the first attempt to learn multiple MBs, but it needs to run multiple times and cannot guarantee finding all possible MBs of the class variable. TIE* can find all MBs of the class variable in a data set, but it is computationally expensive, especially when the number of MBs is large. SGAI may be more efficient than TIE* but it is not guaranteed to find all possible MBs of the class variable. WLCMB is motivated by KIAMB and thus it still suffers from the drawbacks of KIAMB. Thus it is still a challenging problem to tackle multiple MB learning when the faithfulness assumption is violated.

When the causal sufficiency assumption does not hold in a data set, if we still use a MB learning algorithm that assumes causal sufficiency, the MB learnt from the data set may not properly indicate the true causal relations. Yu et al. (Yu et al., 2018c) proposed the M3B algorithm to deal with the situation when the assumption of causal sufficiency is violated. However, M3B uses a backward strategy to learn PC of the class variable and needs to perform an exhaustive search over the currently selected PC set. Thus it also suffers from time efficiency and incorrect test problems of the constraint-based MB learning in general.

5. MB learning with special purpose. Beyond the algorithms discussed above, several MB learning algorithms have been proposed for special purposes, including the MIMB algorithm for identifying a MB of a class variable from multiple data sets (Yu et al., 2018a), the MCFS algorithm for stable prediction with distribution shift , the MI-AMB and MKIAMB algorithms for learning a MB of multiple class variables , and the BASSUM and Semi-IAMB algorithms for MB learning with weak supervision (Cai et al., 2011;Sechidis and Brown, 2018). These studies have shown that causal properties of features can facilitate semi-supervised learning and feature selection with distribution shifts. Moreover the intersection of machine learning and causal discovery has attracted increasing attention in areas beyond feature selection. For example, causal knowledge has inspired efficient transfer learning and domain adaptation methods for accurate prediction across different domains (Rojas-Carulla et al., 2018;Magliacane et al., 2018). It is a promising research area to link machine learning research with causality to develop explainable and robust machine learning methods and solutions to causal discovery for data analytics.


Detailed review of constraint-based methods


Methods of simultaneous MB learning

In this subsection, we firstly introduce the methods using SFBS, including GSMB, IAMB and the two extensions of IAMB, which are IAMBnPC and IAMP-IP. Then we introduce the methods employing IFBS, which are Fast-IAMB, Inter-IAMB and Inter-IAMBnPC. Since FBEDk and PFBP are the state-of-the-art simultaneous MB learning algorithms and the extensions of IAMB, they will be introduced at the end.

GSMB. The Growing-Shrinking MB (GSMB) learning algorithm (Margaritis and Thrun, 2000;Margaritis, 2009) instantiates the SFBS framework for simultaneous MB learning, as shown in Algorithm 3. Let CM B(C) be the candidate MB of C currently selected, in the forward (growing) phase (Steps 5 to 10 in Algorithm 3), at each iteration, if ∃X ∈ F \CM B(C) such that X ⊥ ⊥ C|CM B(C) holds, GSMB adds X to CM B(C), until no features within F \ CM B(C) are added to CM B(C). In the backward (shrinking) phase (Steps 12 to 17 in Algorithm 3), GSMB sequentially removes from CM B(C) the false positive Y ∈ CM B(C) satisfying Y ⊥ ⊥ C|CM B(C) \ Y . However, at Step 5 of the forward phase, GSMB uses a static heuristic that at each time GSMB randomly selects a feature X ∈ F satisfying X ⊥ ⊥ C|CM B(C) and adds it to CM B(C). The static heuristic may make many false positives enter CM B(C) in the forward phase, leading to the growing of the size of CM B(C). Given a fixed size of data samples, the larger size of CM B(C), the more unreliable the independence tests. Thus the heuristic makes GSMB ineffective in coping with a data set of small sample size but high dimensionality.

IAMB, IAMBnPC, and IAMB-IP. To tackle the problem with GSMB, the incremental association Markov boundary (IAMB) algorithm  uses a dynamic heuristic at Step 5 in Algorithm 3 of the forward phase. At each iteration, IAMB adds to CM B(C) the feature X ∈ F \ CM B(C) with the highest association with C conditioning on the current CM B(C) if X ⊥ ⊥ C|CM B(C) holds. This dynamic heuristic makes the features that belong to M B(C) enter CM B(C) as early as possible and reduces as much as possible the chance of false positives to enter CM B(C) during the forward phase. Accordingly, IAMB performs better (with lower time complexity and lower data sample requirement) than GSMB since fewer false positives will be added to CM B(C) in the forward phase. However, the number of required data samples of IAMB is still exponential with the size of CM B(C) since the size of CM B(C) may become large in the forward phase. To mitigate this problem, several variants of IAMB were proposed, such as IAMBnPC (Tsamardinos et al., 2003b), Inter-IAMB (Tsamardinos et al., 2003b), inter-IAMBnPC (Tsamardinos et al., 2003b), and Fast-IAMB (Yaramakala and Margaritis, 2005). Compared to IAMB, IAMBnPC only substitutes the backward phase (Steps 11 to 16 in Algorithm 3) as implemented in IAMB with the PC algorithm (Spirtes et al., 2000). IAMBnPC is more data efficient (with lower data sample requirement) than IAMB since the PC algorithm runs only on the subsets of the current CM B(C) instead of conditioning on the entire CM B(C). To leverage prior knowledge, the IAMB-IP (IAMB-Informative Prior) algorithm was proposed in . It can incorporate domain knowledge priors and structure sparsity priors to improve the performance of MB learning when the data set is of small sample size but high dimensionality.

Inter-IAMB and Inter-IAMBnPC. These two algorithms adopt the IFBS framework, which is the key difference between them and IAMB. Algorithm 4 shows how they instantiate IFBS for simultaneous MB learning. The goal of the interleaving is to keep the size of CM B(C) as small as possible during all steps of the algorithms' execution. Comparing to Inter-IAMB, the Inter-IAMBnPC algorithm substitutes the backward phase as implemented in inter-IAMB with the PC algorithm (Steps 9 to 14 in Algorithm 4).

Fast-IAMB. Similar to Inter-IAMB and Inter-IAMBnPC, Fast-IAMB instantiates IFBS as shown in Algorithm 4. However, different from IAMB and its other variants discussed above, Fast-IAMB adopts an aggressively greedy strategy in the forward phase to make it more efficient. Specifically, at Steps 5 to 6 in Algorithm 4, Fast-IAMB does not add one feature to CM B(C) then immediately triggers the backward phase. Instead, Fast-IAMB greedily adds as many features conditionally dependent on C given the current CM B(C) as possible in the forward phase until a conditional independence test is not reliable (i.e., we do not have enough data for conducting the test). When a test is not reliable in the forward phase, the backward phase is triggered. A reliable independence test for C and X ∈ F \ CM B(C) given CM B(C) should satisfy the rule that the average number of instances per cell of the contingency table of X ∪ C ∪ CM B(C) must be at least k, i.e., N/{r X * r C * r CM B(C) } ≥ k where the minimum value of k is set to 5 for reliable tests as suggested by Agresti (Agresti and Kateri, 2011), N is the total number of data samples, and r C denotes the number of discrete values that C takes. By the rule, at Steps 5 to 6 in Algorithm 4, Fast-IAMB will not perform a test when it is not reliable. This checking not only speeds up Fast-IAMB, but also reduces the risk of unreliable independence tests.

FBED K . Borboudakis and Tsamardinos  generalized the IAMB framework for feature selection and proposed the FBED K (Forward-Backward selection with Early Dropping) algorithm to speed up IAMB. For IAMB, in the forward phase, at each iteration, it should reconsider all remaining features (including all discarded features at each iteration) to find the next best candidate. To tackle the issues, F BED K adopts an early dropping strategy in the forward phase. The main idea is that at each forward iteration, F BED K removes the features that are conditionally independent of C given the current CM B(C) from the remaining features in F instead of keeping them in F . This leads to quickly reduce the number of candidate features in F , while keeping relevant features in it. A run of the forward phase with the early dropping terminates until F is empty. Then the forward phase is allowed to run up to K additional times to reconsider features dropped previously until no features can be dropped. Finally, the backward phase is applied to CM B(C) obtained at the forward phase, and this is the same as the backward phase of IAMB. F BED K significantly improves computational efficiency, while retaining competitive accuracy.

PFBP. Motivated by FBED K , the Parallel Forward-Backward with Pruning (PFBP) algorithm was proposed for improving IAMB to tackle big data with high dimensionality . PFBP enables computations to be performed in a parallel way by partitioning data both in terms of rows (samples) as well as columns (features) and using meta-analysis techniques to combine results of local computations.

Algorithm 5: The instantiation of SFBS for PC Learning 1: Input: Feature set F and the class variable C Output: CP C(C) 2: CP C(C) = ∅; 3: // Filtering out irrelevant features by Proposition 2 (if X ⊥ ⊥ C holds, X / ∈ P C(C)) 4: R = F \ S ′ (∀X ∈ S ′ , X ⊥ ⊥ C|∅); 5: //Forward phase: Adding candidate PC (or relevant) features to CP C(C) 6: repeat 7:

Select the best feature X ∈ R with a greedy strategy; 8:

CP C(C) = CP C(C) ∪ {X}; R = R \ X; 9: until no features in R are added to CP C(C); 10: //Backward phase: Removing false positives from CP C(C); 11: repeat 12:
Consider each feature Y ∈ CP C(C); 13: if ∃S ⊆ CP C(C) \ Y s.t. Y ⊥ ⊥ C|S then 14: CP C(C) = CP C(C) \ Y ; 15: end if 16: until no features in CP C(C) are removed; 17: Output CP C(C)
In addition to the early dropping strategy proposed in , PFBP also proposed two new heuristics of early stopping with the consideration of features within the same iteration and early returning the current best feature for addition or removal. It has been shown that PFBP can scale to millions of features and millions of training samples, and achieves a super-linear speedup with increasing sample size and linear scalability with respect to the number of features and processing cores.


Methods of divide-and-conquer MB learning

In this subsection, we will discuss eight representative divide-and-conquer algorithms, i.e., MMMB (Tsamardinos et al., 2003a) (Gao and Ji, 2017a), and CCMB . As illustrated in Figure 3, given the class variable C, how to learn its parents and children and identify its spouses is the main difference between those algorithms. Generally speaking, there are three strategies for learning parents and children of C: SFBS, IFBS and the backward framework. SFBS and IFBS for PC learning are very similar to those for MB learning. The instantiations of SFBS and IFBS for PC learning are present in Algorithms 5 and 6 respectively, while the backward framework for PC learning is shown in Algorithm 7.

MMMB. The MMMB (Max-Min MB) algorithm (Tsamardinos et al., 2003a) first employs the MMPC (Max-Min Parents and Children) algorithm to find a candidate set of parents and children of C. MMPC (Tsamardinos et al., 2003a) utilizes the SFBS framework to search for candidate parents and children of C first, called CP C(C), then prunes CP C(C) at the backward phase, as shown in Algorithm 5. The novelty of MMPC lies Algorithm 6: The instantiation of IFBS for PC Leaning 1: Input: Feature set F and the class variable C Output:
CP C(C) 2: CP C(C) = ∅; 3: R = F \ S ′ (∀X ∈ S ′ , X ⊥ ⊥ C|∅); 4: repeat 5:
//Forward phase: Adding candidate PC (relevant) features to CP C(C)


6:

Select the best feature X ∈ R with a greedy strategy; repeat 10: the fact that at Step 7 of the forward phase in Algorithm 5, MMPC proposes a Max-Min Parents and Children (MMPC) greedy search strategy to identify the best feature from F \ CP C(C) at each iteration.
Consider each feature Y ∈ CP C(C) 11: if ∃S ⊆ CP C(C) \ Y s.t. Y ⊥ ⊥ C|S then 12: CP C(C) = CP C(C) \ Y ;
Specifically, in the forward phase, at each iteration, given the current CP C(C) (initially CP C(C) is empty), for each feature X in the remaining candidate features (i.e., X ∈ F \CP C(C)), MMPC first calculates the associations of X and C conditioning on all possible subsets of CP C(C) respectively, and chooses the minimum association as the association of X and C. Then MMPC chooses the next feature to be included in CP C(C) as the one that exhibits the maximum association among the features in F \ CP C(C) and is dependent on C, while the features independent of C are discarded and never considered as candidate PC again. The forward phase terminates until each feature in F \ CP C(C) and C are independent given any subsets of CP C(C). At the backward phase, MMPC examines whether each feature Y in CP C(C) obtained in the forward phase is independent of C conditioning on all possible subsets of CP C(C)\Y . If so, Y is removed from CP C(C); otherwise it is retained. Now we discuss how to learn spouses of C after CP C(C) is obtained. The spouses of C are the parents of the children of C excluding C ∪ P C(C), i.e., SP (C) = Y ′ ∈ch(C) pa(Y ′ ) \ (C ∪ P C(C)). However, MMPC cannot distinguish parents from children of C during the procedure of identifying P C(C). Thus, MMMB considers the union of parents and children of the features in CP C(C) excluding C ∪ CP C(C) as the the candidate spouses of C, i.e., SP C
(C) = Y ′ ∈CP C(C) P C(Y ′ ) \ (C ∪ CP C(C)). Then by Proposition 3, for each feature Y in the SP C(C) set and each feature X in CP C(C), if there exists a subset S ⊆ F \ {C, X, Y } (S was identified and stored in the MMPC subroutine) such that both C ⊥ ⊥ Y |S and C ⊥ ⊥ Y |X ∪ S hold, MMMB considers Y as a spouse of C.
HITON-MB and Semi-HITON-MB. HITON-MB uses the HITON-PC algorithm to discover P C(C) . Different from MMPC, HITON-PC employs the IFBS framework as presented in Algorithm 6. HITON-PC interleaves the forward phase and the backward phase to make PC learning and false positive removal alternatively. In addition, at Step 6 in Algorithm 6, HITON-PC adopts a simpler search strategy than MMPC for learning candidate parents and children of C. Specifically, at Step 6, at each iteration, HITON-PC removes a feature, called X, with the highest association with C conditioning on an empty set from the candidate feature set R and adds it to CP C(C), then triggers the backward phase for removing false positives from the current CP C(C) due to the X's inclusion.

For identifying the spouses of C, in the original version of the HITON-MB algorithm , the idea of HITON-MB is the same as that of MMMB.

However, Pena et al. (Peña et al., 2005;Pena et al., 2007) pointed out that MMMB and HITON-MB cannot return the correct MB even under the faithfulness assumption. They found that (1) both MMPC and HITON-PC may return a superset of the true PC of C, and (2) the spouse discovery procedures of both MMMB and HITON-MB cannot find the correct spouses of C. Tsamardinos et al. (Tsamardinos et al., 2006) also identified the flaw of MMPC in point (1) above independently and proposed a corrected MMPC using the symmetric relation between parents and children in a BN (i.e., symmetric check). That is, if X is a parent or a child of C, C should be a child or a parent of X. Find CP C(X) using a PC learning algorithm (e.g., MMPC) 5:
for each feature Y in CP C(X) \ {C ∪ CP C(C)} do 6: if Y ⊥ ⊥ C|X ∪ Sepset(Y ) then 7: SP (C) = SP (C) ∪ Y ; 8: end if 9:
end for 10: end for 11: Output SP (C) uses the two subroutines, called GetPCD and GetPC, to identify P C(C). The GetPCD subroutine is to find CP C(C), and the GetPC subroutine removes false positives in CP C(C) using the symmetric check, i.e., for each feature X in CP C(C), if the set of parents and children of X does not include C, X will be removed from CP C(C).

GetPCD adopts the similar idea of MMPC, but the two algorithms have two differences. First, GetPCD adopts the IFBS framework and interleaves the forward and backward phases of MMPC. Second, in the backward phase, for each feature X in the current CP C(C), GetPCD calculates the associations of X and C conditioned on all possible subsets of CP C(C) and chooses the minimum association as the association of X and C. If X and C are assessed to be independent given the minimum association, X will be removed from CP C(C). Pena et al. (Peña et al., 2005;Pena et al., 2007) stated that CP C(C) learnt by GetPCD may be a superset of the true parents and children of C since some non-child descendants of C are added to CP C(C). Thus GetPC was proposed to remove these nonchild descendants using the symmetry check.

As for finding the spouses of C, for each feature X ∈ CP C(C) obtained by GetPC, first, PCMB uses GetPC to find the parents and children of X (i.e., P C(X)), then for each feature Y in P C(X), if there exists a subset S within F \ {C, X, Y } (S was identified and stored in the procedure of GetPCD) such that both C ⊥ ⊥ Y |S and C ⊥ ⊥ Y |S ∪ {X} hold, Y is a spouse of C with regard to X. The above procedure of finding the spouses of C is summarized in Algorithm 8 (Pena et al., 2007;Aliferis et al., 2010a). The study in (Pena et al., 2007;Aliferis et al., 2010a) has shown that if the input CP C(C) and the PC learning algorithm used by Algorithm 8 are correct, Algorithm 8 is complete and sound (Aliferis et al., 2010a).

IPCMB. The Iterative Parent-Child based search of MB (IPCMB) algorithm (Fu and Desmarais, 2008) is quite similar to PCMB. The key difference between them is that IPCMB employs the RecognizePC algorithm (Li et al., 2015) to find the PC set of C. RecognizePC uses a backward strategy as shown in Algorithm 7. Initially, RecognizePC assumes that all features in F are the candidate PC of C, that is, CP C(C) = F . To remove false positives from CP C(C), RecognizePC uses conditional independence tests to check each feature in CP C(C) level by level of the cardinality of the conditioning sets, starting with an empty set.

For spouse discovery, IPCMB adopts the framework in Algorithm 8. Compared to the divide-and-conquer MB learning algorithms discussed above, an additional improvement is that IPCMB embeds the symmetry check before

Step 5 in Algorithm 8. That is, for each feature X in CP C(C), if CP C(X) obtained at Step 4 does not include C, IPCMB does not implement Steps 6 to 8 and moves to the next feature in CP C(C).

MBOR. The larger the size of a conditioning set in a conditional independence test, the less reliable is the independence test. the MB learning algorithms discussed above, such as IAMB (and its variants), MMMB, HITON-MB, and PCMB, may miss true positives due to the unreliability of the conditional independence tests if the conditioning set is large. In order to increase the data-efficiency and the robustness of MB learning, MBOR (Markov Boundary search using the OR condition) (De Morais and Aussem, 2008) was designed to keep the sizes of conditional sets as small as possible during the search. MBOR consists of the following three steps. At Step 1, MBOR discovers a superset of the parents and children of C (P CS(C)) and a superset of the spouses of C (SP S(C)) by severely restricting the size of a conditioning set S in the tests to |S| ≤ 1 and |S| ≤ 2 respectively. Thus this reduces the risk of missing features that are weakly associated to C and enhances the reliability of the independence tests. Then at Step 2, MBOR first uses the MBtoPC algorithm (De Morais and Aussem, 2008) to find CP C(C), then learn parents and children of each feature in P CS(C) \ CP C(C), and finally applies the OR condition to retrieve a parent or a child of C (called X) that X / ∈ CP C(C), but C ∈ P C(X). Finally, at

Step 3, MBOR identifies the spouses of C using the framework in Algorithm 8.

The first difference between MBOR and the existing MB algorithms is that MBOR applies the "OR condition" to consider two features X and Y as neighbors if Y ∈ P C(X) OR X ∈ P C(Y ). In contrast, MMMB, HITON-MB, and PCMB employ the "AND condition", which means that two features X and Y are considered as neighbors if Y ∈ P C(X) AND X ∈ P C(Y ). The OR condition is less strict than the AND condition and makes it easier for true positives to enter the MB. The second difference is that MBOR finds a superset of the spouses of C from F \ P C(C) at Step 1 instead of the union of parents and children of each feature in P C(C). At Step 2, since MBtoPC employs the simultaneous MB discovery approach to find P C(C), it still suffers from the problem of data inefficiency.

STMB. For the divide-and-conquer approach, in the spouse discovery step, identifying parents and children of each feature in CP C(C) is the most computationally expensive due to the exhaustive search for conditioning sets. To mitigate the computational efficiency problem of identifying spouses, different from the algorithms described above, the simultaneous MB (STMB) algorithm (Gao and Ji, 2017a) presents two new strategies. First, STMB (Gao and Ji, 2017a) identifies the spouses of C from F \ CP C(C) instead of the union of parents and children of each feature in CP C(C). Second, STMB removes false positives from CP C(C) using the candidate spouses selected currently instead of using the symmetric check. These two strategies may make STMB more efficient than MMMB, HITON-MB, and IPCMB in the spouse discovery phase, since it will be computationally expensive or prohibit to learn the union of parents and children of each feature in CP C(C), especially when the size of CP C(C) is large.

Specifically, STMB includes the following four steps. At

Step 1, STMB finds CP C(C) by using the RecognizePC algorithm. At Step 2, for each feature X ∈ CP C(C), STMB identifies the spouses of C with regard to X from F \ CP C(C) and removes false positives from CP C(C) using the candidate spouses selected at this step 2 alternatively. At Step 3, STMB removes false positives in SP (C) by using the CP C(C) ∪ SP (C) obtained at Step 2. At Step 4, STMB removes false positives from CP C(C) by using SP (C) obtained at Step 3. After the four steps, STMB obtains the MB of C, i.e., CP C(C) ∪ SP (C).

Although STMB improves the computational efficiency of identifying spouses, STMB suffers from the problem of data inefficiency at Steps 3 and 4, since at the two steps, STMB uses an entire set as a conditional set instead of a subset exhaustive search.

CCMB. The existing MB learning algorithms mainly focus on how to remove the false positives during the MB search process and then make the false positive rate as low as possible. However, they rarely consider the true positives discarded due to incorrect conditional independence tests, leading to a high false negative rate, especially in the presence of insufficient or noise data samples.

To tackle this issue, Wu et al.  presented a new concept of PCMasking to describe a type of incorrect conditional independence tests in the MB learning process and theoretically analyzed the mechanism behind this type of tests. In the work, PC-Masking denotes that the class variable and its children may be independent of each other conditioning on its parents and vice versa due to incorrect independence tests. Based on the theoretical analysis, the cross-check and complement MB (CCMB) learning algorithm was proposed to repair this type of incorrect CI independence tests for accurate MB learning. Specifically, CCMB first learns the PC set of C using a subroutine called FindPC. FindPC is an improved version of the GetPCD algorithm and aims to effectively identify all possible true parents and children of C except for the PC features discarded by FindPC due to the PCMasking phenomenon. Then CCMB recovers the discarded PC features using the OR rule based on FindPC. The spouse learning phase of CCMB is the same as that of PCMB. The drawback of CCMB is that although it significantly reduces the false negative rate, CCMB achieves a little higher false positive rate than the divide-and-conquer algorithms discussed above due to the OR rule.


Methods of MB learning with interleaving PC and spouse learning

Different from the algorithms described above that learn PC and spouses separately, BAMB (Ling et al., 2019) and EEMB (Wang et al., 2020) implement the PC learning phase and the spouse identifying phase alternatively for the trade-off between data efficiency and time efficiency.

BAMB. The balanced MB learning (BAMB) algorithm (Ling et al., 2019) does not separate PC learning and spouse identifying into two independent phases. It finds the candidate PC and spouse set of C and removes false positives from the candidate set in one go. Specifically, using the IFBS framework, BAMB integrates PC learning and spouse identifying into one procedure. At each iteration, once a new feature is added to the current CP C(C), BAMB is triggered to find the spouses of C (SP (C)) with regard to this feature. Then BAMB first uses the found SP (C) to remove false positives from CP C(C), then employs the updated CP C(C) to prune SP (C) in turn. In this way, during the MB search BAMB can keep both CP C(C) and SP (C) as small as possible for achieving a tradeoff between data efficiency and time efficiency. However, in the PC learning and spouse identifying phase, due to false PC's inclusion, many false spouses may enter SP (C), leading to a large size of SP (C). BAMB will perform an subset search in the union of current SP (C) and CP C(C) to remove false PC and spouses respectively, and thus the large size of {SP (C) ∪ CP C(C)} will make BAMB both time and data inefficient.

EEMB. To tackle the drawback of BAMB, the EEMB (efficient and effective MB) algorithm (Wang et al., 2020) breaks BAMB into two independent subroutines: ADDTrue and RMFalse. EEMB first uses the ADDTrue subroutine to learn the candidate PC set and the spouse set, then employs the RMFalse subroutine for pruning the two sets. In the ADDTrue subroutine, before a candidate PC feature X is added to the current CP C(C), EEMB will test whether X is independent of C using the current CP C(C). If so, X will be discarded and consider the next candidate PC feature. If not, EEMB is triggered to identify the spouses of C with regard to X without performing an subset search in the current SP (C). After this pruning, EEMB will greatly prune the false PC features before the spouse learning phase is triggered and make both CP C(C) and SP (C) keep as small as possible before the RMFalse subroutine runs. In the RMFalse subroutine, EEMB first uses the union of SP (C) and current CP C(C) to prune CP C(C), then removes false positives from SP (C) using the union of the updated CP C(C) and current SP (C).


Methods of MB learning with relaxed assumptions

In this subsection, we will discuss six representative MB learning algorithms for tackling the situation where the faithfulness or causal sufficiency assumption is violated, i.e., KI-AMB (Pena et al., 2007), TIE* (Statnikov et al., 2013), SGAI (Yu et al., 2017), LCMB (Liu and Liu, 2016), WLCMB (Liu and Liu, 2016), and M3B (Yu et al., 2018c).

KIAMB. Let S 1 , S 2 , Z and W denote four mutually disjoint feature subsets, the composition property assumes that if S 1 ⊥ ⊥ S 2 |Z and S 1 ⊥ ⊥ W |Z hold, then X ⊥ ⊥ (S 2 ∪ W )|Z holds (Pearl, 2014). The composition property assumption is much weaker than the faithfulness assumption. The KIAMB algorithm (Pena et al., 2007) aims to tackle MB learning when the faithfulness assumption is violated. The difference between KIAMB and IAMB is that KIAMB allows the user to specify the trade-off between greediness and randomness in the MB search through a randomization parameter K ∈ [0, 1]. IAMB greedily adds to CM B(C) the feature with the highest association with C among all features excluding features currently in CM B(C), while KIAMB adds to CM B(C) the features with the highest associations with C in the CanMB set which is a random subset of CM B(C) with size max(1, (|CM B(C)| · K) ). K specifies the trade-off between greediness and randomness in the MB search: if setting K = 1, KIAMB is reduced to IAMB, while if taking K = 0, KIAMB is a completely random approach which is expected to identify all the MBs of C with a nonzero probability if running repeatedly for enough number of times. IAMB and KIAMB are both correct under the composition assumption (Pena et al., 2007). However, KIAMB does not guarantee finding all MBs of the class variable under the composition assumption and is computationally more expensive than IAMB because it has to be run multiple times. TIE*. Statnikov et al. (Statnikov et al., 2013) relaxed the composition assumption to the local composition assumption and proposed a family of the TIE* (Target Information Equivalence) algorithm for multiple MB learning. Specifically, the TIE* algorithm mainly includes three steps. In Step 1, TIE* uses an existing single MB learning algorithm to learn a M B(C) from a data set D defined on F (i.e., the original distribution) and outputs M B(C). In Step 2, TIE* uses a procedure to generate a new data set D new (i.e., the embedded distribution that is obtained by removing subsets of features of M B(C) from the original distribution D). The motivation is that D new may lead to identifying of a new M B(C) that was previously "invisible" to a single MB learning algorithm since it was "masked" by another MB of C. Next, in Step 3 the MB learning algorithm employed in

Step 1 is applied to D new , resulting in a new candidate MB of C, called CM B new (C) in the embedded distribution. If CM B new (C) is also a MB of C in the original distribution according to a criterion (independence tests or classification accuracy), then CM B new (C) is considered as a new MB of C. Steps 1-3 are repeated until all possible data sets D new generated by the procedure used in Step 2 have been considered. It has been proved that the TIE* algorithm can output all possible MBs of the class variable in data set when the faithfulness assumption is violated.

SGAI. When the faithfulness assumption is violated, it may not be tractable for TIE* to learn all possible MBs for feature selection due to computational complexities. To deal with this problem, the SGAI (Selection via Group Alpha-Investing) algorithm was proposed (Yu et al., 2017). Compared to the standard constraint-based MB learning algorithms discussed above, SGAI combines the MB theory with the idea of classical feature selection. Instead of an exhaustive search over a large number of MBs in a data set, SGAI presents the concept of a representative set which consists of the features of all possible MBs. Each member in the representative set is not a single feature, but a feature set (i.e., a group of features). SGAI first uses the existing MB learning algorithms (e.g., HITIOM-MB) to learn the representative sets. Then SGAI presents a group Alpha-investing procedure to select a best subset from representative sets. The group Alpha-investing procedure is motivated by the Alpha-investing feature selection method (Zhou et al., 2006) and can simultaneously optimize selections within each representative set as well as between those sets to achieve a feature subset that maximizes the predictive power for classification.

Compared to TIE*, SGAI does not learn all possible MBs from a data set, but chooses a feature subset that maximizes the prediction power for classification instead. However, when both the numbers of groups in the representative set and features in each group become large, SGAI may not be efficient and effective. Furthermore, since the number of MBs in a data set is not known, the representative set cannot guarantee to include the features of all possible MBs in the data set. In this case, the final output of SGAI is not optimal for feature selection.

LCMB and WLCMB. To tackle incorrect independent tests, in (Liu and Liu, 2016), the problem of incorrect independent tests is described as swamping and masking. Swamping means a true positive becomes a false negative, while masking means a true negative becomes a false positive. Based on the KIAMB algorithm, the LRH algorithm (Liu and Liu, 2016) was proposed to tackle the problem of swamping and masking and it is correct under the local composition assumption.

Compared to KIAMB, the innovation of LRH is that a selection-exclusion-inclusion (SEI) procedure was proposed to search for a candidate MB set of C which contains as few false positives as possible. Specifically, in the SEI procedure, the selection phase selects the candidate MB features of C conditioning on the MB currently selected, then for each feature in this MB set, the exclusion phase removes this feature if it is independent of C conditioning on its neighbors in the MB set; finally, the inclusion phase chooses the K features in the current MB with the high associations with C as the output of the SEI procedure at each iteration. Since IAMB and KIAMB remain correct under the local composition assumption, in (Liu and Liu, 2016), IAMB, KIAMB and LRH were integrated into a framework called LCMB (Local Composition MB). Furthermore, to tackle the violation of the faithfulness assumption, based on the LCMB framework, WLCMB (Weak Local Composition MB) was proposed (Liu and Liu, 2016). WLCMB interleaves LCMB with a search-resuming procedure and has a higher computational complexity than LCMB.

M3B. The M3B (Mining Maximal ancestral graph MB) algorithm was proposed to tackle MB learning using independence tests when the causal sufficiency assumption is violated. A Maximal ancestral graph (MAG) model has been developed to deal with latent common causes without pre-determining the number of latent common causes and their exact locations with respect to other features (Richardson et al., 2002;Silva and Ghahramani, 2009;Borboudakis and Tsamardinos, 2016). Thus, instead of using DAGs, in (Yu et al., 2018c), authors adopted the MAG model to represent latent common causes and the concept of MBs. Specifically, the work in (Yu et al., 2018c) first defines the concept of MB of the class variable in a MAG, i.e., MAG MB (MMB), and presents a theoretical analysis of its properties. Then the M3B algorithm was proposed to learn the MMB of the class variable and it was the first constraint-based algorithm that was specially designed for MB learning when the causal sufficiency assumption is violated. The M3B algorithm mainly includes two novel methods to find the MMB of the class variable, the AdjV (Adjacent feature) algorithm using a backward strategy as shown in Algorithm 7 to find the parents and children of the class variable and the RecSearch (Recursive Search) algorithm to discover the remaining features of the MMB of the class variable.


Methods of MB learning with special purpose

In the section, we will discuss the six representative MB learning algorithms for some special purposes, i.e., MIMB for identifying a MB of a class variable from multiple data sets (Yu et al., 2018a), MCFS for stable predictions with distribution shift , MIAMB and MKIAMB for learning a MB of multiple class variables , and BASSUM and Semi-IAMB for weak supervision learning (Cai et al., 2011;Sechidis and Brown, 2018).

MIMB. The MB learning algorithms discussed above all learn MBs from a single observational data set. There has been an increasing availability of interventional data collected from various sources, such as gene knockdown experiments by different labs for studying the same diseases. Recently, Yu et al. (Yu et al., 2018a) studied the problems of MB learning in multiple interventional (experimental) data sets. This is the first work systematically studying the conditions for finding the correct MB of a class variable and the conditions for identifying the parents of class variable through MB learning. Based on the theoretical analysis, authors designed the MIMB (Multiple Interventional MB) algorithm to learn MB in multiple Interventional data sets. MIMB also adopts a divide-and-conquer approach which consists of two new subroutines. One subroutine, called MIPC, was designed for discovering P C(T ) from multiple interventional data sets using the IFBS framework as presented in Algorithm 6, and the other was proposed to identify spouses of C from multiple interventional data sets based on the framework as shown in Algorithm 7 .


MCFS.

To achieve stable predictions for multiple data sets with different distributions, based on the theoretical results in (Yu et al., 2018a), the MCFS (multi-source causal feature selection) algorithm was proposed . By utilizing the concept of causal invariance (Pearl, 2009;Peters et al., 2016) and mutual information, MCFS formulates the problem of stable predictions in multiple data sets as a search for an invariant set across different data sets. To speed up the search, this work analyzed the upper and lower bounds of the invariant set and made MCFS learn the best invariant set within the bounds for stable predictions. MCFS outperforms some well-known existing feature selection algorithms designed for a single data set. Furthermore, this work demonstrated that for multiple data sets with different distributions, the set of parents of a class variable is the minimal and promising invariant set for stable predictions, while the MB or PC of the class feature may not.

MIAMB and MKIAMB. The algorithms described above all focus on learning a MB of a single class variable, e.g., M B(C), the MB of C. Recently, the work in ) explored the problem of learning a MB of multiple class variables, e.g., one MB, M B(C 1 , C 2 ) for both class variables C 1 and C 2 . This work first proved that under the local intersection assumption a MB of multiple class variables can be constructed by simply taking the union of the MBs of the individual class variable excluding the class variables from the union (if they are included in the union). Then the MB learning problem for multiple class variables was transformed to a number of MB learning problems of a single class variable. By considering the violation of faithfulness assumption, MIAMB and MKIAMB were proposed in the work . For a set of class variables of interest, given an ordering which determines which class variable's MB needs to be learned in the current step, MIAMB and MKIAMB first find a MB of two class variables, and then learns an MB of three class variables and so on until all the class variables are considered.

BASSUM. In many real-world applications, labelled examples are often expensive to acquire while it is easy to collected unlabelled data examples. To leverage both unlabelled and labelled data to help MB learning (i.e., weak-supervision MB learning), Cai et al. (Cai et al., 2011) proposed a novel BAyesian Semi-SUpervised Method (BASSUM). To our best knowledge, BASSUM was the first weak-supervision MB learning algorithm. In the first phase, BASSUM learns the parents and children and then the spouses of C by taking into account both labelled and unlabelled data examples using a modified version of the G 2 test. The modified version of the G 2 test can use unlabelled data examples to enhance the reliability of the conditional independence tests. In the second phase, to prune the MB obtained in the first phase using unlabelled data examples, a concept of effective feature sets was proposed. It is a subset of the PC set of C obtained in the first phase. Using the effective feature sets, BASSUM prunes the PC set of C without accessing the information of C in labeled data examples. However, one weakness of BASSUM is that there are no guarantees that the modified G 2 test will follow a chi-squared distribution. BASSUM also cannot deal with the situation of partially labelled samples, i.e., we have a small number of binary labelled data and a vast amount of unlabelled examples.

Semi-IAMB. In order to deal with partially labelled data samples, the work in Brown, 2018, 2015) first proposed a generalization of the conditional independence tests for partially labelled samples and then extended the work to semi-supervised data which contains a small number of binary labelled data and a large number of unlabelled examples. In the  work, authors proposed some theoretical results of hypothesis testing (e.g., the G 2 test) and feature ranking in the partially labelled data environment.

Specially, by assuming that all missing labels are negative,or assuming that they are positive, authors present a surrogate class variable for semi-supervised hypothesis testing. That is, let C 0 represent assigning 0 to all missing class labels and C 1 represent assigning 1 to all missing class labels, authors propose to use surrogate test X ⊥ ⊥C 0 or X ⊥ ⊥C 1 to replace the true unlabelled class variable test X ⊥ ⊥C). And they have proved that (1) both surrogate tests (i.e., X ⊥ ⊥ C 0 or X ⊥ ⊥ C 1 ) have exactly the same false positive rate as the ideal test (i.e., X ⊥ ⊥ C); (2) both surrogate tests will have a higher false negative rate than the ideal test. To reduce false negative rate, authors suggested use more data samples (if possible) or prior knowledge of the class probability to determine which one of the two surrogates will have the lower false negative rate. Moreover, in the work, it has been proved that both surrogate tests produce exactly the same feature ranking as X ⊥ ⊥ C. Then based on these theoretical results authors developed the Semi-IAMB algorithm (Sechidis and Brown, 2018) which uses the surrogate tests. However, the theoretical results in the work now only can deal with binary class variables and consequently Semi-IAMB cannot learn the MB of a class variable with more than two classes. In addition, to reduce false negative rate and improve feature ranking quality, Semi-IAMB requires more data samples and prior knowledge for surrogate tests.


Score-based methods

This type of methods employs score-based BN structure learning algorithms to learn the MB or PC of the class variable instead of using independence tests. Table 2 summarizes the representative score-based MB learning algorithms. Score-based MB learning algorithms are not the focus in MB learning research, thus the number of algorithms is much smaller than constraint-based algorithms.

In the following, Section 4.1 presents the basis of score-based methods. Section 4.2 gives the brief discussions of score-based methods. Section 4.3 extensively reviews the representative score-based methods.


Basis of score-based methods

Given a data set D, score-based BN learning algorithms aim to find the structure of the BN, i.e. the DAG, that maximizes a scoring function, which is usually defined as a measure of fitness between the DAG and D. They use the scoring function in combination with a greedy search method in order to measure the goodness of each explored structure from the space of feasible solutions.

The representative scoring functions designed based on different principles include K2 (Cooper and Herskovit 1992), BDeu (Buntine, 1991), BDe (Heckerman et al., 1995), BIC/MDL (Lam and Bacchus, 1994;Schwarz et al., 1978), AIC (Akaike, 1974), and MIT (Campos, 2006). The score-based BN learning problem can be formulated as: given D, learning a DAG G * such that G * = arg max G⊆O f (G : D) where f (G : D) is the scoring function and O is the family of all possible DAGs defined on D. A desirable property for a scoring function is the decomposability that enables to compute the global score of a DAG by aggregating local scores. f (G : D) is decomposable if the score assigned to a structure can be expressed as a combination of local scores of each node and its parents in G: f (G :
D) = V i ∈V f (V i ; pa G (V i ) : D V i ,pa G (V i ) ).
Since scoring functions are decomposable, the main idea of score-based MB learning algorithms is to learn a DAG of the features currently selected, C, and a new feature, then reads the MB (or PC) from the DAG at each iteration. Thus the score-based algorithms can distinguish parents from children of the class variable during MB learning, while the constraint-based algorithms cannot.


Overview of score-based methods

Existing score-based MB learning algorithms are mainly the score-based variants of the constraint-based MB learning algorithms. Through learning a DAG around a class variable, these algorithms read the MB of the class variable from the DAG. Since existing scorebased MB learning algorithms are motivated from constraint-based methods, in Table 2, we categorize these algorithms into three types: divide-and-conquer MB learning, simultaneous MB learning, and MB learning with relaxed assumptions.

The SLL algorithm (Niinimki and Parviainen, 2012) is a score-based variant of the divide-and-conquer MB learning algorithms. In the PC learning and spouse identifying phases, SLL employs a BN structure learning algorithm to learn PC and spouses separately. To removing false positives, SLL implements the symmetric check using the AND rule to remove false positives in the found PC set, while the symmetric check using the OR rule to remove false positives in the found spouse set. The symmetric check makes SLL computationally expensive as the size of the MB of the class variable becomes large.

To improve the search efficiency of SLL, the S 2 TMB algorithm (Gao and Ji, 2017b) was proposed which is a score-based variant of STMB. S 2 TMB learns the spouses of C from F \ CP C(C) instead of the union of parents and children of each feature in P C(C), and employs the found spouses and PC to remove false positives instead of the symmetric check. S 2 TMB + is an improved version of S 2 TMB for further improving the computationally efficiency of S 2 TMB.

Different from SLL and S 2 TMB, DMB and RPDMB (Acid et al., 2013) do not divide MB learning into the PC learning step and the spouse identifying step. Instead, DMB and RPDMB learn PC and spouses of C simultaneously. These two algorithms only need to Obtain CP C(C) from the learnt DAG; 9: until F is empty; 10: Output CP C(C). learn a DAG around the class variable to obtain a MB of class feature instead of learning many local DAGs.

When the the faithfulness assumption is violated, the BSS-MB algorithm (Masegosa and Moral, 2012) was proposed to learn multiple MBs using a score criterion. It is a score-based variant of KIAMB for learning multiple MBs When the the causal sufficiency assumption is violated, the LMB-CSEM algorithm (Gao and Ji, 2016) was the first score-based algorithm to learn the MB of C with latent features in a DAG. Using score-based methods, BSS-MB does not guarantee finding all possible MBs, and it does not show significantly advantages over KIAMB or TIE* in terms of time efficiency and learning accuracy. LMB-CSEM needs to use the EM algorithm to tackle the missing values of latent variables, and thus it will be computationally expensive when the size of data samples is large.

In summary, so far it is not easy to use score criteria for MB learning when the faithfulness or causal sufficiency are violated, and these algorithms may suffer the computational problem of BN structure learning and they are still based on the framework of the constraint-based MB learning. And they algorithms do not show significant advantages over the constraint-based MB learning algorithms, and they have not attached as much attention as constraint-based methods in the MB learning research.


Detailed review of score-based methods


Divide-and conquer methods

In this subsection, we discuss the three representative score-based methods with the divideand conquer strategy as follows.

SLL. The SLL (Score-based Local Learning) algorithm (Niinimki and Parviainen, 2012) first learns the PC set of a class variable as shown in Algorithms 9 and 10, and second identifies the spouses of the class variable as shown in Algorithm 11. Specifically, SLL includes the following four steps.

• (Step 1) Finding candidate PC of C. In Algorithm 9, initially CP C(C) = ∅. At each iteration, SLL randomly selects a feature X ∈ F and removes X from F , then uses a score-based BN learning algorithm, such as those in (Chickering, 2002; Algorithm 10: PC leaning with symmetric checks by SLL 1: Input: Feature set F and the class variable C Output: P C(C) 2: Find CP C(C) using Algorithm 9; 3: //Symmetric check whether C ∈ P C(X)(X ∈ CP C(C)) 4: repeat


5:

Select a feature X ∈ CP C(C);


6:

CP C(C) = CP C(C) \ X;


7:

Obtain CP C(X) using Algorithm 9;

8:

if C / ∈ CP C(X) then 9:

CP C(C) = CP C(C) \ X;

10:

end if 11: until CP C(C) is empty; 12: P C(C) = CP C(C); 13: Output P C(C).

Algorithm 11: Spouse learning by SLL 1: Input: Feature set F and P C(C)

Output: SP (C) 2: Find candidate spouses CSP (C), i.e., PC of each feature in P C(C) using Algorithm 10; 3: CSP (C) = CSP (C) \ P C(C) ∪ C; SP (C) = ∅; 4: repeat


5:

Select a feature X ∈ CSP (C);


6:

CSP (C) = CSP (C) \ X;


7:

Learning a DAG on the set P C(C) ∪ {X}cup{C} ∪ SP (C);


8:

Obtain SP(C) from the learnt DAG; 9: until CSP (C) is empty; 10: Output SP (C). Koivisto and Sood, 2004;Rohekar et al., 2018), to learn a DAG of the set (C ∪ CP C(C) ∪ X). SLL obtains a new CP C(C) from the learnt DAG. The final CP C(C) will be obtained until the set F is empty.

• (Step 2) Symmetry checks for pruning CP C(C). SLL uses a score-based variant of symmetric checks as shown in Algorithm 10. SLL learns the PC of each feature X in CP C(C) using Algorithm 9. If C / ∈ CP C(X), SLL removes X from the CP C(C).


• (

Step 3) Identifying the spouses of C as shown in Algorithm 11. Let SP (C) = ∅. SLL first uses Algorithm 9 to find the union of PC of each feature in P C(C) obtained in

Step 2 as the candidate spouses of C, called CSP (C) \ P C(C) ∪ C. Then for each feature X in this union, SLL learns a DAG of (C ∪ P C(C) ∪ X ∪ SP (C)) and obtains a new SP (C) from the learnt DAG until the union is empty.

• (Step 4) Finalizing spouses of C by the OR-rule symmetry constraint. In this step, SLL performs symmetric checks for finalizing spouses. That is, if C ∈ SP (X) but X / ∈ SP (C), using the OR rule, X should be added to SP (C). SLL first uses Algorithm 11 to find SP (C). Then SLL learns the spouses of all features in F \ P C(C) using Algorithm 11. If the spouse set of a feature includes C, the feature will be added to SP (C). The symmetric check will be computational expensive when the size of F \ P C(C) is large.

SLL is computationally expensive to lean DAGs for symmetric checks in Steps 2 and 4, especially with a large size of the MB of C.

S 2 TMB. The S 2 TMB (Score-based Simultaneous MB) algorithm aims to improve the search efficiency of SLL by removing the symmetry checks in both PC and spouse search steps (i.e., Steps 2 and 4 of SLL). S 2 TMB mainly consists of the following two steps.

• (Step 1) S 2 TMB shares the same Step 1 as SLL for learning CP C(C).

• (Step 2) Pruning CP C(C) and identifying SP (C). Let SP (C) = ∅ and R = F \ CP C(C). S 2 TMB learns the spouses of C (i.e., SP (C)) from R instead of the union of parents and children of each feature in P C(C). It prunes CP C(C) and identifies SP (C) simultaneously at Step 2. For each feature X ∈ R, S 2 TMB learns iteratively a DAG of the subset of C ∪ CP C(C) ∪ SP (C) ∪ X, and prunes CP C(C) and obtains SP (C) using the learnt DAG, until R is empty.

S 2 TMB + . However, in Step 2, the size of CP C(C) ∪ SP (C) may grow uncontrollably large, leading to the same expensive computational cost as BN structure learning. To make the size of BN structures learnt at each iteration as small as possible, S 2 TMB + decomposes

Step 2 of S 2 TMB into two steps as follows. At Step 2(a), S 2 TMB + only learns a DAG of C ∪CP C(C)∪X to prune CP C(C) and obtain SP (C) instead of C ∪CP C(C)∪SP (C)∪X. And

Step 2(b) uses the features in SP (C) one by one to prune both CP C(C) and SP (C).

• (Step 1) S 2 TMB + uses the same method as S 2 TMB for learning CP C(C).

• (Step 2a) Pruning CP C(C) and learning SP (C). Let SP (C) = ∅ and R = F \ CP C(C) initially. For each feature X ∈ R, S 2 TMB + learns iteratively a DAG of the subset of C ∪CP C(C)∪X instead of C ∪CP C(C)∪SP (C)∪X , and prunes CP C(C) and obtains SP (C) using the learnt DAG, until R is empty.

• (Step 2b) Pruning spouses and CP C(C). In this step, let R = SP (C) and SP (C) = ∅. For each feature X in R, S 2 TMB + learns iteratively a DAG of the subset C ∪ CP C(C) ∪ X ∪ SP (C), then obtain CP C(C) and SP (C) from the learnt DAG, until R is empty.


Simultaneous MB learning methods

DMB and RPDMB (Acid et al., 2013) are different from SLL and S 2 TMB. They do not divide MB learning into the PC learning step and the spouse identifying step. Instead, DMB and RPDMB learn PC and spouses of C simultaneously. These two algorithms only need to learn a local DAG around the class variable to obtain a MB of class feature instead of learning many local DAGs. Specially, they first define two restricted search spaces, that is, CDAGs (Class-focused DAGs, see Definition 1 in (Acid et al., 2013)) and CRPDAGs (Classfocused Restricted Partially Directed Acyclic Graphs, see Proposition 1 in (Acid et al., 2013)). Then starting from an empty graph, using the hill-climbing-based search operators proposed in (Acid et al., 2005), DMB carries out a local search in the space of CDAGs while RPDMB implements the search in the space of CRPDAG. Both algorithms terminate until the scoring function does not improve. Finally, the two algorithms read M B(C) from the obtained graphs respectively. Compared to SLL and S 2 TMB, DMB and RPDMB do not need to learn DAGs many times. But the problem is that how to obtain the two restricted search spaces is not clear in the paper (Acid et al., 2005). If the size of the restricted search space is large, the computational cost of learning DAGs will be expensive.


MB learning methods with relaxed assumptions

In this section, we will discuss two representative score-based MB learning algorithms, BSS-MB and LMB-CSEM, for tackling the situations when the assumptions of faithfulness or causal sufficiency is violated. BSS-MB. The BSS-MB (Bayesian stochastic search of MBs) algorithm (Masegosa and Moral, 2012) is a score-based variant of KIAMB for learning multiple MBs when the the faithfulness assumption is violated. BSS-MB adopts a strategy similar to that used by KIAMB with K = 0, but it uses a Bayesian score framework instead of conditional independence tests. In the growing phase, BSS-MB incrementally adds new features to the candidate MB sets by computing the posterior probability of a conditional independence statement. In the shrinking phase, BSS-MB removes from the MB sets the false positives identified using a Bayesian score. In addition, compared to KIAMB, each MB set found by BSS-MB has an associated score which measures how well this feature subset acts as a MB.

LMB-CSEM. LMB-CSEM (Gao and Ji, 2016) treats identifying the latent features included in the MB as a missing value problem. It first assumes the existences of latent features in the MB of C, then assigns these latent features into different non-overlapping latent subspaces. Within each subspace, LMB-CSEM employs a constrained structure expectationmaximization (CSEM) algorithm to greedily learn the MB with latent features. Then the final optimal MB is obtained from the optimal MBs within each subspace. Specifically, LMB-CSEM has three major steps. At Step 1, LMB-CSEM uses a standard MB discovery algorithm to find a MB of C from observed features as the baseline. At Step 2, using the baseline MB set, LMB-CSEM employs the CSEM algorithm to learn a MB with one latent feature within each subspace. At Step 3, if the score of the learned MB with one latent feature in one subspace is higher than that of the baseline MB, the learned MB will be considered as a new baseline MB, and Steps 2 and 3 are repeated to learn another latent feature until adding more latent features into the learned MB no longer improves the MB score or violates the size constraint.


Methods for distinguishing parents from children

Distinguishing direct causes and direct effects of a class variable is critical to the prediction of the consequence of the actions/interventions or the construction of a robust prediction model in various big data analytics and machine learning tasks. Existing studies have illustrated that the direct causes of a class variable is the minimal and stable subset for classification when training data and testing data have different distributions (Yin et al., 2008;. However, existing constraint-based MB or PC learning methods cannot distinguish parents from children, as they are based on conditional independence tests only, which does not indicate directions of relationships. Table 3 summaries three approaches for addressing this problem, global BN structure learning, local structure learning, and local structure learning with experimental data. Note that in Table 3 we only summarize the representative local-to-global BN structure learning algorithms since global BN structure learning often is computationally prohibitive (Ghoshal and Honorio, 2017).

Global structure learning. A global structure learning algorithm first learns a global BN structure, then reads parents and children of C from the learnt BN (Nie et al., 2017;Benjumeda et al., 2019;Campos and Ji, 2011;Yehezkel and Lerner, 2009). However, global BN structure learning is a NP-hard problem due to the huge candidate structure in the search space (Chickering et al., 2004;Ghoshal and Honorio, 2017).

Accordingly, local-to-global structure leaning methods were proposed. This type of algorithms first identifies each feature's MB (or PC) using the existing causality-based feature selection methods, then constructs a DAG skeleton (i.e., a undirected graph) using the found MBs (or PCs), and finally orients the edges of the skeleton using independence tests or score criteria. Several local-to-global structure learning approaches have been proposed to reduce the complexity of global BN structure learning, such as GSBN (Growing-shrinking BN) (Margaritis and Thrun, 2000), MMHC (Max-Min Hill Climbing) (Tsamardinos et al., 2006), and SLL+C/G (Niinimki and Parviainen, 2012). In order to improve the MB learning efficiency, Pellet et al. (Pellet and Elisseeff, 2008) employed the Relief feature selection algorithm and proposed the TC (Total Conditioning) algorithm. This algorithm uses the Relief feature selection algorithm to identify an approximate MB, then employs conditional independence tests to orient edges.  recently proposed a novel GGSL (Graph Growing Structure Learning) algorithm for local-to-global structure learning. Instead of finding the MBs of all features first, GGSL starts with a randomly selected feature, and then gradually expands the learned structure through a series of local structure learning steps using score-based MB learning algorithms. Later, Gao et al. (Gao and Wei, 2018) proposed a parallel Bayesian network structure learning algorithm, call PSL, using multiple local structure learning agents at the same time. These studies have shown that the local-to-global BN learning approach can deal with a data set with thousands of features.

Local structure learning. Since in many real-world applications we are only interested in the causal relationships around a class variable (e.g., causal genes of lung cancer in a gene data set), it is not necessary to waste time and memory to learn a global BN structure. Then several local learning algorithms have been designed for distinguishing direct causes and direct effects of a class variable, such as the CMB (Causal Markov Blanket) (Gao and Ji, 2015), PCD-by-PCD (Parents, Children and some Descendants) (Yin et al., 2008), and MBby-MB algorithms (Wang et al., 2014). Given a class variable, these algorithms first find a MB or PC of the class variable and constructs a local structure among the class variable and the features in the MB or PC, then sequentially finds the MB or PC of the features connected to the class variable and simultaneously constructs local structures along the paths starting from the class variable until the parents and children of the class variable have been distinguished or it is clear that the parents and children cannot be distinguished  (Margaritis and Thrun, 2000) MMHC (Tsamardinos et al., 2006) TC (Pellet and Elisseeff, 2008) SLL+C (Niinimki and Parviainen, 2012) SLL+G (Niinimki and Parviainen, 2012) GGSL  PSL (Gao and Wei, 2018) Local structure learning PCD-by-PCD (Yin et al., 2008) CMB (Gao and Ji, 2015) MB-by-MB (Wang et al., 2014) Local structure learning with experimental data ODLP (Statnikov et al., 2015) ODLP* (Statnikov et al., 2015) further by continuing the process. For a class variable in a large network, the local learning algorithms are able to greatly reduce CPU time through finding only a local structure around the class variable compared with the entire BN network learning approaches. Since all existing local learning methods employ the standard MB or PC learning algorithms, they inherit the drawbacks of these algorithms. Furthermore, the local learning algorithms need to sequentially find the MBs or PCs of the features until the causes and effects of the class variable have been distinguished, and thus their time complexity may not be controllable.

Local structure learning with experimental data. The local structure learning methods discussed above are fully dependent on observational data and may not be able to orient all edges with observational data alone (Aliferis et al., 2010b;Statnikov et al., 2015). Statnikov et. al. (Statnikov et al., 2015) proposed the ODLP algorithm for distinguishing direct causes and direct effects of the class variable using both observational and experimental data. In this work, two versions of the ODLP algorithm, ODLP* and ODLP, were proposed. Under the faithfulness assumption, the ODLP* algorithm first uses the HITON-PC or MMPC algorithm to find the set of PC of the target with observational data, then orients edges using experimental data to distinguish direct causes from direct effects of the class variable. The ODLP* algorithm is sound and complete. In order to increase the learning accuracy, by relaxing the faithfulness assumption, ODLP employs the TIE* algorithm to learn multiple PC sets of the class variable, then finds the true parents and children of the class variable from the union of the multiple PC sets with experimental data. The rational behind the idea is that a feature may have multiple sets of parents and children when the faithfulness assumption is violated (Statnikov et al., 2013).


The toolbox

There are several open-source toolboxes for Bayeisan or causal network learning, such as the well-known BNT in MATLAB 1 (Murphy et al., 2001), PGM in R 2 , bnlearn in 1. https://github.com/bayesnet/bnt 2. http://mensxmachina.org/en/software/probabilistic-graphical-model-toolbox/ R 3 (Scutari, 2009), tetrad in JAVA 4 (Scheines et al., 1998), and pcalg in R 5 (Kalisch et al., 2012). However, these toolboxes do not focus on causality-based feature selection, but Bayesian or causal network structure learning. For example, the bnlearn toolbox contains the several causality-based feature selection algorithms, such as GSMB, IAMB, Inter-IAMB, Fast-IAMB, MMPC, and HITON-PC, but it aims to use these algorithms for implementing algorithms of BN learning, inference, and classification. The Causal Explorer package  is a well-known local causal discovery package in MATLAB, including several representative causality-based feature selection algorithms, but it is not provided with source code and not available for public use now.

In this paper, we have developed the CausalFS toolbox for causality-based feature selection. The CausalFS toolbox provides the first comprehensive open-source library for use in C/C++ that implements the state-of-the-art algorithms of causality-based feature selection. The toolbox is designed to facilitate the development of new algorithms in this exciting research direction and make it easy to compare new methods and existing ones. The CausalFS toolbox is available from https://github.com/kuiy/CausalFS.

CausalFS was developed in Linux systems. The architecture of the CausalFS toolbox in Figure 5 contains three layers: application, algorithm, and data. The three layers are designed independently. This makes it easy to implement and extend CausalFS. One can easily add a new algorithm to the CausalFS toolbox and share it through the CausalFS framework without modifying the other layers. In the algorithm layer, CausalFS mainly implements 28 representative causality-based feature selection methods, including 24 constraint-based algorithms (i.e., 16 algorithms for learning a single MB, 2 algorithms for learning multiple MBs, and 6 algorithms for learning PC and 4 score-based MB and PC learning algorithms.

The algorithm layer of CausalFS can also support local-to-global BN structure learning. By applying the MB and PC learning algorithms in the algorithm layer, using CausalFS, it is easy to design different local-to-global structure learning methods. For example, using the MMMB algorithm, we can generate MMMB based local-to-global structure learning algorithm. All implementation details are included in the detailed documentation available at https://github.com/kuiy/CausalFS, where all algorithms and related data structures are explained in detail.


Evaluations of causality-based feature selection methods

In this section, we systematically evaluate the causality-based feature selection algorithms using the CausalFS package in two aspects as follows with synthetic and real-world data sets.

• For a synthetic data set, we can read the MB or PC or parents of a feature in the corresponding benchmark BN. We evaluate the quality of the MB or PC of a variable learnt by an algorithm by comparing the MB or PC of the variable with the true MB or PC of the variable in the BN.  Figure 5: Architecture of the causality-based feature selection toolbox

• For a real-world data set, we evaluate a causality-based feature selection algorithm based on the classification performance of the selected features.

All experiments were conducted on a computer with Intel(R) i5-2600, 3.4GHz CPU, and 8GB memory. In the following experiments, the G 2 test is used for independence tests and the significance level for the tests is set to 0.05 and 0.01, respectively. In all tables reporting experiment results, "-" denotes that an algorithm cannot deal with a data set due to expensive computations (the running time of the algorithm exceeded the three-day time threshold and it was stopped).


Experiments on synthetic data

In this section, we systematically evaluate the algorithms in the CausalFS package using the four standard benchmark BNs as shown in Table 4. Using the four benchmark networks, we randomly generate two groups of data, one including 5 data sets with 500 data instances each, and the other also containing 5 data sets with 5,000 data instances each. Using the two groups of data sets, we evaluate the causality-based feature selection algorithms for learning MB and PC, respectively. The following metrics are used to compare the MB or PC of a variable learnt by a causality-based feature selection algorithms with the true MB or PC of the variable in the BN. • Precision. The number of true positives in the output (i.e., the features in the output belonging to the true MB or PC of a variable) divided by the number of features in the MB or PC output by an algorithm. Precision reports the false positive rate in the output of an algorithm.

• Recall. The number of true positives in the output divided by the total number of true positives (the size of the true MB or PC) Recall reports the true positive rate in the output of an algorithm.

• F 1 =2 * precision * recall/(precision + recall). It is the harmonic average of the precision and recall, where F 1 = 1 is the best case (perfect precision and recall) while F 1 = 0 is the worst case.

• Efficiency. We use the time consumed in seconds to measure the efficiency of an algorithm.

For an algorithm, we first use it to learn the MB or PC of each variable in a data set, then compute the average results of recall, precision, F1, and running time over all variables in the data set, and finally we report these average results over five data sets. In all tables of experiment results, a value pair A/B indicates the precision, recall or F 1 of an algorithm when the significance level of independence tests is set to 0.01 (represented by A) and 0.05 (represented by B) respectively.

Results of PC learning. From Tables 5 and 6, for the time efficiency, we have the following observations.

• An algorithm using a forward strategy for PC learning may be faster than an algorithm using the backward strategy. Tables 5 and 6 illustrate that among the six constraint-based PC learning methods, MMPC, HITON-PC, and semi-HITON-PC are very competitive in terms of efficiency, but they are faster than the other PC algorithms. The explanation is that MMPC, HITON-PC, and semi-HITON-PC use a forward strategy, while Recongize-PC uses a backward strategy.

• The symmetry check makes a PC learning algorithm computationally expensive. GetPC uses a forward strategy, but it is not efficient since it employs the symmetry check using the AND rule in the PC learning phase. MBtoPC is slower than the other algorithms, because it performs the symmetry check using the OR rule. SLL-PC implements the symmetry check for both PC and spouse learning. S 2 TMB-PC is faster than SLL-PC since it does not perform the symmetry check.  • A score-based PC learning algorithm may be slower than a constraint-based method due to the computational complexity of the BN structure learning. In Tables 5 and 6, both score-based methods are slower than any constraint-based PC learning algorithms and failed to produce results for the two large-sized networks before they were terminated after three days.

In terms of learning performance, the following conclusions are obtained.

• • A PC learning algorithm using the backward strategy or the symmetry check is not affected by the significance level in terms of precision (i.e., false positive rate). In Tables 5 and 6, the recall metric is not affected much by the significance level parameter, but the precision metrics of MMPC, HITON-PC, and semi-HITON-PC are influenced greatly by this parameter, while and Recongize-PC, GetPC, and MBtoPC are not affected. Meanwhile, for the learning performance, SLL-PC (performing the symmetry check) and S 2 TMB-PC are very competitive to PC-simple, GetPC, and MBtoPC on the two small-sized networks.

In summary, the backward strategy or the symmetry check is a double-edged sword. They will make a PC learning algorithm computationally expensive, but they are able to make the PC learning algorithms output a more accurate MB or PC set.

Results of MB learning. From Tables 7 and 8, we have the following conclusions.

• Existing constraint-based simultaneous MB learning algorithms are inferior the other MB learning algorithms. From Tables 7 and 8, we can see that regardless of sample size (500 or 5000), on the four BN networks, the six simultaneous MB learning algorithms are inferior to the remaining ten MB learning algorithms, especially on the two largesized BN networks. Meanwhile, GSMB has the worst precisions and recalls among all rivals. STMB has the lowest precision among all the MB learning algorithms except for GSMB. The explanation is that STMB adopts the same strategy as the simultaneous MB discovery algorithms in the false positive removal phase and this leads to a large data sample requirements.

• The backward strategy and the symmetry check make a MB learning algorithm more accurate using a large-sized data samples. Since GetPC, Recongize-PC, and MBtoPC outperform the other PC learning algorithms as shown in Tables 6 and 7, their corresponding MB learning algorithms, PCMB, IPCMB, and MBOR, are better than the other constraint-based 11 MB learning algorithms on the two large-sized BN networks. For example, IPCMB achieves the best performance on the two large networks, since IPCMB not only adopts the Recongize-PC algorithm to learn the PC of each variable, but also it performs the symmetry check in the spouse discovery procedure (Recongize-PC gets the best performance as shown in Tables 5 and 6).

Duo to unreliable independence tests using a small-sized data samples, a MB learning algorithm using the AND rule may remove the true MB members from its output when performing the symmetry check, and thus this may degrade the performance of the algorithm on recall. For example, in Table 5, using 500 samples on the two small-sized networks, PCMB and IPCMB get much lower recall than MMMB, HITON-MB, and semi-HITON-MB. Thus it is an interesting problem of studying under what conditions we use the AND rule or the OR rule or combining both to make MB learning more accurate.

• Score-based methods have the similar performance as constraint-based methods in terms of F1. From Tables 7 and 8, S 2 TMB and SLL achieve similar performance as the best constraint-based MB learning methods in terms of both precision and recall with the two small-sized networks. These results are consistent with the results of S 2 TMB-PC and SLL-PC in Tables 6 and 7. On the large-sized networks, due to expensive computation costs, S 2 TMB and SLL did not produce results within three days.

• Simultaneous MB learning methods are the fastest while score-based methods are the slowest. Since the six simultaneous MB learning methods do not need to perform an exhaustive subset search within the currently selected features, they are faster than the eight divide-and-conquer MB methods. In addition, these six simultaneous MB learning algorithms have the similar performance in terms of efficiency. PCMB and IPCMB are the slowest among the divide-and-conquer MB methods, since they need to perform the symmetry check. Moreover, the Recongize-PC algorithm used by IPCMB is slower than MMPC, HITON-PC, and semi-HITON-PC as shown in Tables 5 and 6. STMB and BAMB do not need to perform the symmetry check. However, they need to perform an exhaustive subset search for PC learning. The these two algorithms are not significantly faster than MMMB, HITON-MB, and semi-HITON-MB. S 2 TMB and SLL are slower than all constraint-based MB learning algorithms, since they need to use a BN structure learning algorithm to learn MBs. S 2 TMB is faster than SLL because S 2 TMB removes the symmetry check.


Experiments on real-world data

In the section, we validate the causality-based feature selection algorithms using eight realworld datasets from the UCI Machine Learning Repository and NIPS2003 feature selection challenge datasets as shown in Table 9. Among these eight datasets, three are of low dimensionality but contains a large number of samples, two are high dimensional datasets with large number of samples, and the other three are also of high dimensionality but small size. We use the three classifiers, NB, KNN, and SVM to evaluate a selected feature subset for classification. The value of k for the KNN classifier is set to 3 and both SVM and KNN  use the linear kernel. In the following, we evaluate two types of feature subsets selected by the causality-based feature selection algorithms for classification, which are the MB and PC of the class variable, using the following metrics.

• Prediction accuracy. The number of correctly predicted data samples divided by the total number of data samples in a test data set.

• Compactness. The size of the feature subset selected by an algorithm.

• AUC. Area Under the ROC Curve for demonstrating the performance of a classifier for predicting a binary class variable with imbalanced classes.

From Tables 10 to 12, our observations are summarized as follows.

• The classification performance using the PC set of a class variable is not inferior to that of using the MB of the class variable. And PC learning is much more efficient than MB learning. The findings are consistent with the results in (Aliferis et al., 2010a). Thus in terms of feature selection, PC learning algorithms are practical in real-world applications, .

• When the size of data samples is large, the simultaneous MB learning approach (except for GSMB) is significantly faster than the other MB and PC learning algorithms, and they achieve very competitive prediction accuracy with their rivals. Surprisingly, FBED is the fastest algorithm and its performance is comparable with the others as shown in Tables 10 to 11.

• Existing score-based MB or PC learning algorithms are still computationally expensive or prohibitive when the size of PC or MB is large, even if the number of features in a data set is small. For example, on the spambase data set, we observe that when the size of MB is over 30, SLL and S 2 TMB are very computationally expensive using the exact score-based BN learning algorithms. Using both synthetic and real-world data sets, existing score-based MB or PC learning algorithms do not show significant advantages over the constrain-based algorithms. The results also explain why the score-based MB learning approach is not the focus in the causality-based feature selection research.

• With the three class-imbalanced data sets, infant, bankruptcy, and dorothea, all MB learning algorithms achieve almost the same high prediction accuracy in Tables 10 to 11. In Table 12, on infant and bankruptcy, it is the same for all PC learning algorithms. However, in Tables 13 to 14, we can see that all MB and PC learning algorithms achieve much low values of AUC. Here we do not report the value of AUC of each algorithm on the remaining five class-balanced date sets, since the MB and PC learning algorithms obtain almost the same prediction accuracy and AUC. The results indicate that the existing causality-base feature selection algorithms are not able to deal with a data set with imbalanced classes well.

• The compactness and symmetry check. In terms of compactness, in Tables 10 to 11, STMB selects the most features than the other rivals for all data sets, while the score-based MB algorithms achieve the worst performance among all algorithms under comparison. Meanwhile, the symmetry check may not be helpful for selecting a good feature subset for classification in real-world applications. MMMB, HITON-MB, and semi-HITON-MB achieve more stable and better prediction accuracy than the other rivals, although their outputs include more false positives than the other rivals as discussed above. The possible explanation is that when we use causality-based feature selection to deal with real-world data sets for classification, these real-world data sets may violate the faithfulness or causal sufficiency assumption. And this is the same for MMPC, HITON-PC, and semi-HITON-PC in Tables 12. 


Conclusion and open problems

In this paper, we first reviewed the state-of-the art causality-based feature selection algorithms, then described our developed open-source software package which implements the representative causality-based feature selection algorithms, and finally we evaluated the representative algorithms using synthetic and real-world data sets.The experiments using synthetic data sets have demonstrated that a backward strategy or the symmetry check significantly improves the precision of causality-based feature selection algorithms (i.e., helps removing more false positives). However, with real-world data sets, due to noise or smallsized data samples, allowing more false positives in the output of causality-based feature selection algorithms may be useful for classification. Using real world data sets, selecting a PC of the class variable for classification would be better and is much faster than selecting a MB. The score-based PC or MB learning algorithms do not suffer from the problem of data efficiency compared to the constraint-based MB learning algorithms. Although a significant number of causality-based feature selection algorithms have been developed for big data analytics in the past two decades, more efforts are still required in this research direction to tackle the following challenges.

• Low-quality data. Missing or noise data are ubiquitous in many real-world application domains, which means that the values for one or more features in a data set are incorrect or missing from recorded observations. All existing causality-based feature selection methods assume that all features involved in a dataset do not have missing or noise values. It is challenging to address causality-based feature selection methods with low-quality big data.

• Streaming data. Existing causality-based feature selection methods assume that all data instances (or samples) in a data set are given before the learning starts. In fact,       many real-world data sets are available in streams. There is a need to develop online causality-based feature selection algorithms to deal with streaming data.

• Weak-supervision data. In real-world applications, a data set may have very few labeled data instances, while abundant unlabeled data instances are available. However, existing causality-based feature selection algorithms are unable to work well with such data sets. Thus, it is interesting and challenging to exploit unlabeled data instances to facilitate weak-supervision causality-based feature selection methods.

• Imbalanced class data. The majority of existing causality-based methods cannot deal with data sets with imbalanced classes, which, however, exist in many real-world applications. It is important to develop new feature selection methods to address this problem.

• Distribution shift. Causality-based feature selection has the potential to deal with data with distribution shifts, i.e., training data and testing data do not have identical distributions, since in this case the set of all direct causes of a class variable is the invariance and minimal set between training data and testing data. However, it is an open problem to distinguish causes from effects of a class variable.


16: until no features in S are removed 17: Output S Algorithm 2: Interleaving forward-backward selection (IFBS) 1: Input: Feature Set F and the class variable C Output: The set of selected S 2: S = ∅;

S
= S ∪ X and F = F \ X;

Figure 2 :
2Simultaneous MB learning in

Figure 3 :Figure 4 :
34DivideMB learning with interleaving PC and spouse learning The representative divide-and-conquer algorithms include MMMB (Tsamardinos et al., 2003a), HITON-MB (Aliferis et al., 2003), semi-HITON-MB (Aliferis et al., 2003), PCMB (Peña et al., 2005), IPCMB (Fu and Desmarais, 2008), MBOR (De Morais and Aussem, 2008), STMB

Algorithm 3 :
3The instantiation of SFBS for simultaneous MB learning 1: Input: Feature Set F and the class variable C Output: CM B(C) 2: CM B(C) = ∅; 3: //Forward phase: Adding candidate MB (relevant) features to CM B(C) (C) = CM B(C) ∪ X and F = F \ X; 8: end if 9: until no features in F are added to CM B(C); 10: //Backward phase: Removing false positives from CM B(C) 11: repeat 12: Select a feature Y ∈ CM B(C); 13: if Y ⊥ ⊥ C|CM B(C) \ Y then 14: CM B(C) = CM B(C) \ Y ; 15: end if 16: until no features in CM B(C) are removed 17: Output CM B(C)

Algorithm 4 :
4The instantiation of IFBS for simultaneous MB Learning 1: Input: Feature Set F and the class variable C Output: CM B(C) 2: CM B(C) = ∅; phase: Adding candidate MB (relevant) features to CM B(C) 5: Select a feature X ∈ F with the highest association with C; 6: if X ⊥ ⊥ C|CM B(C) then 7: CM B(C) = CM B(C) ∪ X and F = F \ X; 16: until no features in F are added to CM B(C); 17: Output CM B(C)


, HITON-MB (Aliferis et al., 2003), semi-HITON-MB (Aliferis et al., 2003), PCMB (Peña et al., 2005), IPCMB (Fu and Desmarais, 2008), MBOR (De Morais and Aussem, 2008), STMB


no features in CP C(C) are removed; 15: until no features in R are added to CP C(C); 16: Output CP C(C) Algorithm 7: The Backward Framework for PC Learning 1: Input: Feature Set F and the class variable C Output: CP C(C) 2: CP C(C) = {F }; 3: i=0; 4: repeat 5: for each feature X in CP C(C) do 6:if ∃S ⊆ CP C(C) \ X and |S| = i such that X ⊥ ⊥ C|S then 7:CP C(C) = CP C(C) \ X; until i > |CP C(C)|; 12: Output CP C(C)


Following this, Aliferis et al. (Aliferis et al., 2010a) proposed a general local learning (GLL) framework and corrected the two flaws discussed above. In addition, in (Aliferis et al., 2010a), a new Semiinterleaved HITON-PC (Semi-HITON-PC for brevity) algorithm was proposed to speed up HITON-PC. The difference between Semi-HITON-PC and HITON-PC is that atStep 10 in Algorithm 6, Semi-HITON-PC only considers the elimination of the newly added feature at Step 7 before the candidate feature set R becomes empty and a full feature elimination in CP C(C) will be performed after R is empty. Employing Semi-HITON-PC, the semi-HITON-MB algorithm has been proposed accordingly(Aliferis et al., 2010a).PCMB. The parents and children based MB (PCMB) algorithm(Peña et al., 2005;Pena et al., 2007) was the first correct divide-and-conquer MB learning algorithm. PCMB Algorithm 8: The Framework of Spouse Learning 1: Input: C, CP C(C), and Sepset(X) for each feature X in F Output: Spouses of C (SP (C)) 2: SP (C) = ∅; 3: for each feature X in CP C(C) do 4:


T M B (Gao and Ji, 2017b) S 2 T M B + (Gao and Ji, 2017b) Simultaneous MB learning (learning PC and spouses simultaneously) DMB (Acid et al., 2013) RPDMB (Acid et al., 2013) MB learning with relaxed assumptions BSS-MB (Masegosa and Moral, 2012) LMB-CSEM (Gao and Ji, 2016)

Algorithm 9 :
9Candidate PC leaning by SLL 1: Input: Feature set F and the class variable C Output: CP C(C) 2: CP C(C) = ∅;


A PC learning algorithm using the backward strategy or the symmetry check can remove more false positives, especially on large-sized BN networks. On the two smallsized networks, Recongize-PC, GetPC, MBtoPC are very competitive with MMPC, HITON-PC, and semi-HITON-PC in terms of precision and recall. On the two largesized networks, Recongize-PC, GetPC, and MBtoPC significantly outperform MMPC, HITON-PC, and semi-HITON-PC in terms of precision. This indicates that on the large-sized networks, learning PC using a backward strategy or the symmetry check can remove much more false positives.


Algorithm 1: Standard forward-backward selection (SFBS) 1: Input: Feature Set F and the class variable C Output: The set of selected S 2: S = ∅; 3: //Forward phase: Adding features to S 4: repeat5: 



then 12 :
12S = S \ Y ; until no features in S are not removed end if 16: until no features in F are added to S; 17: Output S13: 

end if 

14: 

15: 



Table 1 :
1Representative constraint-based algorithms using conditional independence testsCategory 
Representative algorithm 

Simultaneous MB learning 
(learning PC and spouses simultaneously 
and do not distinguish PC from spouses) 



Table 2 :
2Representative score-based MB learning algorithms using score criteria Category Algorithm Divide-and conquer MB learning (learning PC and spouses separately using a BN structure learning algorithm)

Table 3 :
3Representative methods for distinguishing parents from children CategoryAlgorithmGlobal structure learning 

GSBN 

Table 4 :
4Summary of benchmark BNs Num. Num. Max In/out-Min/Max VariableNetwork Vars Edges 
Degree 
|PCset| 
Domain 
Child 
20 
25 
2/7 
1/8 
2-6 
Alarm 
37 
46 
4/5 
1/6 
2-4 
Pigs 
441 
592 
2/39 
1/41 
3-3 
Gene 
801 
972 
4/10 
0/11 
3-5 



Table 5 :
5Results of PC learning methods on synthetic data sets (size=500)hline Network 
Algorithm 
F1 
Precision 
Recall 
Time 

Child 

PC-simple 
0.89/0.89 
0.94/0.91 
0.86/0.88 
0/0 
MMPC 
0.90/0.87 
0.93/0.87 
0.89/0.89 
0/0 
HITON-PC 
0.91/0.88 
0.94/0.89 
0.89/0.91 
0/0 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.91/0.89 
0.94/0.90 
0.89/0.91 
0/0 
GetPC 
0.84/0.84 
0.93/0.91 
0.80/0.81 
0/0 
MBtoPC 
0.86/0.83 
0.95/0.90 
0.81/0.80 
0/0 
SLL-PC 
0.87 
0.95 
0.83 
0.47 
S 2 TMB-PC 
0.86 
0.91 
0.85 
0.15 

Alarm 

PC-simple 
0.82/0.84 
0.89/0.88 
0.79/0.84 
0/0 
MMPC 
0.85/0.84 
0.90/0.84 
0.83/0.87 
0/0 
HITON-PC 
0.84/0.83 
0.89/0.83 
0.83/0.87 
0/0 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.85/0.84 
0.89/0.85 
0.83/0.87 
0/0 
GetPC 
0.77/0.82 
0.88/0.89 
0.73/0.80 
0/0 
MBtoPC 
0.86/0.85 
0.95/0.92 
0.81/0.82 
0/0 
SLL-PC 
0.91 
0.93 
0.91 
0.38 
S 2 TMB-PC 
0.88 
0.87 
0.93 
0.31 

Pigs 

PC-simple 
0.99/0.95 
0.98/0.93 
1/1 
0.02/0.03 
MMPC 
0.91/0.77 
0.86/0.66 
1/1 
0/0.01 
HITON-PC 
0.91/0.77 
0.86/0.66 
1/1 
0.01/0.01 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.91/0.77 
0.87/0.67 
1/1 
0.01/0.01 
GetPC 
0.99/0.95 
0.98/0.92 
1/1 
0.04/0.05 
MBtoPC 
0.93/0.89 
0.97/0.90 
0.92/0.92 
0.02/0.03 
SLL-PC 
-
-
-
-
S 2 TMB-PC 
-
-
-
-

Gene 

PC-simple 
0.96/0.91 
0.97/0.89 
0.96/0.96 
0.01/0.02 
MMPC 
0.83/0.70 
0.79/0.60 
0.92/0.93 
0.01/0.01 
HITON-PC 
0.83/0.70 
0.79/0.60 
0.92/0.93 
0.01/0.01 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.83/0.71 
0.79/0.61 
0.92/0.93 
0.01/0.01 
GetPC 
0.96/0.94 
0.97/0.94 
0.95/0.96 
0.03/0.04 
MBtoPC 
0.86/0.80 
0.91/0.83 
0.84/0.85 
0.03/0.05 
SLL-PC 
-
-
-
-
S 2 TMB-PC 
-
-
-
-



Table 6 :
6Results of PC learning methods on synthetic data sets (size=5,000)Network 
Algorithm 
F1 
Precision 
Recall 
Time 

Child 

PC-simple 
1/0.96 
0.99/0.94 
1/1 
0.01/0.02 
MMPC 
0.98/0.92 
0.96/0.87 
1/1 
0.01/0.01 
HITON-PC 
0.98/0.92 
0.97/0.88 
1/1 
0.01/0.01 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.98/0.92 
0.97/0.88 
1/1 
0.01/0.01 
GetPC 
1/1 
1/0.99 
1/1 
0.05/0.05 
MBtoPC 
0.97/0.93 
0.98/0.92 
0.97/0.97 
0.02/0.02 
SLL-PC 
0.97 
1 
0.94 
5.2 
S 2 TMB-PC 
0.98 
0.99 
0.97 
1.51 

Alarm 

PC-simple 
0.98/0.97 
0.97/0.96 
0.99/0.99 
0.02/0.02 
MMPC 
0.97/0.93 
0.97/0.90 
0.99/0.99 
0.01/0.01 
HITON-PC 
0.97/0.92 
0.97/0.89 
0.99/0.99 
0.01/0.01 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.97/0.93 
0.97/0.90 
0.99/0.99 
0.01/0.01 
GetPC 
0.98/0.98 
1/1 
0.97/0.97 
0.04/0.04 
MBtoPC 
0.98/0.96 
0.99/0.97 
0.97/0.97 
0.03/0.03 
SLL-PC 
0.97 
0.96 
0.98 
3.49 
S 2 TMB-PC 
0.95 
0.94 
0.98 
2.83 

Pigs 

PC-simple 
0.99/0.95 
0.98/0.93 
1/1 
0.64/0.78 
MMPC 
0.91/0.78 
0.86/0.68 
1/1 
0.19/0.2 
HITON-PC 
0.91/0.78 
0.86/0.68 
1/1 
0.24/0.26 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.91/0.79 
0.86/0.69 
1/1 
0.29/0.3 
GetPC 
0.99/0.97 
0.99/0.96 
1/1 
10.23/10.43 
MBtoPC 
0.97/0.95 
0.98/0.94 
0.99/0.99 
0.52/0.76 
SLL-PC 
-
-
-
-
S 2 TMB-PC 
-
-
-
-

Gene 

PC-simple 
0.98/0.92 
0.97/0.90 
0.99/0.98 
0.40/0.59 
MMPC 
0.83/0.72 
0.78/0.62 
0.94/0.94 
0.12/0.13 
HITON-PC 
0.83/0.72 
0.78/0.62 
0.94/0.94 
0.15/0.19 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.83/0.72 
0.78/0.63 
0.94/0.94 
0.15/0.19 
GetPC 
0.98/0.96 
0.98/0.95 
0.99/0.98 
0.64/0.87 
MBtoPC 
0.91/0.90 
0.91/0.89 
0.93/0.93 
0.69/1.22 
SLL-PC 
-
-
-
-
S 2 TMB-PC 
-
-
-
-


Table 7 :
7Results of MB learning methods on synthetic data sets (size=500)Data 
Algorithm 
F1 
Precision 
Recall 
Time 
GSMB 
0.69/0.54 
0.78/0.59 
0.67/0.58 
0/0 
IAMB 
0.78/0.67 
0.86/0.67 
0.77/0.77 
0/0 
Inter-IAMB 
0.78/0.67 
0.86/0.67 
0.77/0.77 
0/0 
Fast-IAMB 
0.74/0.68 
0.87/0.77 
0.71/0.70 
0/0 
LRH 
0.80/0.68 
0.86/0.67 
0.80/0.82 
0/0 
FBED 
0.79/0.70 
0.87/0.71 
0.77/0.77 
0/0 
MMMB 
0.87/0.82 
0.94/0.84 
0.83/0.84 
0/0 
PCMB 
0.79/0.79 
0.93/0.88 
0.74/0.76 
0/0 
Child 
HITON-MB 
0.85/0.83 
0.94/0.86 
0.82/0.85 
0/0 
Semi-HITON-MB 
0.85/0.83 
0.94/0.87 
0.82/0.85 
0/0 
MBOR 
0.84/0.81 
0.92/0.83 
0.81/0.84 
0/0 
IPCMB 
0.80/0.82 
0.93/0.88 
0.74/0.79 
0/0 
STMB 
0.81/0.71 
0.85/0.66 
0.82/0.86 
0/0 
BAMB 
0.86/0.81 
0.93/0.82 
0.83/0.84 
0/0 
EEMB 
0.84/0.80 
0.92/0.81 
0.82/0.85 
0/0 
SLL 
0.84 
0.95 
0.79 
0.85 
S 2 TMB 
0.83 
0.95 
0.77 
0.14 
GSMB 
0.29/0.19 
0.35/0.21 
0.27/0.20 
0/0 
IAMB 
0.76/0.73 
0.89/0.79 
0.71/0.74 
0/0 
Inter-IAMB 
0.77/0.72 
0.89/0.77 
0.72/0.75 
0/0 
Fast-IAMB 
0.71/0.67 
0.85/0.77 
0.65/0.66 
0/0 
LRH 
0.75/0.70 
0.85/0.71 
0.73/0.76 
0/0 
FBED 
0.77/0.74 
0.90/0.80 
0.71/0.73 
0/0 
MMMB 
0.82/0.82 
0.90/0.85 
0.78/0.84 
0/0 
PCMB 
0.74/0.79 
0.88/0.89 
0.68/0.76 
0/0.01 
Alarm 
HITON-MB 
0.82/0.81 
0.90/0.84 
0.78/0.85 
0/0 
Semi-HITON-MB 
0.82/0.83 
0.90/0.86 
0.78/0.85 
0/0 
MBOR 
0.85/0.85 
0.93/0.89 
0.81/0.85 
0/0 
IPCMB 
0.74/0.80 
0.87/0.88 
0.69/0.77 
0/0.01 
STMB 
0.67/0.59 
0.69/0.54 
0.76/0.84 
0/0 
BAMB 
0.80/0.80 
0.90/0.85 
0.75/0.80 
0/0 
EEMB 
0.80/0.79 
0.90/0.85 
0.75/0.87 
0/0 
SLL 
0.88 
0.93 
0.87 
0.88 
S 2 TMB 
0.87 
0.92 
0.86 
0.29 
GSMB 
0.06/0.01 
0.08/0.02 
0.05/0.01 
0/0 
IAMB 
0.80/0.80 
0.98/0.98 
0.72/0.72 
0.01/0.01 
Inter-IAMB 
0.80/0.80 
0.98/0.98 
0.72/0.72 
0.01/0.01 
Fast-IAMB 
0.77/0.76 
0.80/0.80 
0.83/0.81 
0.01/0.01 
LRH 
0.69/0.68 
0.90/0.87 
0.60/0.60 
0.01/0.02 
FBED 
0.71/0.69 
0.89/0.87 
0.64/0.62 
0/0 
MMMB 
0.93/0.76 
0.88/0.64 
1/1 
0.04/0.05 
PCMB 
0.99/0.95 
0.98/0.92 
1/1 
0.13/0.17 
Pigs 
HITON-MB 
0.93/0.76 
0.88/0.64 
1/1 
0.07/0.08 
Semi-HITON-MB 
0.93/0.77 
0.88/0.65 
1/1 
0.08/0.1 
MBOR 
0.95/0.85 
0.92/0.77 
1/1 
0.02/0.04 
IPCMB 
0.99/0.97 
0.99/0.95 
1/1 
0.60/0.67 
STMB 
0.59/0.25 
0.47/0.15 
0.97/0.98 
0.05/0.08 
BAMB 
0.96/0.81 
0.93/0.71 
1/1 
0.05/0.06 
EEMB 
0.96/0.82 
0.93/0.72 
1/1 
0.04/0.08 
SLL 
-
-
-
-
S 2 TMB 
-
-
-
-
GSMB 
0.06/0.01 
0.08/0.02 
0.05/0.01 
0/0 
IAMB 
0.66/0.66 
0.80/0.80 
0.68/0.68 
0.01/0.01 
Inter-IAMB 
0.66/0.66 
0.80/0.80 
0.68/0.68 
0.01/0.01 
Fast-IAMB 
0.66/0.65 
0.68/0.68 
0.78/0.78 
0.01/0.01 
LRH 
0.71/0.67 
0.89/0.82 
0.67/0.67 
0.01/0.02 
FBED 
0.66/0.66 
0.80/0.80 
0.68/0.67 
0.01/0.01 
MMMB 
0.82/0.66 
0.79/0.56 
0.91/0.92 
0.03/0.04 
PCMB 
0.94/0.93 
0.97/0.93 
0.93/0.95 
0.08/0.12 
Gene 
HITON-MB 
0.82/0.66 
0.79/0.56 
0.91/0.92 
0.03/0.05 
Semi-HITON-MB 
0.82/0.67 
0.79/0.57 
0.91/0.92 
0.03/0.05 
MBOR 
0.87/0.74 
0.86/0.66 
0.91/0.92 
0.03/0.06 
IPCMB 
0.96/0.94 
0.98/0.94 
0.94/0.96 
0.04/0.07 
STMB 
0.56/0.18 
0.44/0.12 
0.92/0.92 
0.04/0.06 
BAMB 
0.82/0.68 
0.79/0.59 
0.90/0.91 
0.03/0.05 
EEMB 
0.82/0.67 
0.78/0.57 
0.90/0.92 
0.03/0.05 
SLL 
-
-
-
-
S 2 TMB 
-
-
-
-


Table 8 :
8Results of MB learning methods on synthetic data sets (size=5,000)Data 
Algorithm 
F1 
Precision 
Recall 
Time 
GSMB 
0.70/0.45 
0.69/0.42 
0.75/0.58 
0/0 
IAMB 
0.86/0.72 
0.83/0.64 
0.95/0.95 
0.01/0.01 
Inter-IAMB 
0.86/0.72 
0.83/0.65 
0.95/0.95 
0.01/0.01 
Fast-IAMB 
0.89/0.74 
0.89/0.70 
0.93/0.91 
0.01/0.01 
LRH 
0.85/0.71 
0.81/0.63 
0.97/0.96 
0.02/0.03 
FBED 
0.89/0.76 
0.87/0.69 
0.94/0.94 
0.01/0.01 
MMMB 
0.98/0.89 
0.97/0.84 
1/1 
0.05/0.05 
PCMB 
1/0.98 
1/0.97 
1/1 
0.1/0.11 
Child 
HITON-MB 
0.98/0.90 
0.97/0.85 
1/1 
0.06/0.07 
Semi-HITON-MB 
0.98/0.90 
0.97/0.85 
1/1 
0.07/0.08 
MBOR 
0.96/0.88 
0.96/0.84 
0.98/0.98 
0.04/0.08 
IPCMB 
1/0.98 
1/0.97 
1/1 
0.09/0.11 
STMB 
0.91/0.80 
0.86/0.71 
0.99/1 
0.02/0.03 
BAMB 
0.97/0.89 
0.96/0.83 
0.99/0.99 
0.04/0.05 
EEMB 
0.96/0.88 
0.95/0.82 
0.99/0.99 
0.02/0.02 
SLL 
0.96 
1 
0.93 
9.1 
S 2 TMB 
0.98 
1 
0.96 
1.3 
GSMB 
0.33/0.20 
0.34/0.20 
0.35/0.26 
0.01/0 
IAMB 
0.92/0.80 
0.94/0.75 
0.91/0.92 
0.02/0.02 
Inter-IAMB 
0.92/0.79 
0.94/0.72 
0.92/0.93 
0.02/0.03 
Fast-IAMB 
0.91/0.79 
0.94/0.75 
0.91/0.92 
0.01/0.01 
LRH 
0.91/0.78 
0.93/0.71 
0.92/0.93 
0.13/0.05 
FBED 
0.93/0.83 
0.96/0.80 
0.91/0.92 
0.01/0.01 
MMMB 
0.97/0.93 
0.98/0.90 
0.97/0.98 
0.04/0.04 
PCMB 
0.97/0.98 
1/1 
0.96/0.96 
0.08/0.09 
Alarm 
HITON-MB 
0.97/0.92 
0.98/0.89 
0.97/0.98 
0.04/0.05 
Semi-HITON-MB 
0.97/0.93 
0.98/0.9 
0.97/0.98 
0.05/0.06 
MBOR 
0.97/0.96 
0.98/0.95 
0.97/0.98 
0.05/0.06 
IPCMB 
0.97/0.98 
1/1 
0.96/0.97 
0.09/0.1 
STMB 
0.79/0.71 
0.76/0.63 
0.95/0.97 
0.04/0.04 
BAMB 
0.96/0.92 
0.98/0.91 
0.94/0.96 
0.03/0.04 
EEMB 
0.96/0.93 
0.99/0.93 
0.94/0.95 
0.02/0.03 
SLL 
0.96 
0.97 
0.96 
8.15 
S 2 TMB 
0.95 
0.98 
0.93 
2.44 
GSMB 
0.05/0.02 
0.04/0.02 
0.06/0.03 
0.02/0.01 
IAMB 
0.71/0.71 
0.62/0.62 
0.96/0.96 
0.29/0.29 
Inter-IAMB 
0.71/0.71 
0.62/0.62 
0.96/0.96 
0.28/0.28 
Fast-IAMB 
0.71/0.70 
0.62/0.61 
0.95/0.94 
0.18/0.14 
LRH 
0.80/0.76 
0.75/0.68 
0.96/0.96 
0.87/1.22 
FBED 
0.78/0.67 
0.71/0.59 
0.95/0.89 
0.12/0.11 
MMMB 
0.92/0.77 
0.87/0.65 
1/1 
6.47/6 
PCMB 
0.99/0.97 
0.99/0.95 
1/1 
29.15/23.12 
Pigs 
HITON-MB 
0.92/0.76 
0.87/0.64 
1/1 
9.74/12.27 
Semi-HITON-MB 
0.92/0.77 
0.87/0.65 
1/1 
13.58/13.6 
MBOR 
0.97/0.91 
0.94/0.86 
1/1 
0.73/1.19 
IPCMB 
1/0.98 
1/0.97 
1/1 
11.17/11.37 
STMB 
0.38/0.15 
0.28/0.09 
1/1 
2.66/5.2 
BAMB 
0.96/0.84 
0.93/0.74 
1/1 
23.35/23.28 
EEMB 
0.96/0.87 
0.94/0.79 
1/1 
8.71/8.27 
SLL 
-
-
-
-
S 2 TMB 
-
-
-
-
GSMB 
0.03/0.01 
0.03/0.01 
0.04/0.02 
0.02/0.01 
IAMB 
0.60/0.60 
0.53/0.53 
0.89/0.89 
0.65/0.64 
Inter-IAMB 
0.60/0.60 
0.53/0.53 
0.89/0.89 
0.71/0.64 
Fast-IAMB 
0.60/0.59 
0.53/0.52 
0.89/0.88 
0.35/0.28 
LRH 
0.66/0.61 
0.60/0.55 
0.89/0.88 
0.98/3.3 
FBED 
0.62/0.55 
0.55/0.48 
0.88/0.82 
0.24/0.19 
MMMB 
0.83/0.68 
0.77/0.57 
0.94/0.94 
0.58/0.69 
PCMB 
0.98/0.96 
0.98/0.95 
0.99/0.98 
1.67/2.13 
Gene 
HITON-MB 
0.83/0.68 
0.77/0.57 
0.94/0.94 
0.76/1.1 
Semi-HITON-MB 
0.83/0.69 
0.77/0.58 
0.94/0.94 
0.73/1.08 
MBOR 
0.89/0.83 
0.86/0.78 
0.94/0.94 
0.85/1.83 
IPCMB 
0.99/0.97 
0.99/0.96 
0.99/0.99 
1.92/2.96 
STMB 
0.30/0.11 
0.20/0.07 
0.99/0.98 
0.95/1.57 
BAMB 
0.82/0.69 
0.76/0.59 
0.94/0.94 
0.71/1.55 
EEMB 
0.82/0.71 
0.77/0.61 
0.94/0.94 
0.56/0.82 
SLL 
-
-
-
-
S 2 TMB 
-
-
-
-


Table 9 :
9Summary of real-world datasetsDataset 
Number of features 
Number of instances 
Category ratio 
infant 
86 
5,337 
0.94/0.06 
spambase 
57 
4,601 
0.61/0.39 
bankruptcy 
147 
7,063 
0.89/0.11 
madelon 
500 
2,000 
0.50/0.50 
gisette 
5,000 
6,000 
0.50/0.50 
arcene 
10,000 
100 
0.56/0.44 
dexter 
20,000 
300 
0.50/0.50 
dorothea 
100,000 
800 
0.90/0.10 



Table 10 :
10Comparison of MB methods on real-world data sets in prediction accuracy(1)Data 
Algorithm 
NB 
KNN 
SVM 
Compactness 
Time 
GSMB 
0.58/0.55 
0.51/0.52 
0.56/0.55 
7.00/7.00 
0.01/0.00 
IAMB 
0.58/0.58 
0.62/0.62 
0.63/0.63 
7.00/7.00 
0.21/0.22 
Inter-IAMB 
0.58/0.58 
0.62/0.61 
0.63/0.63 
7.00/7.00 
0.22/0.21 
Fast-IAMB 
0.57/0.57 
0.57/0.56 
0.61/0.60 
6.00/6.00 
0.06/0.06 
LRH 
0.60/0.61 
0.61/0.60 
0.62/0.63 
8.00/8.00 
0.16/0.30 
FBED 
0.60/0.59 
0.61/0.57 
0.62/0.61 
7.10/7.90 
0.06/0.03 
MMMB 
0.58/0.59 
0.55/0.63 
0.60/0.64 
5.70/9.40 
0.14/0.23 
madelon 
PCMB 
0.56/0.58 
0.50/0.52 
0.55/0.58 
1.50/3.50 
0.24/0.42 
HITON-MB 
0.58/0.60 
0.57/0.60 
0.61/0.63 
5.60/8.40 
0.15/0.24 
Semi-HITON-MB 
0.58/0.60 
0.56/0.60 
0.60/0.63 
5.50/8.30 
0.15/0.26 
MBOR 
0.60/0.60 
0.59/0.60 
0.61/0.61 
6.40/9.40 
0.38/0.78 
IPCMB 
0.59/0.60 
0.54/0.54 
0.59/0.61 
3.70/6.10 
0.16/0.35 
STMB 
0.60/0.60 
0.56/0.52 
0.62/0.60 
24.00/83.40 
0.13/0.31 
BAMB 
0.60/0.59 
0.61/0.65 
0.63/0.64 
7.20/9.60 
0.27/0.47 
EEMB 
0.60/0.61 
0.59/0.62 
0.62/0.62 
6.60/8.10 
0.17/0.26 
SLL 
0.57 
0.52 
0.57 
6.1 
64.47 
S 2 TMB 
0.58 
0.52 
0.57 
5.2 
61.59 
GSMB 
0.71/0.70 
0.68/0.71 
0.66/0.67 
3.60/3.70 
0.00/0.00 
IAMB 
0.69/0.69 
0.64/0.64 
0.66/0.66 
4.00/4.00 
0.10/0.11 
Inter-IAMB 
0.69/0.69 
0.64/0.64 
0.66/0.66 
4.00/4.00 
0.10/0.11 
Fast-IAMB 
0.70/0.67 
0.66/0.64 
0.70/0.68 
3.00/3.00 
0.05/0.06 
LRH 
0.59/0.61 
0.61/0.58 
0.59/0.66 
3.30/4.00 
0.13/0.30 
FBED 
0.68/0.63 
0.58/0.60 
0.66/0.65 
3.90/4.00 
0.03/0.03 
MMMB 
0.80/0.79 
0.66/0.74 
0.79/0.76 
3.90/6.60 
1.61/2.33 
arcene 
PCMB 
0.61/0.62 
0.60/0.60 
0.61/0.63 
1.70/2.00 
2.88/5.01 
HITON-MB 
0.74/0.70 
0.67/0.69 
0.69/0.73 
3.70/6.90 
1.71/2.48 
Semi-HITON-MB 
0.69/0.71 
0.62/0.62 
0.66/0.73 
3.50/5.80 
1.56/2.20 
MBOR 
0.66/0.71 
0.63/0.73 
0.66/0.71 
3.30/6.80 
0.12/0.59 
IPCMB 
0.61/0.63 
0.61/0.62 
0.60/0.62 
1.50/2.80 
0.57/1.38 
STMB 
0.63/0.61 
0.71/0.71 
0.71/0.67 
56.10/293.10 
0.64/0.87 
BAMB 
0.73/0.70 
0.63/0.65 
0.66/0.70 
3.90/7.30 
0.53/1.28 
EEMB 
0.75/0.72 
0.67/0.66 
0.69/0.72 
3.80/5.90 
0.85/1.13 
SLL 
-
-
-
-
-
S 2 TMB 
0.74 
0.7 
0.73 
6.1 
1648.84 
GSMB 
0.70/0.63 
0.67/0.55 
0.70/0.63 
4.80/4.60 
0.00/0.00 
IAMB 
0.81/0.81 
0.73/0.73 
0.82/0.82 
5.00/5.00 
0.36/0.36 
Inter-IAMB 
0.81/0.81 
0.73/0.73 
0.82/0.82 
5.00/5.00 
0.35/0.35 
Fast-IAMB 
0.73/0.73 
0.72/0.74 
0.76/0.77 
4.00/4.00 
0.12/0.13 
LRH 
0.78/0.75 
0.80/0.77 
0.79/0.77 
4.80/5.00 
0.30/1.02 
FBED 
0.81/0.81 
0.73/0.73 
0.82/0.82 
5.00/5.00 
0.05/0.06 
MMMB 
0.86/0.88 
0.84/0.86 
0.86/0.87 
9.20/19.40 
4.10/7.17 
dexter 
PCMB 
0.81/0.85 
0.71/0.83 
0.81/0.84 
6.60/12.30 
11.74/32.99 
HITON-MB 
0.85/0.87 
0.81/0.86 
0.85/0.86 
9.80/19.50 
4.44/6.99 
Semi-HITON-MB 
0.85/0.87 
0.79/0.85 
0.84/0.86 
8.40/18.80 
3.92/6.87 
MBOR 
0.91/0.90 
0.87/0.89 
0.88/0.89 
21.60/31.00 
4.38/10.83 
IPCMB 
0.82/0.86 
0.71/0.85 
0.82/0.85 
5.90/12.40 
6.19/13.08 
STMB 
0.88/0.90 
0.82/0.75 
0.90/0.90 
54.50/244.50 
3.03/9.61 
BAMB 
0.86/0.89 
0.84/0.88 
0.86/0.88 
9.90/17.90 
2.04/3.01 
EEMB 
0.85/0.87 
0.82/0.87 
0.85/0.86 
9.20/14.20 
3.32/4.45 
SLL 
-
-
-
-
-
S 2 TMB 
-
-
-
-
-
GSMB 
0.93/0.90 
0.92/0.90 
0.93/0.90 
4.30/7.00 
0.05/0.01 
IAMB 
0.93/0.93 
0.93/0.94 
0.93/0.94 
7.00/7.00 
42.48/44.64 
Inter-IAMB 
0.93/0.93 
0.93/0.93 
0.93/0.93 
7.00/7.00 
40.89/41.32 
Fast-IAMB 
0.93/0.93 
0.92/0.90 
0.93/0.92 
6.00/6.00 
12.64/12.89 
LRH 
0.94/0.94 
0.92/0.92 
0.93/0.93 
5.90/6.30 
45.22/303.98 
FBED 
0.93/0.93 
0.93/0.93 
0.93/0.93 
7.00/7.00 
2.72/5.32 
MMMB 
0.93/0.93 
0.92/0.91 
0.93/0.93 
8.60/16.60 
288.00/555.40 
dorothea 
PCMB 
0.45/0.92 
0.45/0.92 
0.45/0.92 
0.60/2.50 
331.04/1259.19 
HITON-MB 
0.93/0.93 
0.91/0.92 
0.93/0.93 
10.20/19.90 
333.89/638.10 
Semi-HITON-MB 
0.94/0.93 
0.92/0.92 
0.93/0.93 
8.90/14.60 
302.03/497.61 
MBOR 
0.93/0.93 
0.92/0.93 
0.93/0.93 
10.50/31.80 
171.26/1870.99 
IPCMB 
0.36/0.83 
0.36/0.82 
0.36/0.83 
0.50/1.40 
75.16/538.33 
STMB 
-/-
-/-
-/-
-/-
-/-
BAMB 
0.93/0.93 
0.90/0.91 
0.93/0.93 
10.50/20.20 
329.52/2941.22 
EEMB 
-/-
-/-
-/-
-/-
-/-
SLL 
-
-
-
-
-
S 2 TMB 
-
-
-
-
-


Table 11 :
11Comparison of MB methods on real-world data sets in prediction accuracy(2)Data 
Algorithm 
NB 
KNN 
SVM 
Compactness 
Time 
GSMB 
0.63/0.58 
0.60/0.55 
0.63/0.57 
3.00/3.00 
0.07/0.07 
IAMB 
0.84/0.84 
0.91/0.91 
0.91/0.91 
4.00/4.00 
5.94/5.86 
Inter-IAMB 
0.84/0.84 
0.91/0.91 
0.91/0.91 
4.00/4.00 
5.82/5.85 
Fast-IAMB 
0.84/0.84 
0.83/0.83 
0.84/0.84 
3.00/3.00 
1.25/1.25 
LRH 
0.86/0.86 
0.90/0.90 
0.91/0.91 
6.00/6.00 
294.35/460.95 
FBED 
0.85/0.84 
0.89/0.91 
0.90/0.91 
4.00/4.00 
3.52/3.69 
MMMB 
0.90/0.89 
0.97/0.96 
0.75/0.75 
255.10/334.40 
332.94/601.17 
gisette 
PCMB 
0.86/0.87 
0.93/0.95 
0.87/0.77 
46.60/113.90 
1335.92/3115.83 
HITON-MB 
0.89/0.88 
0.97/0.97 
0.75/0.75 
361.30/507.50 
496.91/1035.98 
Semi-HITON-MB 
0.90/0.89 
0.97/0.97 
0.75/0.73 
315.80/433.50 
546.27/1117.32 
MBOR 
-/-
-/-
-/-
-/-
-/-
IPCMB 
0.86/0.86 
0.94/0.96 
0.83/0.73 
80.90/192.30 
2904.15/6057.

Table 12 :
12Comparison of the PC methods on real-world data sets in prediction accuracyData 
Algorithm 
NB 
KNN 
SVM 
Compactness 
Time 
PC-simple 
0.60/0.60 
0.53/0.49 
0.59/0.60 
3.60/4.70 
0.03/0.08 
MMPC 
0.58/0.59 
0.52/0.57 
0.60/0.60 
4.70/6.10 
0.03/0.04 
HITON-PC 
0.59/0.59 
0.52/0.54 
0.59/0.60 
4.70/5.90 
0.03/0.05 
madelon 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.59/0.59 
0.51/0.54 
0.59/0.60 
4.60/5.50 
0.03/0.05 
GetPC 
0.56/0.58 
0.50/0.51 
0.56/0.58 
1.50/2.70 
0.15/0.23 
MBtoPC 
0.60/0.59 
0.52/0.52 
0.60/0.60 
3.40/4.50 
0.24/0.43 
SLL-PC 
0.57 
0.52 
0.57 
5.1 
22.94 
S 2 TMB-PC 
0.58 
0.52 
0.57 
5.1 
61.63 
PC-simple 
0.61/0.63 
0.61/0.62 
0.60/0.61 
1.50/3.60 
0.25/0.37 
MMPC 
0.78/0.80 
0.66/0.75 
0.79/0.77 
3.80/5.30 
0.34/0.40 
HITON-PC 
0.74/0.72 
0.67/0.68 
0.69/0.71 
3.70/5.60 
0.34/0.40 
arcene 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.69/0.73 
0.62/0.61 
0.66/0.69 
3.50/4.90 
0.34/0.40 
GetPC 
0.61/0.62 
0.60/0.60 
0.61/0.63 
1.70/2.00 
1.66/2.42 
MBtoPC 
0.66/0.69 
0.68/0.65 
0.71/0.69 
2.70/3.20 
0.12/0.61 
SLL-PC 
-
-
-
-
-
S 2 TMB-PC 
0.74 
0.68 
0.73 
5.8 
1633.66 
PC-simple 
0.82/0.86 
0.71/0.84 
0.82/0.85 
6.00/10.90 
1.01/2.06 
MMPC 
0.86/0.87 
0.81/0.87 
0.86/0.86 
8.20/13.40 
0.49/0.63 
HITON-PC 
0.85/0.86 
0.79/0.87 
0.85/0.86 
9.00/13.40 
0.49/0.61 
dexter 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.85/0.86 
0.78/0.85 
0.85/0.86 
7.80/13.00 
0.49/0.64 
GetPC 
0.81/0.85 
0.72/0.82 
0.81/0.84 
6.20/10.60 
4.16/7.18 
MBtoPC 
0.80/0.79 
0.75/0.75 
0.82/0.81 
5.10/5.50 
4.10/9.95 
SLL-PC 
-
-
-
-
-
S 2 TMB-PC 
-
-
-
-
-
PC-simple 
0.73/0.93 
0.73/0.92 
0.73/0.93 
1.30/2.20 
36.72/249.97 
MMPC 
0.93/0.93 
0.92/0.91 
0.93/0.93 
8.60/15.30 
28.47/46.96 
HITON-PC 
0.93/0.93 
0.91/0.91 
0.93/0.93 
9.90/17.80 
28.09/42.30 
dorothea 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.94/0.94 
0.92/0.92 
0.93/0.93 
8.80/13.90 
28.04/39.01 
GetPC 
0.54/0.92 
0.54/0.92 
0.54/0.92 
0.80/2.20 
266.76/615.19 
MBtoPC 
0.94/0.93 
0.92/0.92 
0.93/0.94 
6.40/7.60 
165.69/1726.01 
SLL-PC 
-
-
-
-
-
S 2 TMB-PC 
-
-
-
-
-
PC-simple 
0.89/0.90 
0.93/0.94 
0.90/0.87 
22.30/39.60 
1154.45/3168.57 
MMPC 
0.91/0.91 
0.96/0.96 
0.84/0.82 
53.70/73.90 
67.47/169.92 
HITON-PC 
0.91/0.91 
0.96/0.97 
0.83/0.80 
48.80/67.90 
121.95/329.02 
gisette 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.91/0.90 
0.96/0.96 
0.84/0.82 
46.50/63.60 
135.25/372.99 
GetPC 
0.87/0.88 
0.89/0.91 
0.90/0.88 
11.50/22.70 
291.91/640.68 
MBtoPC 
-/-
-/-
-/-
-/-
-/-
SLL-PC 
-
-
-
-
-
S 2 TMB-PC 
-
-
-
-
-
PC-simple 
0.88/0.87 
0.86/0.87 
0.89/0.89 
23.30/31.30 
29.92/92.30 
MMPC 
0.87/0.87 
0.87/0.87 
0.89/0.89 
30.00/37.40 
12.56/30.69 
HITON-PC 
0.87/0.87 
0.87/0.88 
0.89/0.89 
28.50/36.00 
22.43/56.45 
bankrupty 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.88/0.87 
0.87/0.87 
0.89/0.89 
27.00/35.00 
26.36/72.68 
GetPC 
0.89/0.88 
0.86/0.87 
0.89/0.89 
15.40/24.30 
56.52/163.50 
MBtoPC 
0.89/0.89 
0.88/0.89 
0.89/0.90 
8.20/9.90 
4.05/5.17 
SLL-PC 
0.89 
0.84 
0.89 
9.3 
2668.09 
S 2 TMB-PC 
0.89 
0.84 
0.89 
8.9 
1984.47 
PC-simple 
0.95/0.95 
0.95/0.95 
0.96/0.96 
3.80/6.70 
0.06/0.14 
MMPC 
0.95/0.95 
0.95/0.95 
0.96/0.96 
5.00/7.90 
0.02/0.06 
HITON-PC 
0.95/0.95 
0.95/0.95 
0.96/0.96 
5.00/8.10 
0.03/0.10 
infant 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.95/0.95 
0.95/0.95 
0.96/0.96 
5.00/7.90 
0.04/0.15 
GetPC 
0.95/0.95 
0.95/0.95 
0.96/0.96 
4.00/6.40 
0.11/0.25 
MBtoPC 
0.95/0.95 
0.95/0.95 
0.96/0.96 
5.00/5.00 
0.14/0.19 
SLL-PC 
0.95 
0.94 
0.95 
5.4 
2653.88 
S 2 TMB-PC 
0.95 
0.94 
0.95 
5.9 
94.8 
PC-simple 
0.90/0.90 
0.92/0.92 
0.93/0.93 
21.10/26.80 
19.17/26.59 
MMPC 
0.91/0.91 
0.92/0.92 
0.93/0.93 
23.30/28.60 
2.06/4.08 
HITON-PC 
0.90/0.91 
0.92/0.92 
0.93/0.93 
23.30/28.10 
5.02/9.97 
spambase 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.91/0.91 
0.92/0.92 
0.93/0.93 
23.20/28.10 
6.18/12.78 
GetPC 
0.90/0.91 
0.92/0.92 
0.93/0.93 
21.90/27.10 
25.86/49.17 
MBtoPC 
0.90/0.90 
0.90/0.91 
0.91/0.91 
9.30/9.70 
0.99/1.02 
SLL-PC 
-
-
-
-
-
S 2 TMB-PC 
-
-
-
-
-


Table 13 :
13Comparison of MB learning methods on class-imbalanced real-world data in AUCData 

Table 14 :
14Comparison of PC learning methods on class-imbalanced real-world data in AUCData 
Algorithm 
NB-AUC 
KNN-AUC 
SVM-AUC 
PC-simple 
0.51/0.71 
0.51/0.65 
0.51/0.72 
MMPC 
0.75/0.73 
0.72/0.72 
0.79/0.76 
HITON-PC 
0.74/0.73 
0.72/0.73 
0.77/0.73 
dorothea 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.78/0.74 
0.75/0.72 
0.79/0.74 
GetPC 
0.33/0.68 
0.33/0.67 
0.33/0.69 
MBtoPC 
0.77/0.78 
0.72/0.73 
0.81/0.82 
SLL-PC 
-
-
-
S 2 TMB-PC 
-
-
-
PC-simple 
0.72/0.74 
0.64/0.67 
0.50/0.51 
MMPC 
0.76/0.77 
0.67/0.67 
0.50/0.51 
HITON-PC 
0.74/0.76 
0.67/0.68 
0.50/0.51 
bankrupty 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.74/0.77 
0.66/0.67 
0.50/0.51 
GetPC 
0.63/0.70 
0.65/0.65 
0.50/0.51 
MBtoPC 
0.54/0.55 
0.67/0.69 
0.50/0.59 
SLL-PC 
0.54 
0.70 
0.50 
S 2 TMB-PC 
0.51 
0.74 
0.50 
PC-simple 
0.73/0.74 
0.61/0.65 
0.69/0.69 
MMPC 
0.73/0.74 
0.66/0.66 
0.69/0.69 
HITON-PC 
0.73/0.74 
0.66/0.66 
0.69/0.68 
infant 
Semi-HITON-PC 
0.73/0.74 
0.66/0.65 
0.69/0.68 
GetPC 
0.73/0.73 
0.62/0.62 
0.69/0.69 
MBtoPC 
0.74/0.74 
0.66/0.66 
0.69/0.69 
SLL-PC 
0.71 
0.50 
0.71 
S 2 TMB-PC 
0.71 
0.50 
0.71 


. http://www.bnlearn.com/ 4. https://github.com/cmu-phil/tetrad 5. https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/pcalg/index.html

Learning Bayesian network classifiers: Searching in a space of partially directed acyclic graphs. Silvia Acid, Javier G Luis M De Campos, Castellano, Machine Learning. 59Silvia Acid, Luis M de Campos, and Javier G Castellano. 2005. Learning Bayesian network classifiers: Searching in a space of partially directed acyclic graphs. Machine Learning 59, 3 (2005), 213-235.

Score-based methods for learning Markov boundaries by searching in constrained spaces. Silvia Acid, Moisés Luis M De Campos, Fernández, Data mining and knowledge discovery. 26Silvia Acid, Luis M de Campos, and Moisés Fernández. 2013. Score-based methods for learn- ing Markov boundaries by searching in constrained spaces. Data mining and knowledge discovery 26, 1 (2013), 174-212.

Categorical data analysis. Alan Agresti, Maria Kateri, SpringerAlan Agresti and Maria Kateri. 2011. Categorical data analysis. Springer.

A new look at the statistical model identification. Hirotugu Akaike, Selected Papers of Hirotugu Akaike. SpringerHirotugu Akaike. 1974. A new look at the statistical model identification. In Selected Papers of Hirotugu Akaike. Springer, 215-222.

Local causal and markov blanket induction for causal discovery and feature selection for classification part I: Algorithms and empirical evaluation. Alexander Constantin F Aliferis, Ioannis Statnikov, Subramani Tsamardinos, Xenofon D Mani, Koutsoukos, Journal of Machine Learning Research. 11Constantin F Aliferis, Alexander Statnikov, Ioannis Tsamardinos, Subramani Mani, and Xenofon D Koutsoukos. 2010a. Local causal and markov blanket induction for causal dis- covery and feature selection for classification part I: Algorithms and empirical evaluation. Journal of Machine Learning Research 11 (2010), 171-234.

Local causal and markov blanket induction for causal discovery and feature selection for classification part ii: Analysis and extensions. Alexander Constantin F Aliferis, Ioannis Statnikov, Subramani Tsamardinos, Xenofon D Mani, Koutsoukos, Journal of Machine Learning Research. 11Constantin F Aliferis, Alexander Statnikov, Ioannis Tsamardinos, Subramani Mani, and Xenofon D Koutsoukos. 2010b. Local causal and markov blanket induction for causal discovery and feature selection for classification part ii: Analysis and extensions. Journal of Machine Learning Research 11, Jan (2010), 235-284.

HITON: a novel Markov Blanket algorithm for optimal variable selection. Ioannis Constantin F Aliferis, Alexander Tsamardinos, Statnikov, AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings. 21Constantin F Aliferis, Ioannis Tsamardinos, and Alexander Statnikov. 2003. HITON: a novel Markov Blanket algorithm for optimal variable selection. In AMIA Annual Sympo- sium Proceedings, Vol. 2003. American Medical Informatics Association, 21.

Beyond prediction: Using big data for policy problems. Susan Athey, Science. 355Susan Athey. 2017. Beyond prediction: Using big data for policy problems. Science 355, 6324 (2017), 483-485.

Learning tractable Bayesian networks in the space of elimination orders. Marco Benjumeda, Concha Bielza, Pedro Larrañaga, Artificial Intelligence. 274Marco Benjumeda, Concha Bielza, and Pedro Larrañaga. 2019. Learning tractable Bayesian networks in the space of elimination orders. Artificial Intelligence 274 (2019), 66-90.

Towards robust and versatile causal discovery for business applications. Giorgos Borboudakis, Ioannis Tsamardinos, Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningACMGiorgos Borboudakis and Ioannis Tsamardinos. 2016. Towards robust and versatile causal discovery for business applications. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD Interna- tional Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, 1435-1444.

Forward-backward selection with early dropping. Giorgos Borboudakis, Ioannis Tsamardinos, The Journal of Machine Learning Research. 20Giorgos Borboudakis and Ioannis Tsamardinos. 2019. Forward-backward selection with early dropping. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 20, 1 (2019), 276-314.

Conditional likelihood maximisation: a unifying framework for information theoretic feature selection. Gavin Brown, Adam Pocock, Ming-Jie Zhao, Mikel Luján, Journal of machine learning research. 13Gavin Brown, Adam Pocock, Ming-Jie Zhao, and Mikel Luján. 2012. Conditional likelihood maximisation: a unifying framework for information theoretic feature selection. Journal of machine learning research 13, Jan (2012), 27-66.

Theory refinement on Bayesian networks. Wray Buntine, Proceedings of the Seventh conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. the Seventh conference on Uncertainty in Artificial IntelligenceMorgan Kaufmann Publishers IncWray Buntine. 1991. Theory refinement on Bayesian networks. In Proceedings of the Seventh conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 52-60.

BASSUM: A Bayesian semi-supervised method for classification feature selection. Ruichu Cai, Zhenjie Zhang, Zhifeng Hao, Pattern Recognition. 44Ruichu Cai, Zhenjie Zhang, and Zhifeng Hao. 2011. BASSUM: A Bayesian semi-supervised method for classification feature selection. Pattern Recognition 44, 4 (2011), 811-820.

Efficient structure learning of Bayesian networks using constraints. Qiang Cassio P De Campos, Ji, Journal of Machine Learning Research. 12Cassio P de Campos and Qiang Ji. 2011. Efficient structure learning of Bayesian networks using constraints. Journal of Machine Learning Research 12, Mar (2011), 663-689.

A scoring function for learning Bayesian networks based on mutual information and conditional independence tests. Luis M De Campos, Journal of Machine Learning Research. 7Luis M de Campos. 2006. A scoring function for learning Bayesian networks based on mutual information and conditional independence tests. Journal of Machine Learning Research 7, Oct (2006), 2149-2187.

Optimal structure identification with greedy search. David Maxwell, Chickering , Journal of machine learning research. 3David Maxwell Chickering. 2002. Optimal structure identification with greedy search. Jour- nal of machine learning research 3, Nov (2002), 507-554.

Large-sample learning of Bayesian networks is NP-hard. David Maxwell Chickering, David Heckerman, Christopher Meek, Journal of Machine Learning Research. 5David Maxwell Chickering, David Heckerman, and Christopher Meek. 2004. Large-sample learning of Bayesian networks is NP-hard. Journal of Machine Learning Research 5, Oct (2004), 1287-1330.

A Bayesian method for the induction of probabilistic networks from data. F Gregory, Edward Cooper, Herskovits, Machine learning. 9Gregory F Cooper and Edward Herskovits. 1992. A Bayesian method for the induction of probabilistic networks from data. Machine learning 9, 4 (1992), 309-347.

A novel scalable and data efficient feature subset selection algorithm. Sergio Rodrigues, De Morais, Alex Aussem, ECML PKDD'08. SpringerSergio Rodrigues De Morais and Alex Aussem. 2008. A novel scalable and data efficient feature subset selection algorithm. In ECML PKDD'08. Springer, 298-312.

Fast Markov blanket discovery algorithm via local learning within single pass. Shunkai Fu, C Michel, Desmarais, Conference of the Canadian Society for Computational Studies of Intelligence. SpringerShunkai Fu and Michel C Desmarais. 2008. Fast Markov blanket discovery algorithm via local learning within single pass. In Conference of the Canadian Society for Computational Studies of Intelligence. Springer, 96-107.

Local-to-global Bayesian network structure learning. Tian Gao, Kshitij Fadnis, Murray Campbell, Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning. the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning70Tian Gao, Kshitij Fadnis, and Murray Campbell. 2017. Local-to-global Bayesian net- work structure learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70. JMLR. org, 1193-1202.

Local causal discovery of direct causes and effects. Tian Gao, Qiang Ji, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Tian Gao and Qiang Ji. 2015. Local causal discovery of direct causes and effects. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2512-2520.

Constrained Local Latent Variable Discovery. Tian Gao, Qiang Ji, IJCAI. Tian Gao and Qiang Ji. 2016. Constrained Local Latent Variable Discovery.. In IJCAI. 1490-1496.

Efficient Markov blanket discovery and its application. Tian Gao, Qiang Ji, IEEE transactions on cybernetics. 47Tian Gao and Qiang Ji. 2017a. Efficient Markov blanket discovery and its application. IEEE transactions on cybernetics 47, 5 (2017), 1169-1179.

Efficient score-based Markov Blanket discovery. Tian Gao, Qiang Ji, International Journal of Approximate Reasoning. 80Tian Gao and Qiang Ji. 2017b. Efficient score-based Markov Blanket discovery. Interna- tional Journal of Approximate Reasoning 80 (2017), 277-293.

Parallel Bayesian network structure learning. Tian Gao, Dennis Wei, International Conference on Machine Learning. Tian Gao and Dennis Wei. 2018. Parallel Bayesian network structure learning. In Interna- tional Conference on Machine Learning. 1671-1680.

Learning identifiable gaussian bayesian networks in polynomial time and sample complexity. Asish Ghoshal, Jean Honorio, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Asish Ghoshal and Jean Honorio. 2017. Learning identifiable gaussian bayesian networks in polynomial time and sample complexity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 6457-6466.

Review of Causal Discovery Methods Based on Graphical Models. Clark Glymour, Kun Zhang, Peter Spirtes, Frontiers in Genetics. 10Clark Glymour, Kun Zhang, and Peter Spirtes. 2019. Review of Causal Discovery Methods Based on Graphical Models. Frontiers in Genetics 10 (2019).

. Ruocheng Guo, Lu Cheng, Jundong Li, Richard Hahn, Huan Liu, A Survey of Learning Causality with Data: Problems and Methods. arXiv: Artificial Intelligence. Ruocheng Guo, Lu Cheng, Jundong Li, P Richard Hahn, and Huan Liu. 2018. A Survey of Learning Causality with Data: Problems and Methods. arXiv: Artificial Intelligence (2018).

Causal feature selection. In Computational methods of feature selection. Isabelle Guyon, Chapman and Hall/CRCConstantin Aliferis, and othersIsabelle Guyon, Constantin Aliferis, and others. 2007. Causal feature selection. In Compu- tational methods of feature selection. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 75-97.

An introduction to variable and feature selection. Isabelle Guyon, Andre Elisseeff, Journal of Machine Learning Research. 3Isabelle Guyon and Andre Elisseeff. 2003. An introduction to variable and feature selection. Journal of Machine Learning Research 3 (2003), 1157-1182.

Learning Bayesian networks: The combination of knowledge and statistical data. David Heckerman, Dan Geiger, David M Chickering, Machine learning. 20David Heckerman, Dan Geiger, and David M Chickering. 1995. Learning Bayesian networks: The combination of knowledge and statistical data. Machine learning 20, 3 (1995), 197- 243.

Prediction and explanation in social systems. Amit Jake M Hofman, Duncan J Sharma, Watts, Science. 355Jake M Hofman, Amit Sharma, and Duncan J Watts. 2017. Prediction and explanation in social systems. Science 355, 6324 (2017), 486-488.

Causal inference using graphical models with the R package pcalg. Markus Kalisch, Martin Mächler, Diego Colombo, H Marloes, Peter Maathuis, Bühlmann, Journal of Statistical Software. 47Markus Kalisch, Martin Mächler, Diego Colombo, Marloes H Maathuis, Peter Bühlmann, and others. 2012. Causal inference using graphical models with the R package pcalg. Journal of Statistical Software 47, 11 (2012), 1-26.

Wrappers for feature subset selection. Ron Kohavi, George H John , Artificial intelligence. 97Ron Kohavi and George H John. 1997. Wrappers for feature subset selection. Artificial intelligence 97, 1-2 (1997), 273-324.

Exact Bayesian structure discovery in Bayesian networks. Mikko Koivisto, Kismat Sood, Journal of Machine Learning Research. 5Mikko Koivisto and Kismat Sood. 2004. Exact Bayesian structure discovery in Bayesian networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research 5, May (2004), 549-573.

Toward optimal feature selection. Daphne Koller, Mehran Sahami, Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning. the Thirteenth International Conference on International Conference on Machine LearningMorgan Kaufmann Publishers IncDaphne Koller and Mehran Sahami. 1996. Toward optimal feature selection. In Proceed- ings of the Thirteenth International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 284-292.

Learning Bayesian belief networks: An approach based on the MDL principle. Wai Lam, Fahiem Bacchus, Computational intelligence. 10Wai Lam and Fahiem Bacchus. 1994. Learning Bayesian belief networks: An approach based on the MDL principle. Computational intelligence 10, 3 (1994), 269-293.

Feature Selection: A Data Perspective. Jundong Li, Kewei Cheng, Suhang Wang, Fred Morstatter, P Robert, Jiliang Trevino, Huan Tang, Liu, Comput. Surveys. 5094Jundong Li, Kewei Cheng, Suhang Wang, Fred Morstatter, Robert P Trevino, Jiliang Tang, and Huan Liu. 2017. Feature Selection: A Data Perspective. Comput. Surveys 50, 6 (2017), 94.

Challenges of Feature Selection for Big Data Analytics. Jundong Li, Huan Liu, IEEE Intelligent Systems. 32Jundong Li and Huan Liu. 2017. Challenges of Feature Selection for Big Data Analytics. IEEE Intelligent Systems 32, 2 (2017), 9-15.

Practical approaches to causal relationship exploration. Jiuyong Li, Lin Liu, Thuc Duy Le, SpringerJiuyong Li, Lin Liu, and Thuc Duy Le. 2015. Practical approaches to causal relationship exploration. Springer.

BAMB: A Balanced Markov Blanket Discovery Approach to Feature Selection. Zhaolong Ling, Kui Yu, Hao Wang, Lin Liu, Wei Ding, Xindong Wu, ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology. in pressZhaolong Ling, Kui Yu, Hao Wang, Lin Liu, Wei Ding, and Xindong Wu. 2019. BAMB: A Balanced Markov Blanket Discovery Approach to Feature Selection. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology,in press (2019).

Swamping and masking in Markov boundary discovery. Xuqing Liu, Xinsheng Liu, Machine Learning. 104Xuqing Liu and Xinsheng Liu. 2016. Swamping and masking in Markov boundary discovery. Machine Learning 104, 1 (2016), 25-54.

Markov blanket and Markov boundary of multiple variables. Qing Xu, Xin-Sheng Liu, Liu, The Journal of Machine Learning Research. 19Xu-Qing Liu and Xin-Sheng Liu. 2018. Markov blanket and Markov boundary of multiple variables. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 19, 1 (2018), 1658-1707.

Domain Adaptation by Using Causal Inference to Predict Invariant Conditional Distributions. Sara Magliacane, Tom Thijs Van Ommen, Stephan Claassen, Philip Bongers, Joris M Versteeg, Mooij, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Sara Magliacane, Thijs van Ommen, Tom Claassen, Stephan Bongers, Philip Versteeg, and Joris M Mooij. 2018. Domain Adaptation by Using Causal Inference to Predict Invariant Conditional Distributions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 10846- 10856.

Toward provably correct feature selection in arbitrary domains. Dimitris Margaritis, Advances in neural information processing systems. Dimitris Margaritis. 2009. Toward provably correct feature selection in arbitrary domains. In Advances in neural information processing systems. 1240-1248.

Bayesian network induction via local neighborhoods. Dimitris Margaritis, Sebastian Thrun, Advances in neural information processing systems. Dimitris Margaritis and Sebastian Thrun. 2000. Bayesian network induction via local neigh- borhoods. In Advances in neural information processing systems. 505-511.

A Bayesian stochastic search method for discovering Markov boundaries. Knowledge-Based Systems. R Andrés, Serafín Masegosa, Moral, 35Andrés R Masegosa and Serafín Moral. 2012. A Bayesian stochastic search method for discovering Markov boundaries. Knowledge-Based Systems 35 (2012), 211-223.

Handbook of biological statistics. H John, Mcdonald, 2Baltimore, MDJohn H McDonald. 2009. Handbook of biological statistics. Vol. 2. sparky house publishing Baltimore, MD.

The bayes net toolbox for matlab. Computing science and statistics. Kevin Murphy, 33Kevin Murphy and others. 2001. The bayes net toolbox for matlab. Computing science and statistics 33, 2 (2001), 1024-1034.

Efficient learning of Bayesian networks with bounded tree-width. Siqi Nie, Qiang Cassio P De Campos, Ji, International Journal of Approximate Reasoning. 80Siqi Nie, Cassio P de Campos, and Qiang Ji. 2017. Efficient learning of Bayesian networks with bounded tree-width. International Journal of Approximate Reasoning 80 (2017), 412-427.

Local structure discovery in bayesian networks. T Niinimki, Pekka Parviainen, Proceedings of UAI'12, Workshop on Causal Structure Learning. UAI'12, Workshop on Causal Structure LearningT Niinimki and Pekka Parviainen. 2012. Local structure discovery in bayesian networks. In Proceedings of UAI'12, Workshop on Causal Structure Learning, 2012. 634-643.

Causality. Judea Pearl, Cambridge university pressJudea Pearl. 2009. Causality. Cambridge university press.

Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of plausible inference. Judea Pearl, Morgan KaufmannJudea Pearl. 2014. Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of plausible inference. Morgan Kaufmann.

Using Markov blankets for causal structure learning. Jean- , Philippe Pellet, André Elisseeff, Journal of Machine Learning Research. 9Jean-Philippe Pellet and André Elisseeff. 2008. Using Markov blankets for causal structure learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research 9, Jul (2008), 1295-1342.

Learning gaussian graphical models of gene networks with false discovery rate control. M Jose, Peña, European conference on evolutionary computation, machine learning and data mining in bioinformatics. SpringerJose M Peña. 2008. Learning gaussian graphical models of gene networks with false discovery rate control. In European conference on evolutionary computation, machine learning and data mining in bioinformatics. Springer, 165-176.

Scalable, efficient and correct learning of Markov boundaries under the faithfulness assumption. Johan Jose M Peña, Jesper Björkegren, Tegnér, European Conference on Symbolic and Quantitative Approaches to Reasoning and Uncertainty. SpringerJose M Peña, Johan Björkegren, and Jesper Tegnér. 2005. Scalable, efficient and correct learning of Markov boundaries under the faithfulness assumption. In European Conference on Symbolic and Quantitative Approaches to Reasoning and Uncertainty. Springer, 136- 147.

Towards scalable and data efficient learning of Markov boundaries. M Jose, Roland Pena, Johan Nilsson, Jesper Björkegren, Tegnér, International Journal of Approximate Reasoning. 45Jose M Pena, Roland Nilsson, Johan Björkegren, and Jesper Tegnér. 2007. Towards scalable and data efficient learning of Markov boundaries. International Journal of Approximate Reasoning 45, 2 (2007), 211-232.

Causal inference by using invariant prediction: identification and confidence intervals. Jonas Peters, Peter Bühlmann, Nicolai Meinshausen, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology). 78Jonas Peters, Peter Bühlmann, and Nicolai Meinshausen. 2016. Causal inference by us- ing invariant prediction: identification and confidence intervals. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 78, 5 (2016), 947-1012.

Informative priors for markov blanket discovery. Adam Pocock, Mikel Luján, Gavin Brown, Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. Adam Pocock, Mikel Luján, and Gavin Brown. 2012. Informative priors for markov blanket discovery. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. 905-913.

Why Should I Trust You?": Explaining the Predictions of Any Classifier. knowledge discovery and data mining. Marco Tulio De Freitas Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, Carlos Guestrin, Marco Tulio De Freitas Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. 2016. "Why Should I Trust You?": Explaining the Predictions of Any Classifier. knowledge discovery and data mining (2016), 1135-1144.

Ancestral graph Markov models. The Annals of Statistics. Thomas Richardson, Peter Spirtes, 30Thomas Richardson, Peter Spirtes, and others. 2002. Ancestral graph Markov models. The Annals of Statistics 30, 4 (2002), 962-1030.

Bayesian Structure Learning by Recursive Bootstrap. Y Raanan, Yaniv Rohekar, Shami Gurwicz, Guy Nisimov, Gal Koren, Novik, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Raanan Y Rohekar, Yaniv Gurwicz, Shami Nisimov, Guy Koren, and Gal Novik. 2018. Bayesian Structure Learning by Recursive Bootstrap. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 10525-10535.

Invariant Models for Causal Transfer Learning. M Rojas-Carulla, B Schölkopf, R Turner, J Peters, Journal of Machine Learning Research. 19M. Rojas-Carulla, B. Schölkopf, R. Turner, and J. Peters. 2018. Invariant Models for Causal Transfer Learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research 19, 36 (2018), 1-34.

A review of feature selection techniques in bioinformatics. Yvan Saeys, Inaki Inza, Pedro Larranaga, Bioinformatics. 23Yvan Saeys, Inaki Inza, and Pedro Larranaga. 2007. A review of feature selection techniques in bioinformatics. Bioinformatics 23, 19 (2007), 2507-2517.

The TETRAD project: Constraint based aids to causal model specification. Richard Scheines, Peter Spirtes, Clark Glymour, Christopher Meek, Thomas Richardson, Multivariate Behavioral Research. 33Richard Scheines, Peter Spirtes, Clark Glymour, Christopher Meek, and Thomas Richard- son. 1998. The TETRAD project: Constraint based aids to causal model specification. Multivariate Behavioral Research 33, 1 (1998), 65-117.

Estimating the dimension of a model. Gideon Schwarz, The annals of statistics. 6Gideon Schwarz and others. 1978. Estimating the dimension of a model. The annals of statistics 6, 2 (1978), 461-464.

Learning Bayesian networks with the bnlearn R package. Marco Scutari, arXiv:0908.3817arXiv preprintMarco Scutari. 2009. Learning Bayesian networks with the bnlearn R package. arXiv preprint arXiv:0908.3817 (2009).

Markov blanket discovery in positiveunlabelled and semi-supervised data. Konstantinos Sechidis, Gavin Brown, Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases. SpringerKonstantinos Sechidis and Gavin Brown. 2015. Markov blanket discovery in positive- unlabelled and semi-supervised data. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases. Springer, 351-366.

Simple strategies for semi-supervised feature selection. Konstantinos Sechidis, Gavin Brown, Machine Learning. 107Konstantinos Sechidis and Gavin Brown. 2018. Simple strategies for semi-supervised feature selection. Machine Learning 107, 2 (2018), 357-395.

The hidden life of latent variables: Bayesian learning with mixed graph models. Ricardo Silva, Zoubin Ghahramani, Journal of Machine Learning Research. 10Ricardo Silva and Zoubin Ghahramani. 2009. The hidden life of latent variables: Bayesian learning with mixed graph models. Journal of Machine Learning Research 10, Jun (2009), 1187-1238.

Causation, prediction, and search. Peter Spirtes, N Clark, Richard Glymour, David Scheines, Christopher Heckerman, Gregory Meek, Thomas Cooper, Richardson, MIT pressPeter Spirtes, Clark N Glymour, Richard Scheines, David Heckerman, Christopher Meek, Gregory Cooper, and Thomas Richardson. 2000. Causation, prediction, and search. MIT press.

Algorithms for discovery of multiple Markov boundaries. Alexander Statnikov, Jan Nikita I Lytkin, Constantin F Lemeire, Aliferis, Journal of Machine Learning Research. 14Alexander Statnikov, Nikita I Lytkin, Jan Lemeire, and Constantin F Aliferis. 2013. Al- gorithms for discovery of multiple Markov boundaries. Journal of Machine Learning Research 14, Feb (2013), 499-566.

Ultra-scalable and efficient methods for hybrid observational and experimental local causal pathway discovery. Alexander Statnikov, Sisi Ma, Mikael Henaff, Nikita Lytkin, Efstratios Efstathiadis, Constantin F Eric R Peskin, Aliferis, The Journal of Machine Learning Research. 16Alexander Statnikov, Sisi Ma, Mikael Henaff, Nikita Lytkin, Efstratios Efstathiadis, Eric R Peskin, and Constantin F Aliferis. 2015. Ultra-scalable and efficient methods for hybrid observational and experimental local causal pathway discovery. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 16, 1 (2015), 3219-3267.

Causal explorer: A matlab library of algorithms for causal discovery and variable selection for classification. Alexander Statnikov, Ioannis Tsamardinos, Laura E Brown, Constantin F Aliferis, Challenges in machine learning. 2Alexander Statnikov, Ioannis Tsamardinos, Laura E Brown, and Constantin F Aliferis. 2010. Causal explorer: A matlab library of algorithms for causal discovery and variable selection for classification. Challenges in machine learning 2 (2010), 267-278.

Towards Principled Feature Selection: Relevancy, Filters and Wrappers. Ioannis Tsamardinos, Constantin Aliferis, Proceedings of the Ninth International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. the Ninth International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and StatisticsCiteseerIoannis Tsamardinos and Constantin Aliferis. 2003. Towards Principled Feature Selection: Relevancy, Filters and Wrappers. In in Proceedings of the Ninth International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. Citeseer.

Time and sample efficient discovery of Markov blankets and direct causal relations. Ioannis Tsamardinos, Alexander Constantin F Aliferis, Statnikov, Proceedings of the ninth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. the ninth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data miningACMIoannis Tsamardinos, Constantin F Aliferis, and Alexander Statnikov. 2003a. Time and sample efficient discovery of Markov blankets and direct causal relations. In Proceedings of the ninth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 673-678.

Algorithms for Large Scale Markov Blanket Discovery. Ioannis Tsamardinos, F Constantin, Alexander R Aliferis, Er Statnikov, Statnikov, FLAIRS conference. 2Ioannis Tsamardinos, Constantin F Aliferis, Alexander R Statnikov, and Er Statnikov. 2003b. Algorithms for Large Scale Markov Blanket Discovery.. In FLAIRS conference, Vol. 2. 376-380.

A greedy feature selection algorithm for Big Data of high dimensionality. Ioannis Tsamardinos, Giorgos Borboudakis, Pavlos Katsogridakis, Machine learning. 108Polyvios Pratikakis, and Vassilis ChristophidesIoannis Tsamardinos, Giorgos Borboudakis, Pavlos Katsogridakis, Polyvios Pratikakis, and Vassilis Christophides. 2019. A greedy feature selection algorithm for Big Data of high dimensionality. Machine learning 108, 2 (2019), 149-202.

The max-min hillclimbing Bayesian network structure learning algorithm. Ioannis Tsamardinos, Laura E Brown, Constantin F Aliferis, Machine learning. 651Ioannis Tsamardinos, Laura E Brown, and Constantin F Aliferis. 2006. The max-min hill- climbing Bayesian network structure learning algorithm. Machine learning 65, 1 (2006), 31-78.

Discovering and orienting the edges connected to a target variable in a DAG via a sequential local learning approach. Changzhang Wang, You Zhou, Qiang Zhao, Zhi Geng, Computational Statistics & Data Analysis. 77Changzhang Wang, You Zhou, Qiang Zhao, and Zhi Geng. 2014. Discovering and orienting the edges connected to a target variable in a DAG via a sequential local learning approach. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis 77 (2014), 252-266.

Evolutionary study of web spam: Webb Spam Corpus 2011 versus Webb Spam Corpus. De Wang, Danesh Irani, Calton Pu, De Wang, Danesh Irani, and Calton Pu. 2012. Evolutionary study of web spam: Webb Spam Corpus 2011 versus Webb Spam Corpus 2006. (2012), 40-49.

Towards efficient and effective discovery of Markov blankets for feature selection. Hao Wang, Zhaolong Ling, Kui Yu, Xindong Wu, Information Science. 509Hao Wang, Zhaolong Ling, Kui Yu, and Xindong Wu. 2020. Towards efficient and effective discovery of Markov blankets for feature selection. Information Science 509 (2020), 227- 242.

Accurate Markov Boundary Discovery for Causal Feature Selection. Xingyu Wu, Bingbing Jiang, Kui Yu, Chunyan Miao, Huanhuan Chen, IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics. in press. in pressXingyu Wu, Bingbing Jiang, Kui Yu, Chunyan Miao, and Huanhuan Chen. in press, 2019. Accurate Markov Boundary Discovery for Causal Feature Selection. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics (in press, 2019).

Online Feature Selection with Streaming Features. Xindong Wu, Kui Yu, Wei Ding, Hao Wang, Xingquan Zhu, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. 35Xindong Wu, Kui Yu, Wei Ding, Hao Wang, and Xingquan Zhu. 2013. Online Feature Selection with Streaming Features. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 35, 5 (2013), 1178-1192.

Speculative Markov blanket discovery for optimal feature selection. Sandeep Yaramakala, Dimitris Margaritis, Fifth IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM'05). IEEE4Sandeep Yaramakala and Dimitris Margaritis. 2005. Speculative Markov blanket discovery for optimal feature selection. In Fifth IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM'05). IEEE, 4-pp.

Bayesian network structure learning by recursive autonomy identification. Raanan Yehezkel, Boaz Lerner, Journal of Machine Learning Research. 10Raanan Yehezkel and Boaz Lerner. 2009. Bayesian network structure learning by recursive autonomy identification. Journal of Machine Learning Research 10, Jul (2009), 1527- 1570.

Partial orientation and local structural learning of causal networks for prediction. Jianxin Yin, You Zhou, Changzhang Wang, Causation and Prediction Challenge. Ping He, Cheng Zheng, and Zhi GengJianxin Yin, You Zhou, Changzhang Wang, Ping He, Cheng Zheng, and Zhi Geng. 2008. Partial orientation and local structural learning of causal networks for prediction. In Causation and Prediction Challenge. 93-105.

Kui Yu, Lin Liu, Jiuyong Li, arXiv:1801.08295Discovering Markov Blanket from Multiple interventional Datasets. arXiv preprintKui Yu, Lin Liu, and Jiuyong Li. 2018a. Discovering Markov Blanket from Multiple inter- ventional Datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.08295 (2018).

A Unified View of Causal and Non-causal Feature Selection. Kui Yu, Lin Liu, Jiuyong Li, arXiv:1802.05844arXiv preprintKui Yu, Lin Liu, and Jiuyong Li. 2018b. A Unified View of Causal and Non-causal Feature Selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05844 (2018).

Mining Markov Blankets Without Causal Sufficiency. Kui Yu, Lin Liu, Jiuyong Li, Huanhuan Chen, IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems. 99Kui Yu, Lin Liu, Jiuyong Li, and Huanhuan Chen. 2018c. Mining Markov Blankets Without Causal Sufficiency. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems 99 (2018), 1-15.

Multi-Source Causal Feature Selection. Kui Yu, Lin Liu, Jiuyong Li, Wei Ding, Thuc Le, 10.1109/TPAMI.2019.2908373IEEE transactions. Kui Yu, Lin Liu, Jiuyong Li, Wei Ding, and Thuc Le. 2019. Multi-Source Causal Fea- ture Selection. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2019.2908373 (2019).

Markov blanket feature selection using representative sets. Kui Yu, Xindong Wu, Wei Ding, Yang Mu, Hao Wang, IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems. 28Kui Yu, Xindong Wu, Wei Ding, Yang Mu, and Hao Wang. 2017. Markov blanket feature selection using representative sets. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems 28, 11 (2017), 2775-2788.

Scalable and Accurate Online Feature Selection for Big Data. Kui Yu, Xindong Wu, Wei Ding, Jian Pei, ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery From Data. 1116Kui Yu, Xindong Wu, Wei Ding, and Jian Pei. 2016. Scalable and Accurate Online Feature Selection for Big Data. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery From Data 11, 2 (2016), 16.

The Emerging Big Dimensionality. Yiteng Zhai, Yewsoon Ong, Ivor W Tsang, IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine. 9Yiteng Zhai, Yewsoon Ong, and Ivor W Tsang. 2014. The Emerging Big Dimensionality. IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine 9, 3 (2014), 14-26.

Multi-source domain adaptation: A causal view. Kun Zhang, Mingming Gong, Bernhard Schölkopf, Twenty-ninth AAAI conference on artificial intelligence. Kun Zhang, Mingming Gong, and Bernhard Schölkopf. 2015. Multi-source domain adapta- tion: A causal view. In Twenty-ninth AAAI conference on artificial intelligence.

Kernelbased conditional independence test and application in causal discovery. Kun Zhang, Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, Bernhard Schölkopf, arXiv:1202.3775arXiv preprintKun Zhang, Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. 2012. Kernel- based conditional independence test and application in causal discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:1202.3775 (2012).

Learning causality and causality-related learning: some recent progress. Kun Zhang, Bernhard Schölkopf, Peter Spirtes, Clark Glymour, National science review. 5Kun Zhang, Bernhard Schölkopf, Peter Spirtes, and Clark Glymour. 2017. Learning causal- ity and causality-related learning: some recent progress. National science review 5, 1 (2017), 26-29.

Streamwise feature selection. Jing Zhou, P Dean, Foster, A Robert, Lyle H Stine, Ungar, Journal of Machine Learning Research. 7Jing Zhou, Dean P Foster, Robert A Stine, and Lyle H Ungar. 2006. Streamwise feature selection. Journal of Machine Learning Research 7, Sep (2006), 1861-1885.