New approach for the incoherent and coherent combination of pulsed lasers


Hocine Djellout hocine.djellout@ummto.dz 
Laboratoire LPCQ
UMMTO
15000Tizi-Ouzou

New approach for the incoherent and coherent combination of pulsed lasers
195347455A717C62116714CF427A1B36incoherent combinationcoherent combinationhigh power laserUltrafast optics
This work focuses on the incoherent and coherent combination of pulsed laser beams, building on previous research [1] that addressed the combination of continuous-wave laser beams.For the pulsed combination, we have focused on the temporal evolution of the combined intensity at the image plane.Simulation results show that at the pulse peak, the combined intensity profile is the same, whether in continuous-wave or pulsed mode, for both coherent and incoherent combinations.However, we observe spatial thinning of the combined beams in the case of incoherent pulsed combination when the pulse widths are less than 100 fs.At the front of the pulse, we observe lateral lobes near the focal point, which disappear as we approach the peak of the pulse.Similar to the continuous-wave laser beam combination, our simulations show that in both coherent and incoherent pulsed combinations, the filling factor has no impact on the formation of secondary lobes or on the proportion of energy in the central lobe.Furthermore, with the new configuration, we are no longer constrained by paraxial optics, as the number of lasers that can be combined is arbitrary, and their positions can be chosen freely in space.

Incoherent combination:

The configuration used for the combination of spatially and temporally Gaussian laser beams is the same as that of the previous work [1], and it is shown in Figure 1.The beams to be combined are positioned in the source plane with a minimum waist  0 , and the axis of each beam is directed toward the focal point located at the image plane.

Each beam, whose center is located at the source plane at coordinates (  ,   ), is focused with a lens of focal length   in order to optimize the combination.However, since the lasers to be combined are pulsed with FWHM on the order of a few femtoseconds, it is crucial to use off-axis parabolic mirrors to focus the beams and thus avoid dispersion issues.


Fig 1 : New configuration for incoherent and coherent combination of laser beams

At every point in space, the amplitude of the electric field of a CW Gaussian laser beam is always constant.The same will hold true for the combination of several beams, as the resulting electric field at that point will be the sum of the fields of all beams.However, in the case of a pulsed laser, the amplitude of the electric field at a point in space depends on time.Therefore, for the incoherent combination of pulsed lasers, not only must all beams be directed with high precision toward the focal point, as is done in CW combination, but also the peak intensity of the pulses must reach the focal point simultaneously.To achieve this, it is necessary to use optical path difference controllers in the experimental setup for effective combination, and in the case of coherent combination, a phaselocking system [13] is also required to lock the phase of all laser beams at the focal point.

In this study, we chose a Gaussian temporal shape for the laser pulse, the corresponding temporal electric field is described by equation (1).
𝐸(𝑡) ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ = 𝐸 0 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ 𝑒𝑥𝑝 ( −𝑡 2 2𝜏 2 ) exp (𝑖 𝜔 0 𝑡) (1)
The intensity envelope associated with this field is given by the following expression:


Focusing lenses 𝒇 𝒊𝒋


Focusing Point


Gaussian beam of w0

 


Image Plane

Source Plane
𝒛 𝒚 𝒙 𝑿 𝒀 𝐼(𝑡) = 𝐼 0 𝑒𝑥𝑝 ( −𝑡 2 𝜏 2 ) (2)
 0 is the carrier frequency, and the FWHM of the pulse is given by ∆ = 2  √2.is the radius of the focused beam with a focal length   =   at the distance   + Δ  .

In the case of incoherent combination in pulsed mode, the intensity at a given point in the image plane depends on time.However, for optimal combination efficiency, the peak of each laser pulse (i,j) from the source plane must reach the focal point, which is the origin of the image plane, simultaneously.For any other point (, ) in the image plane, however, the pulse peak will not reach it at the same time as the focal point due to the inclination angle   of the laser (i,j) and the spatial extension of the Gaussian beam, as illustrated in Figure 2. Indeed, the pulse peak will reach the point (, ) either earlier or later by a time offset given by: ∆  = Δ 


𝐶

Where  is the speed of light in a vacuum, and Δ  is the optical path difference for the laser (i,j) relative to the focal point.

To obtain a pulsed intensity, the continuous intensity  , (, ) should be multiplied by the Gaussian temporal envelope defined by equation ( 2), taking into account the delay or advance ∆  for a point (, ) in the image plane.To perform this multiplication, we assume that there is no spatiotemporal coupling [14] for the pulses at the focal plane, so that the spatial and temporal components of the electric field are separable.

Considering a Gaussian pulse shape as shown in Figure 3, let  be the moment when the focal point has an intensity ().Since a point (, ) in the image plane has a time advance of ∆  = Δ   (see Figure 2), its intensity will be equal to ( + ∆  ).Conversely, the symmetric point will have an intensity of ( − ∆  ).Therefore, the intensity as a function of time for laser (i,j) in the image plane will be equal to:
𝐼 𝑖,𝑗 (𝜌, 𝜃, ℎ 0 , 𝑡) = 𝐼 0 𝑒𝑥𝑝 ( −(𝑡+ Δ𝑧 𝑖𝑗 𝐶 ) 2 𝜏 2 ) 𝑤 0 2 𝑤 2 (𝑧 𝑖𝑗 +Δ𝑧 𝑖𝑗 ) 𝑒𝑥𝑝 [−2 𝜌 2 (1−𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 (𝜃−𝜑 𝑖𝑗 +𝜋) 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 (𝛼 𝑖𝑗 )) 𝑤 2 (𝑧 𝑖𝑗 +Δ𝑧 𝑖𝑗 ) ](4)
The total time-dependent intensity of the incoherent combination of all laser beams in the image plane will then be equal to:   4-e), we observe a Gaussian-shaped intensity profile with a waist of 18.9 µ and a peak intensity of 1.8×10 7  0 .Indeed, these observations can be explained by the fact that, at the front of the pulse, the intensity arriving at the periphery of the focal point is greater than that arriving at the focal point itself (as shown in Figure 3), since the beams are tilted.In contrast, at the peak of the pulse, it is the maximum intensity that reaches the focal point, while the periphery of the focal point receives a lower intensity.Figure 5a corresponds to ∆ = ∞ (continuous wave mode), while Figure 5b shows results for ∆ = 150 .We observe that both figures are identical, displaying a Gaussian shape with a waist of 26 µ and an on-axis intensity of 1.8 × 10⁷ ₀.However, in Figures 5c and 5d, a narrowing of the spatial profile is observed, with waists of 14.5 µ for ∆ = 5  and 5.1 µ for ∆ = 1 , respectively.These profiles have a spatial shape resembling a
𝐼 𝑇 (𝜌, 𝜃, ℎ 0 , 𝑡) = ∑ 𝐼 𝑖,𝑗 (𝜌, 𝜃, ℎ 0 , 𝑡) 𝑖,𝑗(5)
Lorentzian, with a square-like base at the bottom of the combined intensity profile.Nonetheless, the on-axis intensity remains the same for all FWHM pulse widths ∆T, maintaining a value of 1.8 × 10⁷ ₀.This is explained by the fact that at  = 0 , the peak of all laser pulses arrives at the focal point simultaneously, so the combined on-axis intensity equals the sum of the maximum intensities of the pulses.However, for a point located at the periphery of the focal point, the intensity received at  = 0  is not the maximum pulse intensity but a lower value that depends on the position of this point in the image plane.This is related to the spatial extent of the focused For FWHM pulse widths greater than ∆ = 100 , the intensity at this point will be practically the same as in the continuous case.In contrast, for FWHM pulse widths less than ∆ = 100 , the intensity at the point will be lower than in the continuous case.The minimum combined waist is obtained for FWHM pulse widths of ∆ = 1 , with a value of 5.1 µ.It is possible to further decrease the combined waist by reducing ∆T, but it cannot go beyond the diffraction limit, as for ∆ below a femtosecond, the carrier wavelength will differ, becoming shorter.


Coherent Combination:

In the case of incoherent combination, the peaks of the laser pulses must reach the focal point simultaneously.

However, for coherent combination, all laser beams must also be in phase at the focal point; this requires phase locking at the focal point.The electric field of the coherent combination in continuous mode at the focal plane is given by the following equation [1]:
𝐸 𝑇 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ (𝜌, 𝜃, ℎ 0 ) = ∑ √𝐼 0 ( ℎ 0 √𝑥 𝑖 2 +ℎ 0 2 𝑖 + 𝑥 𝑖 √𝑥 𝑖 2 +ℎ 0 2 𝑒 𝑧 ⃗⃗⃗ ) 𝑤 0 𝑤(𝑧 𝑖𝑗 +Δ𝑧 𝑖𝑗 ) 𝑒𝑥𝑝 [− 𝑟 𝑖𝑗 2 𝑤 2 (𝑧 𝑖𝑗 +Δ𝑧 𝑖𝑗 )
]  (2  cos( −   + )
sin(𝜙 𝑖𝑗 ) 𝜆 ) 𝑖,𝑗(6)
The exponential term (2  cos( −   + ) sin(  )


𝜆

) represents the phase shift of the field from laser (, ) at a point in the image plane (, ) relative to the focal point.This phase shift depends on the wavelength, and unlike in the monochromatic case, a femtosecond laser pulse consists of a broad spectrum.Therefore, a rigorous calculation of coherent pulsed combination must account for the interference of all spectral components of the pulses.

At the focal point, all spectral components of all lasers (, ) are in phase.However, as we move away from the focal point, they no longer remain in phase due to their different wavelengths.Consequently, a partially coherent


𝒃) ∆𝑻 = 𝟏𝟓𝟎 𝒇𝒔 𝒂) ∆𝑻 = ∞ 𝒄) ∆𝑻 = 𝟓 𝒇𝒔 𝒅) ∆𝑻 = 𝟏 𝒇𝒔

superposition of the focal spots for all spectral components of the pulses is expected.However, since / ≈ 0.12 for a 10  Gaussian pulse (Fourier-limited) with an 800 nm carrier, and this ratio is even lower for longer pulses, and given that a large portion of the pulse energy falls within the spectral bandwidth , the slowly varying envelope approximation, where the phase term of the pulse is represented only by the carrier wavelength, may serve as a reasonable first approximation for studying the coherent combination of pulsed lasers.

Similar to incoherent pulsed combination, one must also consider the delay or advance ∆  for a point (, ) in the image plane.Thus, the electric field of the coherent combination in pulsed mode at the focal plane can be expressed as:
𝐸 𝑇 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ (𝜌,
The total intensity in the image plane is then given by:
𝐼 𝑇 (𝜌, 𝜃, ℎ 0 , 𝑡) = |𝐸 𝑇 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ 𝐸 𝑇 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ * | (8)
We chose to combine around a hundred lasers because it has been reported in the literature that several research teams have coherently combined multiple tens of lasers in a "tiled aperture" configuration, both in continuous mode [15-17] and pulsed mode [18].Figure 7 shows the temporal evolution of the combined intensity of 121 coherent laser beams with Gaussian spatial and temporal profiles.Similar to incoherent combination, we observe side peaks near the focal point, as shown in Figures 7a, 7b, and 7c.However, unlike incoherent combination, there are more peaks due to interference between the different beams.

At  =  (Figure 7d), we observe five high-intensity peaks: four side peaks and one central peak, followed by several low-intensity lobes aligned along the x and y axes.This pattern resembles the Fourier transform of a square, as the lasers in the source plane are arranged in a square formation.The central peak has an intensity of 1.347 × 10 8 ₀.and a waist of approximately 1.35 µ.At  = 0 , at the peak of the pulse (Figure 7e), there is a central Gaussian-shaped peak with an intensity of 2.154 × 10 9 ₀ and a waist of around 1.35 µ, along with secondary lobes along the x and y axes, also representing the Fourier transform of a square.

Unlike incoherent combination, where we observe a spatial narrowing of the combined intensity for pulses shorter than 100 , in the case of coherent combination, we observe almost no difference in the spatial profile of the combined intensity, whether in continuous mode ( = ∞) or pulsed mode for full widths at half maximum greater than  = 3  (see Figure 8).However, for  < 3 , we observe a slight narrowing, even for a lower numerical aperture and therefore a larger focal spot.Simulations show that the focal spot is no longer a Fourier transform of a square, and we observe a slight narrowing of the central lobe, where the full width at half maximum of the central lobe decreases from 1.7 µ for a 10  pulse to 1.5 µ for a 1  pulse.This result does not allow us to claim that we can go beyond the diffraction limit, as the slowly varying envelope approximation is already at its limits for  = 10 .For sub-femtosecond pulses, the carrier wavelength falls within the UV range, Thus, a more rigorous study that takes into account the interference of all spectral components of all pulses would be interesting to see if it is possible to go beyond the diffraction limit, which is, in essence, an uncertainty principle [1].


Effect of the filling factor on the spatial profile of the combined intensity:

The literature reports that optimizing the filling factor (minimum spatial gap between beams at the source plane) can optimize the spatial profile of the combined intensity and the proportion of energy contained in the central lobe in the far field [13,[19][20].In this work, we demonstrate that, with the new configuration, the filling factor has no effect on either the spatial profile of the combined intensity or the proportion of energy carried by the central lobe, whether in coherent or incoherent combination, in continuous or pulsed mode.

For this, in our simulations, we varied the distance between the centers of adjacent beams at the source plane from 0.04  to 0.07  to observe the effect of reducing the filling factor.As shown in Figure 9, obtained with 121 pulsed lasers with a FWHM of 20 , We observe that there is no difference in the spatial profile of the incoherent combination in the pulsed mode for an adjacent beam spacing of 0.04 m (Figure 9-b) and 0.07 m (Figure 9-a).The spatial profile remains Gaussian, but we note a slight difference in intensity and waist radius: 1.809 × 10⁷ ₀ and 22.5 µ for a 0.04 m laser distance, and 1.705 × 10⁷ ₀ and 20.5 µ for a 0.07  distance.This is because the waist of the focused lasers at the image plane varies negligibly between the two configurations (0.04  and 0.07 ).

We observe the same for the coherent combination in pulsed mode, as shown in Figure 9-c (0.07 ) and Figure 9-d (0.04 ), where there is always a central Gaussian-shaped peak with secondary lobes along the x and y axes, which is the Fourier transform of a square.However, we observe a reduction in waist from 1.35 µ for a 0.04  distance between lasers to 0.8 µ for a 0.07  distance.This is because increasing the distance between lasers at the source plane increases the system's numerical aperture, resulting in a reduction in focal spot size.We observe the same effect for the continuous mode combination.

Thus, we understand that with this new configuration, the filling factor has no effect on either the spatial shape of the combined intensity or the energy proportion carried by the central lobe.Furthermore, this new configuration is equivalent to a lens of any size, and we are no longer limited by paraxial optics, as all that matters is


Conclusion

In this work, we extended the study of coherent and incoherent combination from continuous to pulsed mode, allowing us to determine the temporal evolution of the combined intensity at the image plane.At the peak of the pulse, we observed that the spatial profile of the combined intensity is the same as in the continuous mode.

However, we noted a narrowing of the central lobe in the case of incoherent combination for pulses shorter than 100 .We also showed that the fill factor has no influence on either the shape or the energy of the central lobe of the combined intensity.We believe that optimizing this new configuration will enable record-breaking intensities if a large number of high power laser beams can be phase-locked at the focal point.

Fig 2 : 2 𝜌 2 ( 1 −] ( 3 )
22213
Fig 2: determination of   , and   at the image plane  =  


Fig 3 :
3
Fig 3: Advance or delay of ∆  for a point in the image plane for a Gaussian pulse.


Figure 4
4
Figure 4 shows the temporal evolution of the combined intensity of 121 incoherent laser beams with Gaussian spatial and temporal profiles, arranged in a square configuration at the source plane.Each laser has a minimum waist of  0 = 0.01 , a full width at half maximum of  = 10 , and a central wavelength of  = 0.8 .All lasers are oriented and focused at the focal point, which is the origin of the image plane located at a distance ℎ 0 = 1 . Figure 4-a shows the combined intensity at the image plane for  = 5 = 50  (at the front of the pulse), where we observe four lateral peaks with an intensity of 145.4  0 , located 50.34 µ from the focal point.For  = 3 = 30  (see Figure 4-b), the peak intensity increases to 3.297×10 4  0 , and the distance from the peaks to the focal point decreases to 32.24 µ.At  = 2 = 20  and  =  = 10  (see Figures 4-c and 4-d), we observe a ring-shaped intensity distribution, with maximum intensities of 3×10 5  0 for Figure 4-c and 2.75×10 6  0 for Figure 4-d.The distances to the focal point are 22.25 µ and 12.8 µ, respectively.At the peak of the pulse  = 0  (Figure4-e), we observe a Gaussian-shaped intensity profile with a waist of 18.9 µ and a peak


Fig. 4 :
4
Fig. 4: Temporal evolution of the incoherent combination of 121 Gaussian lasers with a full-width at halfmaximum of 10 fs, focused at 1 m.




Gaussian beam in the focal plane and to the delay or advance of ∆  = Δ   =  cos(−  +) cos(  )  as previously explained.Given that the waist of a focused laser beam at the focal plane is approximately 26 µ, this point will have a maximum delay or advance of ∆  = (26 × 10⁻⁶ )/(3 × 10⁸ /) = 86.6 .For example, a point located 3 µ from the focal point would have a delay or advance of ∆  = 10 .The further the point is from the focal point, the greater the delay or advance, resulting in a lower intensity compared to the continuous wave case, which explains the narrowing of the spatial profile of the combined intensity, as shown in Figure 6.


Fig 6 :Fig 5 :
65
Fig 6: Waist of the combined intensity in the focal plane as a function of the FWHM ∆T, of the laser pulses.


Fig 7 :Fig 8 :
78
Fig 7: Temporal evolution of the coherent combination of 121 Gaussian lasers with a FWHM of 10 fs, focused at 1 m.




) ∆ = ∞ ) ∆ =   synchronizing, phasing, and directing all beams to the focal point.Even the spatial positioning of the beams is irrelevant, as per the equation   ≥ /2 derived previously [1], meaning the critical factor is the configuration's numerical aperture () relative to the focal point.


Fig. 9 :
9
Fig. 9: Effect of the fill factor (distance between two adjacent lasers at the source plane) on the spatial profile of the combined intensity in pulsed mode for the incoherent case (a and b) and the coherent case (c and d).


Figure 10 shows
10
Figure10shows the result of this coherent combination in pulsed mode.The spatial profile of the combined intensity displays a central lobe with a Gaussian shape and weaker side lobes aligned along the x-and y-axes.The waist of the central lobe is 0.37 µ, and the on-axis intensity at the focal point is 1.431 × 10 12  0 , corresponding to an on-axis intensity of approximately 0.65×10 24 W/cm 2 .This is an intensity beyond the capabilities of current ultra-intense lasers.Moreover, the simulated configuration is not yet optimized, so we believe that with this new


Fig. 10 :
10
Fig. 10: Coherent pulsed combination of 121 lasers of 40 TW.


New approach for the incoherent and coherent combination of Gaussian laser beams and observation of the spatial thinning of the combined beams by modes phase locking. -Hocine, Djellout, Djillali, Djellout, arXiv:2406.1794426 Apr 2024physics.optics

Femtosecond Laser Refractive Corneal Surgery. -T Juhasz, IEEE Journal of Special Topics in Quantum Electronics. 59021999

Attosecond science. -P B Corkum, F Krausz, Nature Physics. 33812007

GeV electron beams from a centimetre-scale accelerator. - W P Leemans, nature physics. 22006

Ultra-short pulse laser acceleration of protons to 80MeVfrom cryogenic hydrogen jets tailored to near-critical density. Rehwald -Martin, 14:4009 2Nature Communications |. 2023

Brilliant femtosecond-laser-driven hard X-ray flashes from carbon nanotube plasma. -Y Shou, Nat. Photonics. 172023

optical guiding in meter-scale plasma waveguides. -B Miao, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125August 2020

Compression of amplified chirped optical pulses. -D Strickland, G A Mourou, Opt. Commun. 561985

Realization of laser intensity over 10 23 W∕cm2. -J W Yoon, Optica. 82021

10 PW peak power femtosecond laser pulses at ELI-NP. -C Radier, High Power Laser Sci. Eng. 10e212022

Suppression of parasitic lasing in large-aperture Ti:sapphire laser amplifiers. -F G Patterson, J Bonlie, D Price, B White, Opt. Lett. 241999

Coherently tiled Ti:sapphire laser amplification: a way to break the 10 petawatt limit on current ultraintense lasers. -Yanqi , 10.1117/1.APN.2.6.066009Advanced Photonics Nexus. 2666009December2023

Ultimate High-Power Scaling: Coherent Beam Combining of Fiber Lasers. Fathi -Hossein, 2021, 8, 566Photonics

Spatio-temporal characterization of ultrashort laser beams: a tutorial. W Spencer, Jolly, J. Opt. 221035012020

Coherent beam combining of large number of PM fibres in 2-D fibre array. C X -Yu, Kansky, Electron. Lett. 10242006

Efficient phase-locking of 37 fiber amplifiers by phase-intensity mapping in an optimization loop. D Kabeya, Opt. Express. 25138162017

First experimental demonstration of coherent beam combining of more than 100 beams. H Chang, Photonics Res. 2020, 8, 1943

Coherent beam combining of 61 femtosecond fiber amplifiers. I Fsaifes, Opt. Express. 282020. 20152

Realisation of large energy proportion in the central lobe by coherent beam combination based on conformal projection system. D -Zhi, Sci Rep. 721992017

Power-in-bucket enhancement in tiled-aperture coherent beam combining through inducing spatial chirp. -Wenhai Liang, Phys. Rev. Applied. 22240187 August 2024

Four-beam tiled-aperture coherent beam combining of high-power femtosecond laser with two compressors. -Chun Peng, IEEE PHOTONICS JOURNAL. 141FEBRUARY 2022