Modeling and Performance Studies of Data Communication Networks using Dynamic Complex Networks
17 Jan 2017

Suchi Kumari 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
National Institute of Technology
DelhiIndia

Anurag Singh 
National Institute of Technology
DelhiIndia

Modeling and Performance Studies of Data Communication Networks using Dynamic Complex Networks
17 Jan 2017Data Communication NetworksTime varying Networks modelSystem UtilityRouting
All the existing real world networks are evolving, hence, study of traffic dynamics in these enlarged networks is a challenging task. The critical issue is to optimize the network structure to improve network capacity and avoid traffic congestion. We are interested in taking user's routes such that it is least congested with optimal network capacity. Network capacity may be improved either by optimizing network topology or enhancing in routing approach. In this context, we propose and design a model of the time varying data communication networks (TVCN) based on the dynamics of in-flowing links. Newly appeared node prefers to attach with most influential node present in the network. In this paper, influence is termed as reputation and is applied for computing overall congestion at any node. User path with least betweenness centrality and most reputation is preferred for routing. Kelly's optimization formulation for a rate allocation problem is used for obtaining optimal rates of distinct users at different time instants and it is found that the user's path with lowest betweenness centrality and highest reputation will always give maximum rate at stable point.

Introduction

Many real world networks, such as data communication network, World Wide Web, transportation network etc., follow heavy tailed power law degree distribution results in scale free behavior [1]. These networks are evolving, hence, dynamics of the networks have been studied in past few years. In communication networks, data packets are transported from some source (S) to destination (D) via a path. The critical issue concerned with the communication networks is to optimize the network structure to improve searching or routing efficiency and avoid traffic congestion. The next issue is related to efficient usage of the capacity of the networks. It is observed that few nodes become congested and then, later it results in propagation of congestion in the whole network. It happens because these nodes are used most in the communication path as they are more central. Network capacity may be improved using two methods: (i) Methods to optimize network topology, and (ii) Enhancement in routing approach.


Optimization of network topology

Optimization of network topology corresponds to reorganization of the network for minimizing congestion and getting improved network capacity. Zhao et al. [2] have enhanced network capacity by redistributing the load of heavily loaded nodes to other nodes in the network. Links are sorted in descending order according to their end node degrees and links are removed in the descending sorted list [3]. For heterogeneous networks, Zhang proposed a method in which nodes having high betweenness centrality are removed first [4]. Networks are growing during the whole of the life span and nodes are connected via preferential attachment (BA model) [5]. In BA model, appearance of new connections totally depends on the addition of new nodes to the system. But, in real systems, links are added and updated continuously. Tadic [1] has developed a model for dynamics of directed networks. Degree distribution of both the outgoing and incoming links follow power law degree distribution and there is a correlation between them. It suggests that local structure of the network is different in comparison with the case of without updates. There is a need to include time parameter with the nodes and links of the basic network structure so, many models have been proposed for these time-varying graphs (TVGs) [6,7,8,9]. Model developed by Kostakos et al. [10] is based on the concept of quick transfer and delayed transaction of data between distinct nodes in the communication network. Kim et al. [8] focus their work on discovering closest and most betweenness central node in the dynamically changing networks. A series of static graphs (i.e., the snapshots) are used to represent the network at a given time instant [11]. The snapshot model makes an external assumption that the network must be capable of retaining the link transitivity during the period of disconnection. Recently, Wehmuth et al. [6] have proposed a new unifying model for representing finite discrete TVGs. TVG nodes are considered as independent entities at each time and it is analyzed the proposed TVG is isomorphic to a static graph. It is an important result because of the use of the isomorphic directed graph as a tool to analyze both the properties of a TVG and the behavior of dynamic processes over a TVG. A framework to represent mobile networks dynamically in a Spatio-temporal fashion is designed and algebraic structural representation is also provided [12].


Enhancement in routing approach

Network restructuring cost is more, hence most of the researchers focus on finding better routing strategies. Traditionally, packets are sent along the shortest paths in the term of hop count or minimal sums of weighted links [13]. Most of the shortest paths are passing through most central nodes and hence, sending data only through shortest path is not efficient. Yan et al. [14] have focused their work on searching efficient path, instead of searching of shortest paths. In communication networks, two rates are associated with each node: packet generation rate λ and packet forwarding rate µ. There is a critical rate of packet generation (λ c ), below which network will be free from congestion. Two models are proposed by Zhao et al. [2] for finding packet delivery rate of a node, (i) based on node's links and (ii) number of the shortest path passing through the node. In later model, critical rate is independent of network's size and topology, unlike, previous model. Du et al. [15] have developed a model in which packets are generated with a rate λ between random source and destination pairs. Packets are propagated into the network such that load is minimized and will be delivered by Shortest Remaining Packet First (SRPF) algorithm. They also studied the behavior of congested node with the arrival of large number of packets. A heuristic routing strategies are used by Jiang et al. [16], in which routing process is divided into N (size of network) steps. All the routes from the source node are based on the betweenness centrality and node's degree information. Pu et al. [17] have formed a network model based on Barabasi Albert (BA) model and routing between pair of nodes are done such that cost function is minimized. Robustness and network efficiency are calculated against cascading failure. Networks are changing rapidly with time, hence, acquiring global information of the network using global routing strategy is not useful for longer time. Various local routing strategies are proposed by Lin et al. [18]. Proposed methods include node duplication avoidance, searching next nearest neighbors and restricted queue length. All the proposed strategies are used to enhance the performance of the system, by increasing packet generation rate of the nodes and reducing packet transmission time.


Rate control mechanism

Some nodes as well as links are getting added or removed but there is a net increment in the size of the networks with time. As network is expanding day by day so design and control of such network is a challenging work. Structure of networks is dependent on distribution of links and directly affects the accessibility of particular node. Topology is changing and due to change in topology, the performance of the network is also affected. Communication network can respond to the randomly changing traffic but modern communication networks face multiple challenges at different layers. Real life communication networks are extremely volatile and making connections in the volatile environment with optimal network utility is a challenging task. Modeling their rate control behavior [19] with volatile and dynamic connectivity helps us in getting optimal utilization of the system. La et al. [20] have extended Kelly's work by introducing a suitable pricing scheme. An algorithm is proposed for adjusting network's price and users' window size is re-framed to achieve optimal system utility by maintaining weighted proportionally fairness. Priya Ranjan et al. [21] have investigated Kelly's optimization framework and used for finding stability conditions with the consideration of arbitrary delays. Effect of the non responsive traffic on the system stability is studied. It is shown that ubiety of such elements help in improving the stability of the system. Recently, progress is made on the earlier work of modeling of TVCN and a new Lyapunov function is being formulated for rate control scheme and long term stability is obtained [22].

In previous researches, various routing strategies are proposed to avoid congestion in the communication networks. Here, work is focused on congestion and network utility both and the routing of the users are established with minimum congestion and maximum network utility along them. Network utility is calculated by summing up all individual user's utilities, and it will be maximum when, each user send data to their destinations with optimal rate. Once network is designed then, users select their routes for data communication with their destined nodes. In this paper, network is designed with the consideration of expansion, rewiring and removal of the links. A model is proposed for removing infrequently used links in the network apart from addition and rewiring of links. Addition and rewiring of links are based on preferential attachment. The removed links increase unnecessarily maintenance cost, hence, the removal of these links will reduce the cost. In the proposed model, the links attached to a node having lower degree, will be preferred to remove. Optimality of the routes are checked by analyzing Kelly's optimization approach [19] for a rate allocation problem in communication networks at different time instants.

Centrality plays an important role for congestion in the network, especially betweenness centrality. Betweenness centrality of a node v is equal to the number of shortest paths from all node pairs pass through that node v and is given by,
g(v) = ∑ S v D σ S→D (v) σ S→D .
If larger number of shortest paths are passing through a node then, betweenness centrality and degree of that node will be more but, vice-versa is not true [23]. Connectivity distribution of both betweenness and degree centrality of the real world networks follow power law distribution with different but, correlated exponents [24]. Nodes with maximum betweenness centrality is the most congested node in the network [2]. In the proposed routing strategy, shortest paths with lowest total sum of betweenness centrality of nodes are selected for sending data packets. Some nodes are endorsed by the congested nodes and cause increase in load at that node. Hence, these nodes may be avoided for reducing data traffic in the network. Eigen vector centrality is used to check influence of one node to others. In this paper, influence is measured in terms of congestion in the networks. A node with high Eigen vector centrality is highly congested and it is undesirable to connect with that node. We have used a term, "reputation", for finding overall congestion at any node. Reputation of a node is inversely related to Eigen vector centrality of the particular node, hence, most Eigen vector central node is least reputed. Both, betweenness centrality and reputation are collectively used for avoiding congestion in the network. Among all the shortest paths, the path having lowest betweenness central and most reputed are desirable for data communication between user pairs. These desirable paths are taken as an input for Kelly's optimization framework and are the achievers of optimal data rates x * . Section 2 states background information about the related work and describe the mathematical model used in the analysis of rate control behavior of the user route. Section 3 introduces model for growth dynamics of TVCN, formulation of scaling exponent and the proposed routing strategies for communication network. Section 4 presents theoretical and simulation results, and in Section 5, conclusion and future research are discussed.


Background and Related work

In communication network, each node can generate and forward packets with distinct rate, λ and µ respectively. There are three possible relationships between λ and µ: (i.) λ < µ implies that system in free flow state, (ii.) λ = µ shows boundary case for congestion and (iii.) λ > µ allows system in congestion. Zhao et al. [2] have proposed a model in which packet forwarding rate µ of a node i for model: (i) based on degree of a node, µ i = 1 + ⌊β k i ⌋ and (ii) based on betweenness centrality of a node, µ i = 1 + ⌊ β g i N ⌋. Here, k i = degree of node i, g i = betweenness centrality of node i, N = size of the network and β , 0 < β < 1. By theoretical estimation, the value of critical rate is given by λ c = µ Lmax (N−1) g Lmax . The node with maximum packet forwarding capacity and betweenness centrality are denoted by µ Lmax and g Lmax respectively.

An order parameter ζ (λ ) [25], is used to describe the traffic and given by,
ζ (λ ) = lim t→∞ µ λ ∆Num p ∆t ∆Num p = Num p (t + ∆t) − Num p (t), Num p (t)
is number of packets at time t and . shows that average value over the time window ∆t. ∆Num p = 0 shows that no packet in the network and when η = 0, system is in free flow state. Yan et al. [14] have found average betweenness centrality g(k) for the nodes with same degree k:
g(k) = 1 N(k) ∑ v:k v =k g(v)
where, N(k) is number of nodes with degree k. For Scale Free networks, g(k) ∼ k α . An efficient path P(i → j) between node i and j is calculated such that the sum L(P(i → j : α) = ∑ N−1 i=0 k(x i ) α should be minimized for an optimal value of α. Critical rate, λ c also depends on µ and hence, λ
c (β ) = N(N−1) g β Lmax .
Liu et al. [3] have studied network traffic by considering local and global routing strategies. Betweenness Centrality (globally calculated) of a link whose end nodes are m with degree k m and n with degree k n , is linearly correlated with multiplication of degree of end nodes, k m k n (locally evaluated). To avoid congestion in the network, links having maximum k m k n values are closed. After closing few links, λ c , average path length (L avg ) and average travel time ( T ) are studied. Jiang et al. [16] have found heuristic method for routing and used an incremental approach for adding new paths in the network. As addition of new paths cause change in betweenness and degree of each node.
L s (P(i → j)) = v=N−1 ∑ v=0 f S (n v ) where, f S (n v ) = (g S n v Deg S n v ) α is dynamic weight of node v, n v for source node S, g S x v is dynamic betweenness centrality of n v and Deg S n v is dynamic degree of node v. Hence, weight of each link (i, j) is (g S i Deg S i ) α + (g S j Deg S j ) α .
All the previous works discussed till now are focused on routing and optimizing network structure. Tadic [1] has discussed about restructuring of directed networks by considering growth and rearrangement at unique time scale. At each time unit t a new node is added to the network (growth) and a number X(t) and fraction β are used to find newly added and rearranged links in the network. (i.) A portion f add (t) = β X(t) of new links are out-flowing links from the new added node i = t and (ii.) the remaining part f update (t) = (1 − β )X(t) are the updated links at other nodes in the network. Optimization of network topology and developing efficient routing strategies help us to avoid congestion and to improve overall network performance. In communication network, various users want to establish connection between specious node pairs via an optimal route. Routes are selected such that user can send data with optimal rate to their destinations. Kelly [19] has formulated the rate allocation problem into optimization problem for a static network. We have used the formulation of rate control algorithm and proposed a mathematical model for dynamic communication networks.


Mathematical model

A brief description is presented about mathematical representation of the dynamic networks. Network consists of N nodes and E links and life span of the network is T . A set of R users are willing to send data in the network. Any link e mn connects node m with node n can send maximum C e mn units of data through it, where, C e mn is capacity of the link e mn and e mn ∈ E. In TVCN, each user r is assigned a route r ∈ R for a particular time instant t i ∈ T . At the end of t th i time, a zero-one matrix A of the size (N × N) t i is defined where, A n i ,n j ,t i = 1, if node n i and n j are connected at time t i otherwise zero. When the user r is assigned a rate x r,t i then, utility of user r at rate x r,t i is given as U r,t i (x r,t i ) is increasing, strictly concave function of x r,t i over the range x r,t i ≥ 0. Aggregate utility is calculated by summing up all utilities of user r with rate x r,t i and is denoted as ∑ r∈R,t i U r,t i (x r,t i ). Rate allocation problem can be formulated as the following optimization problem.
SY ST EM(U t i , A t i ) maximize ∑ r∈R,t i U r,t i (x r,t i ) (1) A T t i x t i ≤ C t i and x t i ≥ 0 A t i is a matrix at time interval t i−1 to t i .
The given constraint states that a link can not send data more than its capacity [19]. It is difficult and unmanageable to allocate a suitable utility function and optimal rate to distinct users in complex networks. Hence, Kelly has divided this problem into two simpler problems named as user's optimal problem and network's optimal problem [19]. Let user r decide an amount P r (t i ) to pay per unit time, while r is demanded a price η r for unit flow. Hence, user will acquire a flow, x r (t i ) = P r (t i )/η r at time t i . User's optimal price for sending x r (t i ) at time t i can be obtained using the optimization problem as
User r (U r (t i ), η r (t i )), maximize U r (x r (t i )) − P r (t i ), (2) P r > 0
On the other hand, network wants to maximize weighted log function of P r (t i ). Therefore, network optimization problem can be formulated as
NETWORK(A t i , p t i ), maximize ∑ r∈R,t i P r (t i )log(x r (t i )),(3)A T t i x t i ≤ C t i and x t i ≥ 0.
As the network is time varying so, the values of η r and x r are varying with time. Each user r ∈ R, initially computes the price per unit flow by using the Eq. ((2)) and it is willing to pay, P r (t i ). Utility of each user r is assumed as a strictly concave function of user's rate x r (t i ) at that time (t i ). At each time instant if user wants to access a link e mn ∈ E then, the cost will depend on the total data flow through the link at that time and is given by ψ e mn (t i ) = ς e mn (∑ r:e mn ∈E x r (t i )) where, ς e mn (•) is growing if it comes in large number of user's path and ς e (y) is given by ς e mn (y) = c e mn .(y/C e mn ) ω where, c e mn is constant and assumed with value one, C e mn is the capacity of link e mn ∈ E. Now, consider the following system of differential equation for getting optimal data rate (x * )
dx r (t i ) dt i = ϑ r (P r (t i ) − x r (t i ) ∑ e mn ∈r ψ e mn (t i ))(4)
Here, ϑ r is proportionality constant. Each user first computes it's willingness to pay as P r (t i ) then, it adjusts its rate based on the response provided by the links in the network and trying to balance its willing to pay and total price. Eq. ((4)) consists of two components: a steady increase in the rate proportional to P r (t i ) and steady decrease in the rate proportional to the response ψ e mn (t i ) provided by the network.


Time varying communication network model and routing strategies

Network topology and routing are responsible for congestion and network efficiency. An optimal network structure is generated using an efficient TVCN model. Proposed model considers all the aspect of growth and alteration (rewiring & removal) of links in the network. In the established network, users establish dedicated connection between the nodes with whom they want to communicate. These connections are able to manage traffic efficiently, which results minimized congestion in the network.


Time varying communication network model

Time varying data communication networks are designed by maintaining specific set of rules and nodes are connected via directed links. Directed links may have two categories: links which come out from a node (out-flowing) and other links are incidental to a node (in-flowing). Degree distribution of both out-flowing and in-flowing links follow a heavy tail power law distribution with distinct power law exponents. In the proposed model, the preferences are assigned to in-flowing links. The newly incoming node will be attached to the node endorsed by the highest number of nodes [1,5].


Network Dynamics

A communication network model is proposed by using the Barabasi-Albert (BA) model [5] and the model using the dynamics of directed graphs [1]. The proposed directed network model has following properties:

1. Network consists of directed links for connecting nodes. At each time instant t i ∈ T , a new node n i is added to the network (expansion) and a number X(≤ n 0 ) is selected for network expansion, rewiring and removal, where n 0 is initial number of nodes present in the seed network. Links are divided into three categories: newly added, rewired and removed links. Distribution of the links are done using the given set of rules [26]. Notations:

(a.) β = Fraction of the evolving (appear from the new incoming node and appear/disappear in the existing network) links at any time instant. It informs about the establishment of new connections from the new incoming node n t at time t , 0 < β < 1.

(b.) γ = Fraction of the links, those are rewired in the existing network, 0.5 < γ ≤ 1.

Using the above notation, following set of rules may be defined: 
f delete (t) = X − f add (t) − f rewire (t) = (1 − γ)(1 − β )X
The parameter δ is the ratio of altered and added links in the model and is given by,
δ = f delete (t) + f rewire (t) f add (t) = (1 − γ)(1 − β )X + γ(1 − β )X β X = (1 − β ) β(5)
Here, δ is independent of the number X and is known as correlation parameter.

While studying the behavior of communication networks, the concept of preferred linking to a node is driven by the demand of the node to outflow the data into the network. Only few influential nodes have the right to rewire their links. Nodes rewire their infrequently used links and connect it to preferred nodes for data communication. The preference is given to the infrequently used links for the removal of links. Hence, the links attached to a node having lower degree will be preferred for removal.


Degree Distribution

The scale free behavior is found, after studying the scaling properties of the time varying network model. A mean field theoretical approach [5] is used to anticipate the growth dynamics of distinct nodes, which is later applicable for analytical computation of connectivity distribution and scaling exponents. Network is growing with time hence, some of the previously existing nodes will get more time to acquire links and are being the holders of highest degrees. Degree k i of the node i is changing continuously with time, so probability Π(k i ) is interpreted as rate of change of k i . At each time stamp, fractions β and γ decide the number of links chosen for expansion (addition), rearrangement and removal, and is deciding parameters of degree of the node i. Analysis is given using following steps: 1. A fraction β of the number X links are newly added links at time t.
dk i dt add = β X k i ∑ j k j(6)
Effect of newly added links on the degree of node i is written on the left hand side of the equation and on the right side β X links are formed using preferential attachment.


2.

A fraction γ(1 − β )X links are re-arranged at time t.
dk i dt rewire = γ(1 − β )X 1 n 0 + t + 1 − 1 n 0 + t k i ∑ j k j − 1 n 0 + t 1 − k i ∑ j k j(7)
When few links are rewired then, change in degree of node i depends on three terms: first term shows random selection of nodes, second term corresponds to linking with other existing nodes having high preferential attachment probability and third term shows removal of link having low preferential attachment value.


A fraction
(1 − γ)(1 − β )X links are removed from the network at time t. dk i dt delete = −(1 − γ)(1 − β )X 1 n 0 + t + 1 − 1 n 0 + t 1 − k i ∑ j k j 1 n 0 + t(8)
Removal of links affect the degree of node i and it is shown in above equation. First term shows random selection of a node and that link will be removed which has low preferential attachment value.

At time t, the sum of degrees of nodes in the network will be:
∑ j k j = 2t [β X + (1 − β ) (γX − (1 − γ)X)] = 2Xt [β + (1 − β )(2γ − 1)] Let c = β + (1 − β )(2γ − 1)
. Now, combining the eqns. (6) to (8) we get the change in degree of node i with respect to time t.
dk i dt = β k i 2ct + γ(1 − β )k i 2ct − (1 − β )(1 − γ)X 2 n 0 + t − 1 (n 0 + t) 2 − k i 2ct(n 0 + t) + k i 2ct(n 0 + t) 2 = β 2c + γ(1 − β ) 2c k i t − ((1 − β )(1 − γ)X) 1 t (for large t )
Let us assume θ 1 = β 2c + γ(1−β ) 2c and θ 2 = −(1 − β )(1 − γ)X Hence, the above equation can be re-written as
dk i dt = θ 1 k i t + θ 2 1 t(9)
The solution of the Eq. ( (9)) is derived by taking initial condition that node i appears at time t i with X connections k i (t i ) = X and is given as:
k i (t) = − θ 2 θ 1 + k i (t i ) + θ 2 θ 1 t t i θ 1 = − θ 2 θ 1 + X + θ 2 θ 1 t t i θ 1
At each time stamp, a node is added into the network hence, Probability density of t i is:
P i (t i ) = 1 n 0 + t
The probability that a node has total k i (t) connections and which is smaller than k, P(k i (t) < k), can be written as:
P(k i (t) < k) = P(− θ 2 θ 1 + X + θ 2 θ 1 t t i θ 1 < k) = P   ti > X + θ 2 θ 1 k + θ 2 θ 1 1 θ 1 t    = 1 − P   ti ≤ X + θ 2 θ 1 k + θ 2 θ 1 1 θ 1 t   
The probability density of k is P(k) and can be written as:
P(k) = ∂ P(k i (t) < k) ∂ k = t θ 1 (n 0 + t) X + θ 2 θ 1 1 θ 1 k + θ 2 θ 1 −(1+ 1 θ 1 )(10)
Now, assume α = −(1 + 1 θ 1 ). The value of the scaling exponent of the real world network lies between 2 and 3, hence, for dynamic communication network, exponent (α) must lie within 2 < α ≤ 3. Constraint on α will be fulfilled if 0.5 < θ 1 < 1. As P(k) is always positive so, X + θ 2 θ 1 should be positive.


Routing Strategies

Each node in the communication network generates packets with a certain rate and can deliver packets according to the capacity of that particular node. Capacity of the network (C) is calculated by summing up the capacity of all the individual nodes in the communication network. Aggregate values of the packet generation rate of all the nodes are termed as the load of the network.
L = N−1 ∑ v=0 l v here, l v = load at node v
When, load (L) exceeds the capacity (C) of the network then, it will become congested with the packets. If all the packets are sent through the shortest paths to their destinations then, some nodes may appear frequently in the formation of shortest path and it will become congested. In the large communication networks, multiple users want to establish a connection between a source (S) and destination (D). There may exist multiple shortest paths σ z (S → D) from S to D, where z = 1, 2, ..., χ and χ is total number of shortest paths between S and D. In the shortest path, a node may lie with high betweenness centrality. Sending data through the shortest path will lead to the congestion in the network (most of the user pairs will try to follow the same path). Therefore, it is important to investigate a shortest path σ (S → D) between the user pairs such that overall betweenness centrality of the nodes appears in the path
θ g [σ z (S → D)] = ∑ v:v∈σ z (S→D) g v here, g v = betweenness of node v
should be minimum. Hence, we want to find out a path whose nodes should not be the part of large number of other shortest paths (low betweenness centrality). Hence, it is defined by,
min {∀z : θ g (σ z (S → D))}
Apart from routing strategy using betweenness centrality of the nodes, a local strategy is used by considering influence of the neighbor nodes. If a heavily loaded node is connected with some other nodes then, it will make all the succeeding nodes congested. Heavily congested preceding nodes have negative impact on successor nodes. The impact of one node to others is measured by Eigen vector centrality of the node v,
x v = 1 κ ∑ j∈N a v j x j
Here, κ is largest Eigen value of the matrix A and if node v and j are connected then, a v j = 1. If a node is most Eigen vector central, then it will be highly congested and hence, least reputed. So, among all the shortest path, that path will be reputed if aggregate value of the reputation of the path θ r [σ (S → D)]
θ r [σ z (S → D)] = ∑ v:v∈σ z (S→D) 1
x v

x v = Eigen vector centrality of node v is maximized and and the function is defined by,
max {∀z : θ r (σ z (S → D))}.
Optimal path between S and D θ gr
σ z (S → D)] = ∑ v:v∈σ z (S→D) g v x v
is calculated by considering both betweenness centrality and reputation. A path is optimal if it's elements will have least betweenness central as well as reputed and is given by,
min {∀z : θ gr (σ z (S → D))}.
A snapshot of the proposed method is discussed in Fig. 1. Two users, U 1 and U 2 want to send data from node 9 to node 4 and from node 10 to node 5, respectively. Their respective routes are 9 − 1 − 4, 9 − 5 − 4 and 10 − 1 − 5, 10 − 2 − 5. Both the users avoid congested routes hence, U 1 avoids the route 9 − 1 − 4 and U 2 prefers 10 − 2 − 5. From Fig.  1, it is evident that node 1 is highly congested node in the network, so both users avoid to send data through node 1 and select other possible options available for sending data to their destined node. Packet generation rate (PGR) of a node depends on the packet forwarding rate and betweenness centrality of the node. Packet forwarding rate depends on the capacity of a node, that affects bandwidth of a link.

Capacity of a link C e mn is dependent on the degrees k m and k n of node m and n. It can be approximated by a power-law dependence [27] C e mn = b(k m k n ) α α is the degree influenced exponent which depends on the type of networks and b is a positive quantity. Three possible relations between capacity C e mn and exponent α: (i) if α > 0 then, data is transmitted through high degree nodes (ii) when α < 0 then, data will be sent through low degree nodes and (iii) α = 0 shows degree independent transmission. Cong. = congestion g = betweenness k = degree, C= capacity, λ = packet generation rate µ= packet forwarding rate 2


Congested

Highest Betweenness Central Node U 1 routes: (9-1-4) and (9-5-4) U 2 routes: (10-1-5) and (10-2-5) Users: U 1 = U 9,4 and U 2 = U 10,5

Cong. ∝ g Cong. The value of α in the proposed model is taken positive value with constant α = 1 and b is also equal to 1. Reputation and betweenness centrality are deciding parameter for evaluating congestion. Reputation of a node is inverse of the Eigen vector centrality of a node. While, congestion is proportionally related to betweenness centrality and inversely related with reputation.

Algorithmic steps are given for expansion, rewire and removal of links in the TVCN (Algorithm 1). Expand the network with one node at each time instant t.


Algorithm 1 Network


5:

for x: 1 to f add (t) do 6: Attach the newly added node with node having highest inflowing link attachment probability in the existing network. 7: end for 8: for y : 1 to f rewire (t) do 9: Remove the infrequently used link of an influenced node and attach to the node having higher inflowing link probability. 10: end for 11: for z : 1 to f delete (t) do 12: Remove the infrequently used link of a randomly selected node. 13: end for 14: end while

Steps involved in Algorithm 1, are used to design TVCN. In the time varying network, various users want to communicate data from a source S to destination D. User gives information about the source and destination, and accordingly S → D pairs are generated. Increments in the number of users lead to the network into congested state. Therefore, our aim is to find efficient routing paths such that maximum number of users are getting benefited with a unique stable value of the optimal data sending rate x * r and corresponding convergence vectors will be x * = x * r , r ∈ R using equation Eq. (4). Shortest path σ (S → D) with lowest betweenness centrality and highest reputation (θ gr [σ (S → D)]) are assumed as efficient. After finding such paths of all the users, optimal data sending rate of each user is calculated by using rate allocation equation Eq. (4). Detailed description of selecting shortest path with lowest (highest) betweenness centrality and highest (lowest) reputation along with optimal rate is given in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2 Finding shortest path having lowest (highest) betweenness centrality with highest (lowest) reputation and optimal rate for each user 1: Input: All source destination S − D pairs N SD in the network, designed through Algorithm 1, a and b such that a > 0 & 0 < b < 1. for j := 1 to N do 13: Frequency of occurring of node j, ω j in user's path decides initial data rate of each node.

14:

x j = C j ω j ; 15: end for 16: end for 17: for i := 1 to length(N SD ) do 18: for d := 1 to length(N SD (i)) do 19: Update network feedback ψ d for each element d. 20: end for 21: x r = min(x N SD (i) );


22:

A(r) = rand(1, 10); 23: P r = x r * ( a x r +b ); 24: ψ r = ψ d {∀d : d ∈ N SD (i)};

25: end for 26: Use the value of x r , A(r), P r and ψ r to find the rate of convergence of each user.


Simulation and results

For dynamics of TVCN model, the simulation starts by establishing the infrastructure of the network followed by algorithmic steps in Algorithm 1 and the rules are given in the Section 3.1.1. The proposed TVCN model is one of the example of real world networks, hence, degree distributions must follow a heavy-tailed power law distribution: P(k) ∼ k −α , where 2 < α ≤ 3, known as scale-free networks. Scale-free networks are non-homogeneous, numerous nodes with few links coexist with a few hub nodes, connected with thousands or even millions of links. In this paper, the parameters are set to be seed node n 0 = 5, number X = 5, fraction of newly added links β range in (0, 1), fraction of rewired links γ is in the range of (0.5, 1), with network size ranging from N = 10 2 to N = 10 4 . Any nodes can be included in the user's S − D sets or may participate in routing also. Data forwarding capacity of a node n, C n is equal to the in-flowing degree k n of the node n. Capacity of a link C e mn is obtained by multiplying the degree k m and k n of end nodes m and n respectively. At each time stamp, degree of the nodes will be different, hence capacity of the nodes as well as links change accordingly.

In the Section 3.1.1, the value of correlation parameter, δ = 1−β β , where, 0 < β < 1 , implies that ∞ < δ ≤ 0. The value of δ will be minimum with value 0 or maximum with value ∞, for maximum value of β = 1, or minimum value of β = 0. The following cases are possible for the value of the δ , depending on altered (rewired & removed) and newly added links in the network, (a) δ = 1, when both the values of altered (rewired & removed) and added links are same.

(b) δ < 1(β > 0.5), more number of new links are getting added than altered.

(c) δ > 1(β < 0.5), more number of links are altered than added.

(d) δ = 0(β = 1), only expansion, no alteration in the existing network. The degree distribution is plotted of the generated TVCN ( Fig. 2 (a − d)) for number of nodes, N = 10 4 . Different values are considered for parameters β , γ and δ (Table 1 (a − d)). The degree distribution is found power law in nature with all the considered values of the parameters (Fig. 2). A fraction (1 − β ) of the number X is used for alteration of links and γ part of the altered links are used for rewiring. To maintain the growing nature of TVCN, the value of γ is considered in the range (0.5, 1). Once the value of β is increased it implies that more number of new incoming links appear with the newly added node. Therefore, in the network a node may acquire more number of links. Hence, the tail of the distribution is found longer and increasing slope of degree distribution of TVCN ( Fig. 2 (a − d)). The power law exponent α is also increasing (2 < α ≤ 3) for all the possible values of correlation parameter δ (Table 1), with the increasing value of β . As per proposed mathematical model for calculating the degree distribution of the generated TVCN, power law exponent α is dependent on the value of θ 1 and may be written as 1 α+1 . For real world networks, range of α is (2, 3] hence, θ 1 must lie between 0.5 and 1. The density function is always positive, hence, X + θ 2 θ 1 must be positive. For different values of δ , both conditions are fulfilled ( Table 2).  The degree distribution of the in-flowing links in TVCN is calculated and compared with all the possible cases of the parameter δ , by using mean field theoretical approach and through simulation, for the network of size N = 5 * 10 2 .

The obtained values of the power law exponent α are very proximate to each other ( Fig. 3) with corresponding values (Table 3). Hence, proposed mathematical model for degree distribution for TVCN is validated.

In the communication networks, many paths are available for sending packets for each user, between the desired source and destination. All routes are assumed as equally weighted hence, users can select any of the available routes for sending the packets. Each user can send data along one of the shortest paths to the destination with a maximum  flow rate of individual links. The data sending rate is reduced as multiple users want to share the common resources. Furthermore, user may not send more data with maximum rate. User's rate depends on two parameters; it's own willingness to pay P r (t i ) and network's feedback ψ r (t i ) = ∑ e∈r ψ e (t i ). Using rate control theorem given in Eq. ((4)), an optimal data sending rate of each user is obtained (Fig. 4). Optimal data rate of two users, User1 and User2 are shown at different time instants. Interval of the two time instants ∆t is taken as ∆t = 5 * 10 2 . Size of the network is changing but number of users are kept same as in initial network. Size of the network increases but optimal rates are decreasing to a stable point. User rates depend on the demand of particular resources coming in the shortest route. If demand is high then, data sending rate will be less. Multiple users want to establish connections between a distinct pair of nodes through a shortest possible communication path. More than one shortest routes are possible for making those connection, so data flow rates will be less through the paths having highest betweenness centrality and lowest reputation summation of all the existing nodes. A network is formed with the network network of size N = 5 * 10 2 with considering 20 source to destination S − D pairs along with their betweenness centrality and reputation values and optimal rate (x * ) (    Fig. 5(a). Apart from betweenness centrality, there is one more parameter named as reputation effects optimal data rate x * of each user. If path is formed by takings over all sum of most reputed nodes then, rate of the user will be maximum. Results of optimal data rates (x * ) of 39 users with aggregate sum of most and least reputed nodes are displayed in Fig.5(b). Calculation of betweenness centrality and reputation individually is not sufficient for obtaining optimal rates of users. Hence, we have considered both betweenness and reputation of the nodes in the networks. Those paths are selected. A path considered as efficient for routing if contains those nodes, which is least betweenness central as well as reputed. Simulation results in Fig. 6 show that the data sending rate of the user path having lowest or highest value for the aggregate sum of betweenness and highest or lowest total sum of reputation, is always maximum or minimum.


Conclusions and future work

A framework is designed to represent time varying communication networks (TVCN) where links may appear/disappear randomly with time and nodes are added continuously. A model is proposed to design an optimal network with the consideration of all the aspects of dynamicity (addition, rewiring and removal) of links. At each time step, a new node is added into the network, and a number X is taken for establishing, rewiring and removal of connections. The values of the fraction β and γ determine the number of added and altered (rewired and removed) links. Various experiments were performed for finding the topological structure for the TVCN with different values of correlation parameter, δ . It is observed that with increasing value of β in the range (0, 1) leads to decrement of the correlation parameter δ in the interval (∞, 0). Furthermore, the scaling exponent increases in the range 2 < α ≤ 3. It is found that the value of power law exponents obtained from the simulation and mean field theoretical analysis of connectivity distribution are proximate to each other. In TVCN, multiple users select their paths such that nodes in the path should have least betweenness centrality and most reputed. Once a path is established, optimal data sending rate of the user is obtained by using rate control theorem proposed by Kelly [19]. Interval of the two time instants (∆t) is taken as ∆t = 5 * 10 2 . Number of users are kept same as in initial network despite of change in network size. At the end of (t i + ∆t) th time instant, x * of users are evaluated and it is found that size of the network increases but optimal rates are decreasing to a stable point, x * . At each time step, optimal rate of the users are calculated and it is found that data sending rate of the user's are different with time. We have also studied the case in which number of users increase with network growth. Shortest path with lowest or highest betweenness and highest or lowest reputation are chosen for routing and observed that the value of optimal rate will always be the maximum or minimum. In this paper, system utility is calculated without consideration of delays in the network. Utility function, itself can be replaced by using game theoretical approach. We have not considered the resilience under cascaded failure and targeted attack in the network.

2 .
2Network expansion, link rewiring and removal are done at unique time scale.

(i )
)Total number of new out-flowing links from the new appeared node, i(= t) with the nodes existing in the network at (t − 1) based on preferential attachment is given by, f add (t) = β X (ii) Few links are rewired in the existing network. γ fraction of the available X links are chosen for rewiring, f rewire (t) = γ(X − f add (t)) = γ(1 − β )X (iii) Last part of the remaining segment of X are used for deleting most infrequently used links.

Figure 1 :
1Block diagram

Evolution 1 :
1Input: A number of nodes (n 0 ) for creating seed network, n(≤ n 0 ), β , γ and T . 2: Output: Time varying data communication networks. 3: while t ≤ T do 4:

2 :
2for i := 1 to length(N SD ) do 3: Evaluate all shortest paths χ i of user i. gr [σ m (S → D)]. paths χ i (S → D) having maximum and minimum value of θ gr [σ m (χ i (S → D))].

Figure 2 :
2Degree distribution of the network when number of nodes are average ratio of altered and newly added links are (a) N = 10 4 , δ = 1.00, (b) N = 10 4 , δ = 0.67, (c) N = 10 4 , δ = 3.00 and (d) N = 10 4 , δ = 0.00

2 :
2User's optimal rate through the shortest routes having different betweenness centrality values (maximum and minimum), when number of nodes N =

Figure 3 :
3Simulated and analytical results of degree distribution of in-flowing links for the network of N = 5 * 10 2 nodes for δ = 1 (a), δ < 1 (b), δ > 1 (c) and δ = 0 (d).

Figure 4 :
4Conservation of data sending rates of User1 and User2 at different time instants

Figure 5 :
5User's optimal rates of user paths with (a) highest & lowest betweenness and (b) reputation (highest & lowest)

Figure 6 :
6User's optimal rates at time t = 5 * 10 2 by considering both betweenness and reputation ( θ gr [σ (S → D)]) with maximum & minimum value

Table 1 :
1Values of power law exponent α, for different values of δ at N = 10 4 .β 
γ 
α 

δ = 1 0.50 0.50 2.486 
δ < 1 0.60 0.50 2.455 
δ > 1 0.25 0.70 2.065 
δ = 0 0.90 0.90 2.664 



Table


Table 3 :
3Comparative study of the values of power law exponent α obtained through simulation and theoretical approach, for different values of δ for network size N = 5 * 10 2 .β 
γ 
α 
α 

(Simulation) (Theoretical) 
δ = 1 0.50 0.50 
2.750 
2.619 
δ < 1 0.60 0.50 
2.616 
2.500 
δ > 1 0.25 0.70 
2.021 
2.419 
δ = 0 0.90 0.90 
2.741 
2.895 


Table 4 )
4. Now, the number of users are equal to the network size N = 5 * 10 2 . Here, in this network 39 users' source Data sending rate(in Mbps)100 

300 
500 
700 
1000 
2000 
0 

0.5 

1 

1.5 

2 

2.5 

3 

3.5 

4 

4.5 

5 

Time instants 

2.84 

2.36 
2.63 
2.84 

2.33 

1.6 

2.57 
2.47 

1.78 

2.24 
2.09 

2.69 

User1 
User2 



Table 4 :
4Optimal rate x * r of 20 users through the shortest routes with minimum and maximum θ gr [σ (S → D)] (maximum and minimum), when size of network N = 5 * 10 2 Source Destination path θ gr [σ (S → D)] θ gr [σ (S → D)] destination pairs are taken and for each pair the highest and lowest summation of the betweenness centralities for all the available shortest path are calculated. Optimal data sending rates of the 39 users with highest and lowest betweenness centrality are calculated and the result are shown inlength 
(Minimum) 
(x  *  
r ) 
(Maximum) 
( x  *  
r ) 
User1 
29 
14 
3 
0.0156 
8.9969 
0.0987 
3.3189 
User2 
77 
1 
2 
0.0192 
8.0567 
0.0552 
3.8823 
User3 
74 
73 
4 
0.0025 
4.8526 
0.0509 
2.2117 
User4 
72 
1 
2 
0.0183 
8.7746 
0.0544 
4.0416 
User5 
58 
73 
3 
0.0118 
4.5454 
0.0518 
2.7566 
User6 
34 
84 
3 
0.0115 
8.8328 
0.0560 
4.4339 
User7 
94 
25 
3 
0.0028 
10.8234 
0.0508 
3.1719 
User8 
96 
36 
2 
0.0005 
4.8525 
0.0008 
3.6785 
User9 
66 
85 
4 
0.0027 
6.1431 
0.0566 
2.4510 
User10 
20 
2 
3 
0.0023 
9.2059 
0.0569 
4.4499 
User11 
58 
16 
3 
0.0121 
8.0484 
0.0554 
3.6219 
User12 
3 
52 
2 
0.0415 
8.5054 
0.0457 
5.2154 
User13 
14 
26 
3 
0.0100 
9.2094 
0.0646 
4.6149 
User14 
95 
74 
5 
0.0006 
5.7869 
0.0517 
2.7312 
User15 
70 
58 
3 
0.0025 
6.2374 
0.0559 
3.5818 
User16 
31 
69 
3 
0.0024 
7.0966 
0.0578 
4.9822 
User17 
28 
12 
3 
0.0072 
7.2207 
0.0582 
2.7948 
User18 
22 
7 
3 
0.0236 
6.6195 
0.0852 
2.7941 
User19 
89 
100 
3 
0.0030 
8.6138 
0.0503 
3.7978 
User20 
57 
31 
3 
0.0025 
8.0771 
0.0535 
4.0460 



Dynamics of directed graphs: the world-wide web. B Tadić, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications. 2931Tadić, B.: Dynamics of directed graphs: the world-wide web. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 293(1) (2001) 273-284

Onset of traffic congestion in complex networks. L Zhao, Y C Lai, K Park, N Ye, Physical Review E. 71226125Zhao, L., Lai, Y.C., Park, K., Ye, N.: Onset of traffic congestion in complex networks. Physical Review E 71(2) (2005) 026125

Method to enhance traffic capacity for scale-free networks. Z Liu, M B Hu, R Jiang, W X Wang, Q S Wu, Physical Review E. 76337101Liu, Z., Hu, M.B., Jiang, R., Wang, W.X., Wu, Q.S.: Method to enhance traffic capacity for scale-free networks. Physical Review E 76(3) (2007) 037101

Enhancing the transmission efficiency by edge deletion in scale-free networks. G Q Zhang, D Wang, G J Li, Physical Review E. 76117101Zhang, G.Q., Wang, D., Li, G.J.: Enhancing the transmission efficiency by edge deletion in scale-free networks. Physical Review E 76(1) (2007) 017101

Mean-field theory for scale-free random networks. A L Barabási, R Albert, H Jeong, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications. 2721Barabási, A.L., Albert, R., Jeong, H.: Mean-field theory for scale-free random networks. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 272(1) (1999) 173-187

A unifying model for representing time-varying graphs. K Wehmuth, A Ziviani, É Fleury, arXiv:1402.3488arXiv preprintWehmuth, K., Ziviani, A., Fleury,É.: A unifying model for representing time-varying graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1402.3488 (2014)

Time-varying graphs and dynamic networks. A Casteigts, P Flocchini, W Quattrociocchi, N Santoro, International Journal of Parallel, Emergent and Distributed Systems. 275Casteigts, A., Flocchini, P., Quattrociocchi, W., Santoro, N.: Time-varying graphs and dynamic networks. International Journal of Parallel, Emergent and Distributed Systems 27(5) (2012) 387-408

Temporal node centrality in complex networks. H Kim, R Anderson, Physical Review E. 85226107Kim, H., Anderson, R.: Temporal node centrality in complex networks. Physical Review E 85(2) (2012) 026107

J Tang, S Scellato, M Musolesi, C Mascolo, V Latora, arXiv:0909.1712Small-world behavior in time-varying graphs. arXiv preprintTang, J., Scellato, S., Musolesi, M., Mascolo, C., Latora, V.: Small-world behavior in time-varying graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:0909.1712 (2009)

Temporal graphs. V Kostakos, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications. 3886Kostakos, V.: Temporal graphs. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 388(6) (2009) 1007-1023

Evolving graphs and least cost journeys in dynamic networks. B B Xuan, A Ferreira, A Jarry, WiOpt'03: Modeling and Optimization in Mobile, Ad Hoc and Wireless Networks. 10Xuan, B.B., Ferreira, A., Jarry, A.: Evolving graphs and least cost journeys in dynamic networks. In: WiOpt'03: Modeling and Optimization in Mobile, Ad Hoc and Wireless Networks. (2003) 10-pages

Towards a framework for rate control on dynamic communication networks. S Kumari, A Singh, P Ranjan, Proceedings of the International Conference on Internet of things and Cloud Computing. the International Conference on Internet of things and Cloud ComputingACM12Kumari, S., Singh, A., Ranjan, P.: Towards a framework for rate control on dynamic communication networks. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Internet of things and Cloud Computing, ACM (2016) 12

Optimizing ospf/is-is weights in a changing world. B Fortz, M Thorup, Louvain School of Management. Technical reportFortz, B., Thorup, M., et al.: Optimizing ospf/is-is weights in a changing world. Technical report, Louvain School of Management (2000)

Efficient routing on complex networks. G Yan, T Zhou, B Hu, Z Q Fu, B H Wang, Physical Review E. 73446108Yan, G., Zhou, T., Hu, B., Fu, Z.Q., Wang, B.H.: Efficient routing on complex networks. Physical Review E 73(4) (2006) 046108

Effective usage of shortest paths promotes transportation efficiency on scale-free networks. W B Du, Z X Wu, K Q Cai, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications. 39217Du, W.B., Wu, Z.X., Cai, K.Q.: Effective usage of shortest paths promotes transportation efficiency on scale-free networks. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 392(17) (2013) 3505-3512

Incremental routing strategy on scale-free networks. Z Y Jiang, M G Liang, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications. 3928Jiang, Z.Y., Liang, M.G.: Incremental routing strategy on scale-free networks. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 392(8) (2013) 1894-1901

Efficient and robust routing on scale-free networks. C L Pu, S Y Zhou, K Wang, Y F Zhang, W J Pei, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications. 3913Pu, C.L., Zhou, S.Y., Wang, K., Zhang, Y.F., Pei, W.J.: Efficient and robust routing on scale-free networks. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 391(3) (2012) 866-871

Advanced algorithms for local routing strategy on complex networks. B Lin, B Chen, Y Gao, K T Chi, C Dong, L Miao, B Wang, PloS one. 117156756Lin, B., Chen, B., Gao, Y., Chi, K.T., Dong, C., Miao, L., Wang, B.: Advanced algorithms for local routing strategy on complex networks. PloS one 11(7) (2016) e0156756

F P Kelly, Mathematical modelling of the internet. Mathematics unlimited-2001 and beyond. Kelly, F.P.: Mathematical modelling of the internet. Mathematics unlimited-2001 and beyond (2001) 685-702

Utility-based rate control in the internet for elastic traffic. R J La, V Anantharam, IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking (TON). 102La, R.J., Anantharam, V.: Utility-based rate control in the internet for elastic traffic. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking (TON) 10(2) (2002) 272-286

Global stability conditions for rate control with arbitrary communication delays. P Ranjan, R J La, E H Abed, IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking (TON). 141Ranjan, P., La, R.J., Abed, E.H.: Global stability conditions for rate control with arbitrary communication delays. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking (TON) 14(1) (2006) 94-107

Understanding stability of rate control schemes on dynamic communication networks. S Pushp, P Ranjan, M R Tripathy, J Song, Progress in Electromagnetic Research Symposium (PIERS). Pushp, S., Ranjan, P., Tripathy, M.R., Song, J.: Understanding stability of rate control schemes on dynamic communication networks. In: Progress in Electromagnetic Research Symposium (PIERS), IEEE (2016) 3230-3234

Universal behavior of load distribution in scale-free networks. K I Goh, B Kahng, D Kim, Physical Review Letters. 8727278701Goh, K.I., Kahng, B., Kim, D.: Universal behavior of load distribution in scale-free networks. Physical Review Letters 87(27) (2001) 278701

Betweenness centrality in large complex networks. M Barthelemy, The European Physical Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex Systems. 382Barthelemy, M.: Betweenness centrality in large complex networks. The European Physical Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex Systems 38(2) (2004) 163-168

Optimal network topologies for local search with congestion. R Guimerà, A Díaz-Guilera, F Vega-Redondo, A Cabrales, A Arenas, Physical Review Letters. 8924248701Guimerà, R., Díaz-Guilera, A., Vega-Redondo, F., Cabrales, A., Arenas, A.: Optimal network topologies for local search with congestion. Physical Review Letters 89(24) (2002) 248701

Modeling of data communication networks using dynamic complex networks and its performance studies. S Kumari, A Singh, Complex Networks & Their Applications V: Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Complex Networks and their Applications (COMPLEX NETWORKS 2016. Springer69329Kumari, S., Singh, A.: Modeling of data communication networks using dynamic complex networks and its performance studies. In: Complex Networks & Their Applications V: Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Complex Networks and their Applications (COMPLEX NETWORKS 2016). Volume 693., Springer (2016) 29

Structure and tie strengths in mobile communication networks. J P Onnela, J Saramäki, J Hyvönen, G Szabó, D Lazer, K Kaski, J Kertész, A L Barabási, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 10418Onnela, J.P., Saramäki, J., Hyvönen, J., Szabó, G., Lazer, D., Kaski, K., Kertész, J., Barabási, A.L.: Structure and tie strengths in mobile communication networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104(18) (2007) 7332-7336