A weighted FDR procedure under discrete and heterogeneous null distributions


Xiongzhi Chen xiongzhi.chen@wsu.edu 
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Washington State University
PullmanWAUSA

R W Doerge 
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Carnegie Mellon University
PittsburghPAUSA

Department of Biological Sciences
Carnegie Mellon University
PittsburghPAUSA

Sanat K Sarkar 
Department of Statistical Science and Fox School of Business
Temple University
PhiladelphiaPAUSA

Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Correspondence Xiongzhi Chen
Washington State University
99164PullmanWAUSA

A weighted FDR procedure under discrete and heterogeneous null distributions
10.1002/bimj.201900216Received: 21 July 2019 Revised: 21 January 2020 Accepted: 22 January 2020R E S E A R C H PA P E R
This article has earned an open data badge "Reproducible Research" for making publicly available the code necessary to reproduce the reported results. The results reported in this article were reproduced partially due to their computational complexity.AbstractMultiple testing (MT) with false discovery rate (FDR) control has been widely conducted in the "discrete paradigm" where p-values have discrete and heterogeneous null distributions. However, in this scenario existing FDR procedures often lose some power and may yield unreliable inference, and for this scenario there does not seem to be an FDR procedure that partitions hypotheses into groups, employs data-adaptive weights and is nonasymptotically conservative. We propose a weighted p-value-based FDR procedure, "weighted FDR (wFDR) procedure" for short, for MT in the discrete paradigm that efficiently adapts to both heterogeneity and discreteness of p-value distributions. We theoretically justify the nonasymptotic conservativeness of the wFDR procedure under independence, and show via simulation studies that, for MT based on p-values of binomial test or Fisher's exact test, it is more powerful than six other procedures. The wFDR procedure is applied to two examples based on discrete data, a drug safety study, and a differential methylation study, where it makes more discoveries than two existing methods.K E Y W O R D Sdiscrete and heterogeneous null distributions, false discovery rate, grouped hypotheses testing, proportion of true null hypotheses, weighted multiple testing procedure 1544

INTRODUCTION

Multiple testing (MT) aiming at false discovery rate (FDR) control has been routinely conducted in various scientific endeavors. Given the deluge of discrete data collected in genomics (Auer & Doerge, 2010), genetics (Gilbert, 2005), drug safety monitoring, and other areas, researchers frequently need to conduct MT in the "discrete paradigm" where test statistics have discrete and different distributions under null hypotheses. Two major types of tests conducted in the discrete paradigm are the binomial test (BT) and Fisher's exact test (FET). As reported by Gilbert (2005) and Pounds and Cheng (2006), discreteness and heterogeneity of p-value distributions under null hypotheses can reduce the power of two of the most popular FDR procedures, that is, the "BH" procedure in Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) and "Storey's procedure" in Storey, Taylor, and Siegmund (2004), which were initially designed for the "continuous paradigm" where test statistics have a continuous and identical distribution under null hypotheses. This has triggered considerable efforts to improve these two procedures and other procedures.

To adjust existing procedures for discrete distributions, minimal achievable significance levels (Gilbert, 2005;Heyse, 2011), less conservative estimators of the proportion 0 of true null hypotheses (Chen, Doerge, & Heyse, 2018;Liang, 2016;Pounds & Cheng, 2006) or randomized p-values (Habiger, 2015) have been used. On the other hand, to account for heterogeneous null distributions, almost all methods assume a Bayesian two-component mixture model or a variant of this model where a p-value under the true null hypothesis is (conditionally) uniformly distributed on the compact interval [0, 1]; see Cai and Sun (2009) and Ignatiadis, Klaus, Zaugg, and Huber (2016). Clearly, these models are inappropriate for p-values of BTs or FETs. Even though Hu, Zhao, and Zhou (2010) proposed the group Benjamini-Hochberg (GBH) procedure that is able to accommodate heterogeneous null distributions, they assumed that groups of hypotheses with different proportions of true null hypotheses exist, and were only able to prove the asymptotic conservativeness of GBH by assuming that various empirical processes converge to the two-component mixture model. Finally, even though the work of Döhler, Durand, and Roquain (2018) is able to accommodate discreteness and heterogeneity of p-value distributions, its authors admitted that their methods may be more conservative than the BH procedure (due to their construction of critical constants).


Main contributions

In this work, we propose a weighted p-value-based FDR (wFDR) procedure to better tackle both heterogeneity and discreteness of p-value distributions. The wFDR procedure utilizes p-value grouping and weighting, does not employ any Bayesian mixture model, does not assume the existence of groups of hypotheses with different proportions of true null hypotheses, and is theoretically shown to be conservative nonasymptotically regardless of how p-values are partitioned into groups.

To tackle heterogeneity, we propose a new grouping algorithm that partitions hypotheses into groups such that distributions of p-values within a group are less heterogeneous, so that the wFDR procedure can better utilize information from p-value distributions within a group. The algorithm is easily implemented for distributions of p-values of BTs or FETs even when there are a large number of hypotheses to test and each p-value cumulative distribution function (CDF) has a large support. Once hypotheses are partitioned into groups, the wFDR procedure employs data-adaptive weights constructed by Nandi and Sarkar (2018), which are based on a different strategy than the plug-in strategy of Hu et al. (2010). The groupwise weights account for the discreteness and remaining heterogeneity of p-value distributions for each group, and potentially utilize the power characteristics of the tests. Finally, the wFDR procedure applies the BH procedure to the weighted p-values for MT. When all p-values are uniformly distributed on [0,1] under the null hypothesis, the wFDR procedure reduces to the "data-adaptive one-way GBH" procedure of Nandi and Sarkar (2018) if the hypotheses are partitioned into at least two groups, or to Storey's procedure of Storey et al. (2004) if the hypotheses are considered as one group.

When p-values are super-uniform under null hypotheses and are independent, we prove that the wFDR procedure is conservative nonasymptotically. Under the same setting, we provide in Appendix B a nonasymptotic upper bound on the FDR of the wFDR procedure when the weights are constructed using the proportion estimator of Chen et al. (2018). This bound also applies to the FDR of the adaptive GBH procedure of Hu et al. (2010), and is perhaps the best such bound. A sufficient condition is given such that the wFDR procedure is more powerful than the "adaptive BH procedure" (aBH) in Chen et al. (2018). For MT based on p-values of BTs and FETs, we empirically show that the wFDR procedure is much more powerful than this adaptive procedure, the "randomized Storey procedure" of Habiger (2015) and four other procedures, and that the stability of the wFDR procedure is robust to the number of groups that the hypotheses are partitioned into and the value of its tuning parameter.

An package https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/fdrDiscreteNull/index.html fdrDiscreteNull is available on https://cran.r-project.org/ CRAN to implement the wFDR procedure and other procedures compared in this article.


Relation to existing weighted FDR procedures

There are quite a few multiple testing procedures (MTPs) that are based on p-value weighting or grouping and that aim at conservative FDR control. They can be roughly categorized into four classes:

• Class I: methods that assume p-values follow the uniform distribution on [0,1] marginally or conditionally under the null hypothesis, some of which have weights that are obtained from complicated optimization algorithms; see, for example, Benjamini and Hochberg (1997), Genovese, Roeder, and Wasserman (2006), Finos and Salmaso (2007), Cai and Sun (2009), van de Wiel (2009), andIgnatiadis et al. (2016).

• Class II: methods that assume p-values marginally under the null hypothesis are super-uniform and that are not theoretically guaranteed to be conservative nonasymptotically, some of which have weights that potentially satisfy restrictive conditions; see Hu et al. (2010) and Li and Barber (2019).

• Class III: methods that assume the existence of groups of hypotheses with different proportions of true null hypotheses; see Cai and Sun (2009) and Hu et al. (2010).

• Class IV: methods that employ weights that are induced by an informative covariate and are assumed to be independent of their corresponding p-values under the null hypothesis, or that employ an informative variable that is independent of p-value under the null hypothesis and a functional proportion of true null hypothesis; see Ignatiadis et al. (2016), Chen, Robinson, and Storey (2019), and Ignatiadis and Huber (2018). More specifically, the "independent hypothesis weighting (IHW)" method of Ignatiadis et al. (2016) and Ignatiadis and Huber (2018) is a weighted p-value based BH procedure, uses an informative covariate to partition the hypotheses into groups, weights all p-values in each group of hypotheses by the same weight, and compute the optimal weights subject to a nominal FDR level.

In the "discrete paradigm" where p-values have discrete and heterogeneous null distributions and where hypotheses do not necessarily form groups that have different proportions of true null hypotheses, none of the methods in Classes I-III are applicable in terms of their modeling assumptions or are fully reliable in terms of their nonasymptotic FDR conservativeness. Further, for methods in Class IV, an unresolved issue is to ensure that the induced weights are independent of their corresponding pvalues under the null hypothesis, or to ensure the independence between the informative variable and the p-value under the true null hypothesis. By contrast, the wFDR procedure is free from the shortcomings of all methods mentioned above. Finally, unlike the procedures of Döhler et al. (2018), the wFDR procedure is often more powerful than the BH procedure (as shown by our simulation studies) and does not need to search over subsets of p-values.


Organization of article

The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the rationale for the wFDR procedure, new grouping algorithm, wFDR procedure, and a theorem on the conservativeness of the wFDR procedure. A simulation study is provided in Section 3. Two applications of the wFDR procedure with discrete data are provided in Section 4. The article is concluded by Section 5. All proofs and the wFDR procedure with plug-in weights are provided in the Appendices.


A WEIGHTED FDR PROCEDURE FOR DISCRETE PARADIGM

We will illustrate the rationale behind the wFDR procedure using MT means of Poisson and binomial random variables (see Sections 2.1 and 2.2), and introduce the new grouping algorithm (see Section 2.3) and the wFDR procedure with its nonasymptotic conservativeness (see Section 2.4).


Multiple testing Poisson means or binomial means

In a typical MT setting, there are null hypotheses to be tested simultaneously, among which 0 are true and the rest 1 are false. Further, associated with each hypothesis is a test statistic and its p-value. The proportion 0 of true null hypotheses is defined as 0 = 0 ∕ , and a MTP is usually applied to the p-values. Our rationale for the wFDR procedure comes from analyzing MT equality of Poisson means or binomial means, where the BT or FET is used; see Lehmann and Romano (2005) for details on these two types of test.

MT of Poisson means can be described as follows. Let ( ) denote a Poisson random variable (or its distribution) with mean . Assume there are 2 mutually independent Poisson random variables ( ) with = 1, 2 and = 1, … , , such that ( 1 ) and

( 2 ) form a pair for each . To assess how many pairs of these Poisson random variables have equal means, for each the BT is conducted to test the null 0 ∶ 1 = 2 versus the alternative 1 ∶ 1 ≠ 2 , a two-sided p-value is obtained, and then an MTP is applied to the p-values to determine which null hypotheses are true.

MT of binomial means can be described similarly. Let ( , ) denote the binomial random variable (or its distribution) with probability of success and number of trials . Assume there are 2 mutually independent binomial random variables ( , ) with = 1, 2 and = 1, … , , such that ( 1 , , 1 ) and ( 2 , , 2 ) form a pair for each . To assess how many pairs of the binomial random variables have equal means, for each FET is conducted to test the null 0 ∶ 1 = 2 versus the alternative 1 ∶ 1 ≠ 2 , a two-sided p-value is obtained, and then an MTP is applied to the p-values to determine which null hypotheses are true. The construction of an FET is illustrated in Table 1.


Rationale for the weighted FDR procedure

The rationale behind grouping hypotheses and weighting p-values are two-fold. The heterogeneity of p-value distributions when conducting the BT or FET is due to conditioning on different observed total counts or marginal counts. However, for two discrete T A B L E 1 A 2-by-2 table that illustrates, for Fisher's exact test (FET), how the joint marginal vector * = ( 1 , 2 , ) is formed based on observed counts from two binomial distributions ( , ) for = 1, 2


Observed Unobserved Total

( 1 , 1 ) p-value distributions obtained from either test to be close to each other under the null hypotheses, it is necessary that the observed total or marginal counts be close to each other. Therefore, partitioning hypotheses into groups according to the similarity between their associated p-value distributions helps gather statistical evidence of similar strength, accounts for the heterogeneity of the p-value distributions, and may lead to more powerful decision rules.

On the other hand, by the definitions of BT and FET, a conditional test induces a "prior probability" for a null hypothesis to be true. For example, given pairs of independent Poisson distributions such that 0 pairs have equal means, and let the th null hypothesis be that the th pair of Poisson distributions have equal means. Then 0 = 0 ∕ . When BT is used to test the th null hypothesis based on the total of the observed counts of the th pair of Poisson random variables, a prior probabilitỹ0 on if the th null hypothesis is true can be thought of as being induced by the observed total count. The same reasoning applies when FET is conducted. Thus, MT based on p-values of conditional tests, even though being cast in the frequentist paradigm, has a strong Bayesian interpretation, in that each null hypothesis can be regarded as having its own prior probability of being true and the p-value distributions are heterogeneous.

Accordingly, the wFDR procedure uses the new grouping algorithm to partition discrete p-values into groups so that p-values in each group have less heterogeneous distributions, forms weights for p-values in each group using the concept of Bayesian FDR (Efron, Tibshirani, Storey, & Tusher, 2001), and interpolates the corresponding Bayesian decision rule; see Section 2.4 for details on the wFDR procedure.


A new grouping algorithm

For = 1, … , , let denote the status of the th null hypothesis, such that = 0 or 1 means that the th null hypothesis is true or false. Let be the p-value associated with the th null hypothesis. We take the convention that any CDF is rightcontinuous with left limits and let  be the set of CDFs.  contains many types of CDFs that are commonly encountered in MT. For example, it contains the CDF of the standard uniform random variable, the CDFs of p-values induced by permutation tests, and the CDFs of p-values of BTs or FETs. The metric we take to group CDFs is the infinity norm for functions. Namely, the distance between any two and in  is defined as
( , ) = ‖ − ‖ ∞ = sup ∈ℝ | ( ) − ( )|.
(1)

Clearly, the distance is 0 between any two CDFs of p-values that are uniformly distributed with the same discontinuities. For example, this is true for the CDFs of p-values under the null hypothesis in the continuous paradigm and for any two p-value CDFs obtained from permutation test. For a p-value, call its distribution under the null hypothesis the "null distribution" and that under the alternative hypothesis the "alternative distribution". Let be the null distribution of p-value . Set  = { ∶ = 1, … , }. To partition  into * groups with minimal group size * such that each group contains less heterogenous CDFs, we propose a grouping algorithm  as Algorithm 1. The grouping algorithm accounts for the practical need of a minimal group size. Once the set  is partitioned, the set of null hypotheses and that of p-values are partitioned accordingly. When the null distributions of p-values are identical such as those in the continuous paradigm or induced by permutation test, ≡ 0 and  automatically forms one group. Further, we do not assume that a group structure exists among hypotheses.

Two attractive features of the algorithm are as follows: (1) for a BT, its null distribution is determined by the observed total count from the two Poisson random variables, and therefore grouping CDFs of p-values of BTs can be equivalently based on the Euclidean norm of the observed total counts without computing the supremum norm; (2) for an FET (illustrated in Table 1), its null distribution is determined by the joint marginal vector * = ( 1 , 2 , ) from the two binomial random variables, and therefore grouping CDFs of p-values of FETs can be approximately based on the Euclidean norm on the observed total counts if the binomial variables have the similar number of trials without computing the supremum norm. This will greatly speed up computing the distances between discrete CDFs in order to form groups of hypotheses for BTs and FETs. Thus, the grouping scheme used in the simulation study in Section 3 approximately equivalently implements Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1: Grouping algorithm to partition p-value CDFs into * groups with minimal group size * and merging size * The grouping Algorithm 1 basically works as follows. First the distance between each pair of and with ≠ is computed, and the maximum * of s obtained. Note that = 0. Pick an initial radius = (2 * ) −1 * . Secondly, for each ∈ , form the subset ( ) of CDFs such that their distances from are upper bounded by ; find among subsets ( ), = 1, … , one, denoted by * ( ), that has the most members, and remove it from . We call this "identification and removal process (IRP)." Note that * ( ) is a candidate group we have formed. Apply the IRP to the rest of the CDFs, and repeat it by adjusting the value for until * groups are obtained and no group has less than * members. We remark that implementing  according to Algorithm 1 and computing supremum norms can take some time when is large and each has a large support.

In Algorithm 1, whenever the current radius in "input" is changed in the inner "while" loop into some ′ , we say that a new iteration inside  is started with the new radius ′ . The merging size ℎ * is set to be no less than the minimal group size * to speed up grouping and ensure that  terminates in a finite number of iterations. However, the final radius the algorithm assumes to successfully form * groups with minimal group size * may be different than the initial radius . For notational simplicity, we will still use to denote the final radius. As is a metric on the Cartesian product  ⊗ , the grouping algorithm  always produces out of  at least * − 1 -metric balls of radii upper bounded by .  may form the * th group by merging the last group with at most ℎ * members or by taking the last ℎ * members; see the first subcase of the casẽ= * or the second subcase of the casẽ= * − 1 in Algorithm 1. In this case, the * th group may contain p-value CDFs that are more than 2 units away in the -metric.

For each natural number , let ℕ = {1, … , }, and for a set , let | | be its cardinality and its indicator. The grouping algorithm  retains maximal within-group homogeneity in the sense of the following result.

Theorem 1. Let be the set of partitions of  = { ∶ = 1, … , } into * ≥ 2 groups that consist of at least * − 1 -metric balls of radii no larger than . Let̃be the th group produced by  and = |̃| for each 1 ≤ ≤ * , and let { ′ } * −1 =1 be the cardinalities of any set of * − 1 -metric balls of radii no larger than produced by any  ∈ . Without loss of generality, assume ′ s are ordered descendingly in for 1 ≤ ≤ * − 1. Then ≥ ′ for 1 ≤ ≤ * − 1.

The proof of Theorem 1 follows directly from the definition of  and is thus omitted. Roughly speaking, Theorem 1 says that among all partitions of size * ≥ 2 of the set  of CDFs into at least * − 1 -metric balls of radii no larger than , each of the first * − 1 groups produced by  contains the maximal number of CDFs and thus achieves maximal within-group homogeneity in terms of distributional differences.

To illustrate the reduction in computation when the algorithm is implemented using the Euclidean norm, let us consider = 5 BTs and { } 5 =1 with observed total counts 1 = 2, 2 = 3, 3 = 4, 4 = 8 and 5 = 1, respectively. Then the CDFs { } 5 =1 can be partitioned into two groups by putting and into one group whenever | − | ≤ 2, resulting iñ1 = { 1 , 2 , 5 } and 2 = { 3 , 4 } for the CDFs and 1 = { 1 , 2 , 5 } and 2 = { 3 , 4 } for the hypotheses. For p-values of BTs or FETs, the observed total counts or joint marginal vectors, used by the wFDR procedure (to be introduced in Section 2.4) to partition the hypotheses into groups, are not independent of the p-value distributions under the null hypothesis, and the weights employed by the wFDR procedure are not independent of the p-values under the null hypothesis. This is another distinction between the wFDR procedure and the IHW method of Ignatiadis et al. (2016) and Ignatiadis and Huber (2018).


The weighted FDR procedure and its conservativeness

Let 0 be the index set of true nulls with cardinality 0 , and 0 = 0 −1 the proportion of true nulls. We assume throughout the rest of the article that min{ ∶ ≥ 1} > 0 almost surely, in order to avoid the undetermined operation 0 × ∞ when a p-value is 0 and a weight is ∞. The wFDR procedure is stated as follows:

• Grouping: Apply the grouping algorithm  to partition  = { ∶ = 1, … , } into groups̃, = 1, … , * whose corresponding groups , = 1, … , * of indices partition the index set ℕ = {1, … , }.

• Constructing weights: Fix a ∈ (0, 1), the tuning parameter, and for each and , set
= ( − ( ) + 1 )( ( ) + * − 1 ) (1 − ) ( ) ,(2)
where (  For the wFDR procedure, the number of groups * , the minimal group size * and the merging size ℎ * need to be specified when Algorithm 1 is used to partition the hypotheses and p-values into groups, and needs to be specified and is often set to be 0.5 for discrete p-values in order to construct weights for the p-values. Note that = −1 (1 − ) −1 ( − ( ) + 1) when * = 1, and that ∕0 = ∞ is set for (2) when > 0. The weights , = 1, … , * were constructed by Nandi and Sarkar (2018) and have been adopted here. We refer the readers to Nandi and Sarkar (2018) for the intuition behind these weights, their connections with the proportion estimator of Storey et al. (2004), and their differences from the plug-in weights of Hu et al. (2010). Specifically, is the product of two estimates −1 (1 − ) −1 ( − ( ) + 1) and −1 ( ) −1 ( ( ) + * − 1), respectively, of * 0 and (1 − * 0 ) −1 (1 − 0 ), where * 0 is the proportion of true null hypotheses among the th group of hypotheses  = { ∶ ∈ }. Note that * 0 (1 − * 0 ) −1 (1 − 0 ) is the weight for group for the oracle GBH of Hu et al. (2010). We refer to as "null p-value" a p-value whose associated null hypothesis is true and as "alternative p-value" a p-value whose associated null hypothesis is false. Further, we refer to a p-value as "super-uniform" if its CDF satisfies ( ) ≤ for all ∈ [0, 1]. The following result justifies the nonasymptotic conservativeness of the wFDR procedure, and provides a condition under which the wFDR procedure nonasymptotically has no less rejections than the "aBH procedure" of Chen et al. (2018).

Theorem 2. If { } =1 are independent and the null p-values are super-uniform, then the wFDR procedure is conservative. On the other hand, let̂( 1) 0 be the estimator of 0 that is employed by the aBH procedure. Then on the event that
(1) 0 ≥ max 1≤ ≤ * ,(3)
the set of hypotheses rejected by the wFDR procedure contains that rejected by the aBH procedure.

Theorem 2 asserts that the wFDR procedure is conservative nonasymptotically regardless of how the null hypotheses are partitioned and the feasible value of the tuning parameter. Further, as 0 ≤̂( 1) 0 ≤ 1 by default and the set of hypotheses rejected Note. The minimal number of tuning parameters for wFDR is 2 and includes the number of groups to partition hypotheses into (using the "quantile-based partition" scheme to be introduced in Step 3 of Section 3.1) and the tuning parameter for the weights that has been introduced in Section 2.4 by the aBH procedure contains that by the BH procedure, the condition "̂( 1) 0 ≥ max 1≤ ≤ * " ensures that the wFDR procedure is not less powerful than either the aBH procedure or BH procedure. We remark that the new algorithm  is employed to enhance the power of the weighted procedure when p-values have heterogeneous null distributions. In fact, Theorem 2 holds when  is replaced by any partition of the null hypotheses, as can be seen from its proof. Theorem 2 extends the conservativeness of the adaptive one-way BH in Nandi and Sarkar (2018) from MT in the continuous paradigm to the discrete paradigm. Condition (3) in Theorem 2 is simple, easy to check but a bit restrictive. Relaxing (3) involves a careful study on the orderings of the weighted p-values induced by the two procedures compared by Theorem 2. This is a very complicated task when the number of hypotheses to test is large, which we will not pursue here.


SIMULATION STUDY

We present a simulation study on MT based on p-values of BTs and FETs to compare the wFDR procedure with six other procedures: the BH procedure ("BH"), the aBH procedure of Chen et al. (2018), the procedure (BHH) of Heyse (2011), the randomized Storey procedure (SR) of Habiger (2015) (with tuning parameter ′ = 0.5 because other methods such as "smoother" and "bootstrap" provided by the package to determine ′ seems to make the resulting SR a bit anticonservative in the simulation studies to be presented next), the "aHSU" procedure of Döhler et al. (2018), and the "BH+" procedure of Chen (2019). The BH+ procedure is proven by Chen (2019) to be conservative and will be applied to two-sided mid-p-values and be denoted by "BH+MidP"; a definition of mid-p-value can be found in Hwang and Yang (2001). For the simulated data, there do not exist groups of hypotheses for which each group has its own proportion of true null hypotheses, and condition (3) in Theorem 2 is not necessarily satisfied. Table 2 provides some features of these seven FDR procedures. 2. Two types of discrete data are generated as follows:


Simulation design under independence

(a) Poisson data: Generate means 1 , = 1, … , from the Pareto distribution (7, 7) with scale parameter 7 and shape parameter 7. Generate 1 s independently from (1.5, 5). Set 2 = 1 for = 1, … , 0 , 2 = 1 −1 for 0 + 1 ≤ ≤ 0 + [0.5 1 ], and 2 = 1 for 0 + [0.5 1 ] + 1 ≤ ≤ . For each and , generate a count from the Poisson distribution ( ) with mean . For each , conduct the BT to assess the null 0 ∶ 1 = 2 versus the alternative 1 ∶ 1 ≠ 2 and obtain two-sided p-value .  2 table as Table 1 for which the observed counts are { } 2 =1 and the marginal vector is * = ( , , 1 + 2 ); apply FET to test the null 0 ∶ 1 = 2 versus the alternative 1 ∶ 1 ≠ 2 and obtain twosided p-value .

3. Apply the competing FDR procedures and record statistics for the performance of each procedure. In order to implement the wFDR procedure, let̂= 1 + 2 for each , set , = 0, … , * as the 100 −1 * th percentile of {̂} =1 , and partition the hypotheses into * groups, for which group = {1 ≤ ≤ ∶ −1 ≤̂< } for 1 ≤ ≤ * − 1 and * = {1 ≤ ≤ ∶ * −1 ≤̂≤ * }. This partitioning scheme is based on the Euclidian distance between the observed total counts for both types of tests, as discussed in Section 2.3. 4. For each combination of the triple 0 , and * , repeat Steps 2 and 3 300 times.

For each test, its two-sided p-value is computed according to the formula in Agresti (2002), that is, it is the probability computed under the null hypothesis of observing values of the test statistic that are equally likely to or less likely than the observed test statistic. Note that once the number of groups * is specified, grouping by the quantiles of the observed total counts (for the Poisson random variables or binomial random variables), as done by Step 3 above, automatically determines the minimal group size * and makes unnecessary to specify the merging size ℎ * . The simulation design for the binomial data is similar to that employed by Gilbert (2005) for a study on the genetics of immunological difference to the HIV, and that for the Poisson data is motivated by differential expression studies (e.g., in Lister et al. (2008) or Chen and Storey (2015)) based on RNA-seq technology.


Simulation design under dependence

Set = 5,000. The simulation design to generate dependent binomial and Poisson data is as follows:

1. Construct a block diagonal, correlation matrix with 100 blocks of equal sizes as follows: for the first 20 blocks each block has identical off-diagonal entries 0.1, for the second 20 blocks each block as identical off-diagonal entries 0.2, ..., and for the fifth 20 blocks each block as identical off-diagonal entries 0.5. Namely, each block of corresponds to a random vector whose entries are equally correlated. Note that there is no specific reason for choosing 100 blocks for such a .

2. Generate a realization = ( 1 , … , ) from the -dimensional normal distribution with zero mean and correlation matrix , and obtain the vector = ( 1 , … , ) such that = Φ( ), where Φ is the CDF of the standard normal random variable. By its definition, , = 1, … , have a block dependence structure inherited from .

3. Maintain the parameters and other settings used in Section 3.1; generate -dimensional vectors of binomial or Poisson random variables using the vector as the quantiles of the corresponding marginal binomial or Poisson distribution. Namely, for each ∈ {1, 2} and ∈ {1, … , }, the generated count corresponds to quantile of the CDF of ( ) or ( , ).

We use the above design to generate vectors of binomial or Poisson random variables whose correlation matrices are block diagonal and approximately positive, because this type of dependence has been a popular touchstone to assess the performance of an FDR procedure under dependence. For this simulation setting, we will only present the performance of the wFDR procedure when it partitions the hypotheses into three groups and employs tuning parameter = 0.5.


Simulation results

We use the expectation of the true discovery proportion (TDP), defined as the ratio of the number of rejected false null hypotheses to the total number of false null hypotheses, to measure the power of an FDR procedure. We also report the standard deviation of the FDP of a procedure because a smaller standard deviation implies that the corresponding procedure is more stable in its FDR. Note that FDR is the expectation of FDP. As the aHSU procedure only has software implementation for MT based on p-values of FETs, it was not implemented for the scenario of MT based on p-values of BTs. However, to visualize the simulation results via in the software , we set the FDP and TDP of the aHSU procedure to be zero for this scenario. First, we discuss the performances of the procedures under independence. Figure 1 presents the FDRs and powers of the procedures , for which wFDR has partitioned the hypotheses into three groups and used = 0.5. The simulation results show that (a) all procedures but BHH are conservative. This is reasonable because BHH has not been proven to be conservative. All procedures are stable, that is, having small standard deviations for the FDPs. (b) wFDR is the most powerful, BHH the second, SR the third, BH + MidP the fourth, aBH the third, and BH and aHSU the least. (c) The smaller the proportion 0 is, the more F I G U R E 1 FDR and power of each procedure, where the weighted FDR (wFDR) procedure partitions the hypotheses into three groups and employs tuning parameter = 0.5 Note. In the legend, "sd(FDP)" is the estimated standard deviation of the FDP of a procedure. Each type of points from left to right in each subfigure are obtained successively under nominal FDR levels 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2. The wFDR procedure is the most powerful, and the smaller 0 is, the more improvement in power the wFDR procedure has over the other procedures improvement in power wFDR has over the other procedures. Note that the top right panel of Figure 1 seems to show that BH is more powerful than aHSU when ≥ 0.15 and 0 = 0.5, which deserves an investigation.

For wFDR, Figures 2 and 3, respectively, present its FDR and power, as the number * of groups the procedure partitions the hypotheses into ranges in {3, 7, 10} and as the tuning parameter ranges in {0.25, 0.5, 0.75}. These figures show the following: (a) Increasing the value of * usually does not decrease the power or increase the FDR of wFDR, or increase the standard deviation of the FDP or TDP of wFDR. (b) The power of wFDR may stop increasing and its FDR may stop decreasing once * is large, for example, when * > 7 for the simulations. This is reasonable because the data-adaptive weights will likely increase with * when * is large and beyond a specific value (that is determined by the distributional properties of the p-values), thus reducing the power of wFDR. (c) Changing the value of does not considerably affect the FDR, power, or stability of wFDR.

The performances of wFDR when = 0.5 and * = 7 or 10, respectively, are compared to those of the other six procedures. In these settings, wFDR is stable and is still the most powerful. Further, with * = 3, we assess the power of wFDR when the null hypotheses are partitioned by k-means (applied to the 2-vectors each of which consists of the difference between the two F I G U R E 2 FDR and power of the weighted FDR procedure when it partitions the hypotheses into different "number of groups" and uses tuning parameter = 0.5 Note. In the legend, "sd(FDP)" is the estimated standard deviation of the FDP of a procedure. Each type of points from left to right in each subfigrue are obtained successively under nominal FDR levels 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2. We see that increasing the number of groups to partition the hypotheses into can increase the power of the wFDR procedure. However, beyond a value for the number of groups, the power of the wFDR procedure stops increasing and may decrease observed counts and the total of the two observed counts for each hypothesis), and found that wFDR based on this partitioning method is less powerful than it is based on quantiles of the observed total counts (stated in the simulation design in Section 3.1). To save space, the associated visualizations are not included in the article.

Finally, we discuss the performance of the wFDR procedure under (approximate) positive dependence (see the simulation design in Section 3.2) and with = 0.5, which is presented by Figure 4. First, there is strong evidence that wFDR is conservative and competitive in power, regardless of when it is applied to p-values of BTs or FETs. Second, we have observed that each FDR procedure in comparison can have counterintuitively large power and very small FDR when the nominal FDR level increases and 0 is not very close to 1. Such behavior of the procedures for dependent discrete p-values does not seem to have been reported elsewhere before. A partial explanation for this may be the clustering of signals associated with the false null hypotheses and that of noise associated with the true null hypotheses, both due to dependence, so that the wFDR procedure can have very low or high power depending on if its random rejection threshold badly or well splits the null and alternative p-values. However, F I G U R E 3 FDR and power of the weighted FDR procedure when it partitions the hypotheses into three groups but employs different values of "tuning parameter" Note. In the legend, "sd(FDP)" is the estimated standard deviation of the FDP of a procedure. Each type of points from left to right in each subfigure are obtained successively under nominal FDR levels 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2. We see that changing the value of does not considerably affect the FDR or power of the wFDR procedure the exact reason deserves further investigation because in general we do not have a good understanding of the behavior of the random rejection threshold of a MTP or the empirical distribution of adaptively weighted p-values under dependence.


T WO APPLICATIONS TO MULTIPLE TESTING WITH DISCRETE DATA

We provide two applications of the wFDR procedure to MT based on discrete data, one for drug safety study and the other differential methylation study, where p-values have discrete and heterogeneous null distributions. The wFDR procedure will be implemented with = 0.5 (based on our experience with MT with discrete p-values) and the grouping strategy in Step 3 of the simulation design in Section 3.1, and it will be compared with the BH procedure, "aBH" procedure of Chen et al. (2018) and the "aHSU" procedure of Döhler et al. (2018). The proportion of true null hypotheses in each group and that for all hypotheses will be estimated by the estimator of Chen et al. (2018). F I G U R E 4 FDR and power of each FDR procedure when it is applied to two-sided p-values and when the weighted FDR (wFDR) procedure partitions the hypotheses into three groups and employs tuning parameter = 0.5 Note. In the legend, "sd(FDP)" is the estimated standard deviation of the FDP of a procedure. Each type of points from left to right in each subfigure are obtained successively under nominal FDR levels 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2. We see that wFDR is competitive in power


Application to drug safety study

A drug safety study was conducted to assess if a drug is associated with amnesia. The data set, available from Heller and Gur (2012), records the number of amnesia cases and the total number of adverse events for each of the 2466 drugs. Among the total of 686,911 reported adverse events, 2,051 involves amnesia cases. For each drug, the null hypothesis is that the drug is not associated with amnesia, and there are 2,466 null hypotheses to test simultaneously. The null hypothesis for drug will be tested by FET based on Table 3. For this study, it is known that the number of drugs that are associated with amnesia is small, that is, the proportion 0 of true null hypotheses is close to 1.

This data set has been analyzed by Heller and Gur (2012) using one-sided p-values of FETs and their FDR procedures. Here, we reanalyze it using two-sided p-values of FETs and the wFDR procedure. From Chavant, Favrelière, Lafay-Chebassier, Plazanet, and Pérault-Pochat (2011), we know that Benzodiazepines and anticholinergic drugs are often responsible for amnesia. Based on this information, the wFDR procedure partitions the hypotheses into three groups, reflecting the side effects of the two known types of drugs and that of the rest in the data. The three groups have 782, 848, and 816 hypotheses, estimated groupwise T A B L E 3 A 2-by-2 table used by Fisher's exact test (FET) to test if drug is associated with amnesia: 1 is the number of amnesia cases reported for drug , and 1 + 2 the number of cases reported to have adverse events for drug


Amnesia Not amnesia

Drug 1 2

Other drugs 2,051-1 686,911-2,051− 2 proportions of true null hypotheses being 1, 1, and 0.98650 (which is consistent with the fact that only few of the drugs might be associated with amnesia), and weights 26.4399019, 4.9129027, and 0.4899531, respectively. The proportion 0 is estimated to be 1 by aBH, and condition (3) does not hold. At an FDR level of = 0.05, the wFDR procedure finds 39 drugs to be associated with amnesia, the aBH procedure 36, the BH procedure 36, and aHSU 43. As the wFDR procedure employs weights and reranks p-values, it may claim a different set of drugs to be associated with amnesia than that found by the BH procedure. In fact, 37 of the drugs found by the wFDR procedure are different than those found by the BH procedure. Drugs found by the wFDR procedure but not by the BH procedure to be associated with amnesia include "Sirolimus," "Vitamin B substances," "Xipamide," and "Raloxifene." Sirolimus, also known as "Rapamycin," is able to induce amnesia in rats, and the FDA has approved its use on humans for posttraumatic stress disorder treatment; see, for example, Glover, Ressler, and Davis (2010) and Tischmeyer et al. (2003). However, none of the methods in Heller and Gur (2012) identified Sirolimus to be associated with amnesia, and nor did aHSU. Interestingly, Bupropion is identified by the BH procedure and the two discrete procedures of Heller and Gur (2012) but not by the wFDR procedure to be associated with amnesia. Note that Chavant et al. (2011) reported some evidence on the association between Bupropion and memory disorders.


Application to methylation study

The data set, available from Lister et al. (2008), was obtained on a study on cytosine methylation in two unreplicated lines of Arabidopsis thaliana, wild-type (Col-0) and mutant defective (Met1-3). Corresponding to each cytosine, the null hypothesis is "the cytosine is not differentially methylated between the two lines." The aim is to identity differentially methylated cytosines. It is known that the number of differentially methylated cytosines is relatively large for A. thaliana, that is, the proportion 0 of true null hypotheses is relatively small compared to 1.

There are 22,265 cytosines in each line, and each cytosine in each line has only one observation, that is, a discrete count that indicates the level of methylation. We choose cytosines whose total counts for both lines are greater than 5 and whose count for each line does not exceed 25, so as to filter out genes with unreliable low counts and to better utilize for MT the jumps in the discrete p-value distributions corresponding to genes without large counts. This yields 3,525 cytosines, that is, 3,525 null hypotheses to test simultaneously. We model the counts for each cytosine in the two lines by two binomial distributions whose numbers of trials are, respectively, the total counts for all cytosines in individual lines, and use FET to test the null hypothesis for each cytosine. Two-sided p-values of the tests are collected, and the FDR procedures or estimators are applied to these p-values.

Based on the evidence in Zhang et al. (2006) that methylated cytosines may belong to pericentromeric heterochromatin, repetitive sequences, and regions producing small interfering RNAs, the wFDR procedure partitions the 3,525 null hypotheses into three groups that have 1,097, 1,171. and 1,257 hypotheses whose groupwise proportions of true null hypotheses are estimated to be 0.7602744, 0.5744432, and 0.6996581 (which is consistent with the evidence on the three types of genomic regions for cytosine methylation), and whose weights are 0.7956344, 0.5212311, and 0.7279440, respectively. The proportion 0 is estimated to be 0.6756938 by aBH, and condition (3) does not hold. At an FDR level of = 0.05, the wFDR procedure finds 449 differentially methylated cytosines, the aBH procedure 432, the BH procedure 326, and aHSU 426.


DISCUSSION

We have proposed a new grouping algorithm and a wFDR procedure for MT in the discrete paradigm where p-value distributions are discrete and heterogeneous and null p-values are super-uniform. Under this setting, we have theoretically justified that the wFDR procedure is nonasymptotically conservative under independence, regardless of how the null hypotheses are partitioned into groups or the feasible value of its tuning parameter. For MT based on p-values of the BT and FET, we have empirically shown that the wFDR procedure is considerably more powerful than six other FDR procedures under independence, and provided numerical evidence on its nonasymptotic conservativeness and competitive power performance (relative to these other procedures) under positive dependence. With regard to the number of groups to partition the hypotheses into, we suggest using domain knowledge on the data for this purpose. If such knowledge is not available, we recommend choosing a number that balances the degree of heterogeneity of p-value distributions within each group and the minimal group size.

We did not study the asymptotic conservativeness of the wFDR procedure under the "weak dependence" assumption proposed by Storey et al. (2004). Once the wFDR procedure partitions hypotheses into groups, this assumption equivalently requires that the empirical distributions of the null p-values and alternative p-values for each group, respectively, converge almost surely to two continuous functions, and that the proportion of true null hypotheses for each group converges. In the discrete paradigm of MT, we prefer not to employ such an assumption because it is usually invalid. However, assuming the assumption is sensible, the asymptotic conservativeness of the wFDR procedure follows directly from that of the data-adaptive one-way GBH procedure of Nandi and Sarkar (2018).

The method we have used to construct data-adaptive weights uses a tuning parameter. This raises the interesting task of finding the values of the tuning parameter and the number of groups that maximize the power of the wFDR procedure subject to a nominal FDR upper bound. Further, in our simulation studies, we have observed considerable power improvement of the wFDR procedure over the procedures of Habiger (2015), Döhler et al. (2018), and Chen (2019). However, it is challenging to derive simple, analytic conditions for which the wFDR procedure has no less rejections than these three procedures because the former uses discrete p-values and the latter three use randomized p-values, a complicated step-up critical sequence, or mid p-values, respectively. Despite this, we can still check which among them is more powerful on a case-by-case basis. Finally, computing the supremum norms of the differences between discrete, heterogeneous p-value CDFs in order to implement the new grouping algorithm may be take some time when the number of hypotheses to test and the support of each discrete CDF are very large. So, it is important to identify other types of discrete and heterogeneous p-values distributions (different from those of BTs and FETs) for which these supremum norms can be fast computed (either approximately or equivalently). We leave these for future research.


APPENDIX A: PROOF OF THEOREM 2

The following notations and conventions will be used in the proofs of this section and Appendix B: the indicator function of a set will be written as if is described by a proposition. The null hypotheses { } =1 are partitioned into * disjoint groups , ∈ , so are the p-values { } =1 into , ∈ , and so are the weighted p-values {̃} =1 intõ, ∈ ,

where { } * =1 partition the set {1, … , }. Recall 0 as the index set of true null hypotheses among the null hypotheses. For each , let 0 = ∩ 0 , that is, 0 is the index set of true null hypotheses for group , and 0 be the cardinality of 0 . Let = ( 1 , … , ) be the vector of the p-values. For each 1 ≤ ≤ , let − be the vector obtained by removing from , and 0, the vector obtained by setting = 0 in . Now we present the arguments. The proof of the first claim is very straightforward by noting that the adaptive procedure of Chen et al. (2018) is equivalent to applying the BH procedure to weighted p-values with the weight̂( 1) 0 . So, larger weights lead to less rejections, and the set of hypotheses rejected by wFDR contains that by aBH on the event̂( 1) 0 ≥ max 1≤ ≤ * . Next, we deal with the claim on conservativeness of the wFDR procedure. This part of the proof can be simplified if we use some arguments from the proof of Theorem 2 of Nandi and Sarkar (2018), which depends on Theorems 2.1 and 3.3 in Sarkar (2008). However, for completeness, we will provide streamlined, self-contained arguments here. Let̂be the FDR of the wFDR procedure at nominal FDR level ∈ (0, 1), that is, is the nominal FDR level at which the BH procedure is applied to the weighted p-values {̃} =1 . For each 1 ≤ ≤ and 1 ≤ ≤ * , define (− ) 
( ) = ∑ ∈{1,…, }⧵{ } { ≤ } , (− ) ( ) = ∑ ∈ ⧵{ } { ≤ } and (− ) = ( − (− ) ( ) ) ( (− ) ( ) + * ) (1 − ) ( (− ) ( ) + 1 ) .
Recall defined by (2) as
= ( − ( ) + 1 )( ( ) + * − 1 ) (1 − ) ( ) .
As is nondecreasing in , setting = 0 when computing directly gives (− ) . So, ≥ (− ) for each and . Let be the number of rejections of the wFDR procedure, which will be written as ( , − ) for each and whenever needed. When the p-values are independent and the null p-values are super-uniform,
= ⎡ ⎢ ⎢ ⎢ ⎣ * ∑ =1 ∑ ∈ 0 1 ( , − ) × ⎧ ⎪ ⎨ ⎪ ⎩ ≤ ( , − ) ⎫ ⎪ ⎬ ⎪ ⎭ ⎤ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎦ (4) ≤ ⎛ ⎜ ⎜ ⎜ ⎝ * ∑ =1 ∑ ∈ 0 ⎡ ⎢ ⎢ ⎢ ⎣ 1 ( , − ) × ⎧ ⎪ ⎨ ⎪ ⎩ ≤ ( , − ) (− ) ⎫ ⎪ ⎬ ⎪ ⎭ | | | | | | | | − ⎤ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎦ ⎞ ⎟ ⎟ ⎟ ⎠ (5) ≤ * ∑ =1 ⎡ ⎢ ⎢ ⎣ ∑ ∈ 0 1 (− ) ⎤ ⎥ ⎥ ⎦ ,(6)
where from (4) to (5) we have used ≥ (− ) and then conditioned on − , and from (5) to (6) we have applied Lemma 4.2 of Sarkar (2008) for super-uniform null p-values to the conditional expectation in (5) and used the fact that ( , − ) conditional on − (and hence equivalently conditional on (− ) for all 1 ≤ ≤ * and a fixed ) is nonincreasing in . Therefore, it suffices to show *
∑ =1 [ ∑ ∈ 0 ( (− ) ) −1 ] ≤ ,(7)
which implieŝ≤ , that is, the wFDR procedure is conservative.

Let ( ) = ∑ ∈ 0 { ≤ } . Then 0 − ( ) ≤ − ( ). Let be a nonnegative, real-valued, measurable function of ( ). Then, 
[ ( ( ) )] ≥ [ ( 0 − ( ) ) ( ( ) ) max { − ( ), 1 } ] = ∑ ′ =0 ∑ ∈ 0 ⎡ ⎢ ⎢ ⎢ ⎣ { > } 1 { ( )= ′ } ( ′ ) max { − ′ , 1 } ⎤ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎦ ≥ −1 ∑ ′ =0 (1 − ) ∑ ∈ 0 [ { (− ) ( , ′ ) ≤ < (− ) ( , ′ +1) } ( ′ ) max { − ′ , 1 } ] (8) = −1 ∑ ′ =0 (1 − ) ∑ ∈ 0 ⎡ ⎢ ⎢ ⎢ ⎣ { (− ) ( ) = ′ } max { − (− ) ( ), 1 } ( (− ) ( ) ) ⎤ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎦ = ∑ ∈ 0 ⎡ ⎢ ⎢ ⎢ ⎣ (1 − ) ( (− ) ( ) ) − (− ) ( ) ⎤ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎦ , where (− ) ( , ′ ) is the ′ th largest p-value among { , ∈ ⧵ { }}[ ( ( ) )] ≥ ∑ ∈ 0 ⎡ ⎢ ⎢ ⎢ ⎣ (1 − ) ( (− ) ( ) ) − (− ) ( ) ⎤ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎦(9)
for any nonnegative, real-valued, measurable function of ( ). For each , take to be the mapping
( )  → ( ) + 1 ( ) + * = ( ) + 1 ( ) + ∑ ≠ ( ) + * . Then (9) implies * ∑ =1 [ ∑ ∈ 0 ( (− ) ) −1 ] = * ∑ =1 ⎡ ⎢ ⎢ ⎢ ⎣ ∑ ∈ 0 (1 − ) ( (− ) ( ) + 1 ) ( − (− ) ( ) ) ( (− ) ( ) + * ) ⎤ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎦ ≤ * ∑ =1 [ ( ) + 1 ( ) + * ] = ,
justifying (7). This completes the proof.


APPENDIX B: wFDR PROCEDURE WITH PLUG-IN ESTIMATOR OF ORACLE WEIGHTS

In this section, we provide a nonasymptotic FDR upper bound on the wFDR procedure that employs a plug-in proportion estimator to construct data-adaptive weights. This upper bound also applies to the adaptive GBH of Hu et al. (2010).

After the wFDR procedure partitions the hypotheses into * groups, if it employs as the weights


=̂0

(
1 −̂ * 0 ) 1 −̂0 {̂0 ≠1 } + ∞ × {̂0 =1 } for ∈ { 1, … , * } , wherê * 0 = −1 * ∑ =1̂0
| | and eacĥ0 is given by the estimator̂0 in Chen et al. (2018) as an estimate of the proportion * 0 of true null hypotheses among the th group of null hypotheses, then we call this version of the wFDR procedure "plug-in wFDR procedure," which is also an adaptive GBH of Hu et al. (2010). Note that the plug-in wFDR procedure makes no rejections when * 0 = 1, and that̂0 is "reciprocally conservative" as justified by Theorem 2 of Chen et al. (2018). The assumptions we need are stated as follows:

(A0) min{ ∶ ≥ 1} > 0 almost surely and 0 ∈ (0, 1) uniformly in .

(A1) { } =1 are mutually independent, the null p-values are super-uniform, and no null p-value has its CDF as a Dirac mass.

(A2) If 0 ∈ (0, 1) uniformly in , then lim →∞ Pr(̂ * 0 >̌0) = 0 for a sequence of constantš0 such thať0 ≤ 0 .

The first part of assumption A0) avoids the undetermined operation 0 × ∞ when a p-value is 0 and a weight is ∞. It is a very mild requirement in the discrete paradigm and holds automatically in the continuous paradigm. The second part of (A0) excludes the case 0 = 0 or 1 for some , for which the plug-in wFDR procedure makes no false discoveries or makes all false discoveries and is thus conservative or anticonservative automatically. It is also assumed in the continuous paradigm and is not restrictive. Assumption A1) is used to validate Theorem 2 in Chen et al. (2018) on the estimator̂0 (in the proof of Theorem 3 hereunder). The second part of (A1) requires that a null p-value distribution should not be degenerate and is not restrictive, and it holds automatically in the continuous paradigm. Assumption (A2) is technical as will be seen later.

With these preparations, we have Theorem 3. Let * be the FDR of the plug-in wFDR procedure. Under assumptions A0) and A1), there exists a constant 0 ∈ (0, 1) possibly dependent on such that * ≤ 1 − 0 1 −̃0 + Pr (̂ * 0 >̃0

) .

If in addition assumption A2) holds, then lim sup →∞ * ≤ .

The proof of Theorem 3 is provided in Section B.1. The nonasymptotic upper bound in (10) gives an integrated view on how the proportion 0 of true null hypotheses and the conservativeness of the estimator̂ * 0 of 0 jointly affect the FDR of the plug-in wFDR procedure. In particular, if Pr(̂ * 0 ≤ 0 ) → 1, theñ0 = 0 can be set in (10), leading immediately to lim sup →∞ * ≤ , and the plug-in wFDR procedure is conservative asymptotically. On the other hand, the assumption (A2) requires lim →∞ | [̂ * 0 ] − 0 | = 0 in view of the conservativeness of the estimator̂0 , that is, [̂ * 0 ] ≥ 0 . This requireŝ * 0 to be very accurate on average when is large. Nonetheless, the upper bound in inequality (10) is not necessarily tight because it is obtained from the self-consistency property (see Definition 3 in Blanchard & Roquain, 2009) of the plug-in wFDR procedure. So,̂ * 0 does not have to satisfy (A2) to ensure the asymptotic conservativeness of the plug-in wFDR procedure. Let us discuss a bit more about assumption (A0) and those used by Theorem 4 of Hu et al. (2010) to prove the asymptotic conservativeness of GBH. First, the condition on 0 in (A0) is implied by Condition (3.1) assumed by this theorem. Second, Theorem 4 in Hu et al. (2010) employed two additional assumptions, that is, Conditions (3.2) and (3.3) there, that require, for each group, the empirical distribution of the null p-values converges almost surely to the identity function on [0,1] and that the empirical distribution of the alternative p-values converges almost surely to a continuous function. However, we prefer not to employ such or similar assumptions in the discrete paradigm.


B.1 Proof of Theorem 3

Recall * as the FDR of the plug-in wFDR procedure at nominal FDR level ∈ (0, 1). The rest of the proof is divided into three steps: (a) filter out irrelevant cases from the analysis; (b) obtain a nonasymptotic upper bound on * ; (c) show that the procedure is asymptotically conservative.

Step 1. Let = ( ) be the number of rejections made by the plug-in wFDR procedure. Then, we can assume ( ) ≥ 1. Recall 0 = | 0 || | −1 . If 0 = 0, then the null hypotheses in group are false and do not contribute to any false discovery, and we can exclude the p-values in group from the analysis. So, we can assume 0 > 0 for each . By assumption (A0), no However, assumption (A1) validates Theorem 2 of Chen et al. (2018), that is, [̂− 1 0 ( 0, )] ≤ −1 0 . Thus, the definition of ( ) in (14) implies 

Combining (11) and (20), we have * ≤ 1 − 0 1 −̃0 + Pr
(  ) ,(21)
justifying the nonasymptotic upper bound on * .

Step 3. Under the additional assumption A2), we can identifỹ0 in

Step 2 as the constanť0, that is, set̃0 =̌0 and still maintain the validity of (21). Due to (A2), lim →∞ Pr( ) = 0 and This completes the whole proof.

∑
=1 { ≤ } and = | |. • Weighting and rejecting: Weight the p-values , ∈ intõ= , and apply the BH procedure to {̃} =1 .

For
< , let ( , ) be the uniform random variable or the uniform distribution on the closed interval [ , ]. The simulations are set up as follows: 1. Set the number of hypotheses = 5,000, the proportion of true null hypotheses 0 ∈ {0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.95}, nominal FDR level ∈ {0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2}, the number of groups for the wFDR procedure to partition the hypotheses into * ∈ {3, 7, 10}, the number of true null hypotheses 0 = [ 0 ], and 1 = − 0 , where [ ] is the integer part of a real number .


(b) Binomial data: Generate 1 from (0.02, 0.15) for = 1, … , 0 and set 2 = 1 for = 1, … , 0 . Set 1 = 0.3 and 2 = 0.15 for 0 + 1 ≤ ≤ 0 + [0.5 1 ], and 1 = 0.15 and 2 = 0.3 for 0 + [0.5 1 ] + 1 ≤ ≤ . Set = 50,


with ∈ 0 and (− ) ( ,0) = 0 and (− ) ( , ) = ∞ are set, and the independence among p-values and super-uniformity of null p-values have been used to obtain (8). In other words, we have justified

≤ 1 .
1So, (21) implies lim sup →∞ * ≤ .
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThis research was funded by a National Science Foundation Plant Genome Research Program grant (no. IOS-1025976) to R.W. Doerge, and part of it was completed when X. Chen was a graduate student in the Department of Statistics, Purdue University. We are very grateful to the Editor and Associate Editor for handling our submission, and to two anonymous referees for their comments that helped improve the presentation of the manuscript. We are also grateful to John D. Storey for helpful comments on the manuscript, and to Florian Junge for suggestions that improved the package "fdrDiscreteNull".CONFLICT OF INTERESTThe authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.OPEN RESEARCH BADGESThis article has earned an Open Data badge for making publicly available the digitally-shareable data necessary to reproduce the reported results. The data is available in the Supporting Information section. This article has earned an open data badge "Reproducible Research" for making publicly available the code necessary to reproduce the reported results. The results reported in this article were reproduced partially due to their computational complexity.ORCIDXiongzhi Chenhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9494-7101SUPPORTING INFORMATIONAdditional supporting information may be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of the article. p-value takes value 0 and 0 ∈ (0, 1) uniformly in . So, a weighted p-value is 0 if and only if its associated weight is 0. Note that by its definition the plug-in wFDR procedure makes no rejections when̂ * 0 = 1. So, when computing * , we can exclude the event {̂ * 0 = 1}. Thus, we can assumê * 0 < 1, for whicĥ0 < 1 for some and there exists some constant̃0 < 1 such that * 0 ≤̃0. By its definition,̂ * 0 > 0 almost surely. Thus,̃0 ∈ (0, 1).HowStep 2. Before we proceed further, we need to set up some notations. Eacĥ0, = 1, … , * and̂ * 0 will be written as a function of the p-values when needed. In particular, for each and ,̂0( 0, ) denotes the estimator̂0 of proportion inChen et al. (2018)applied to 0, . Let ( ) be the number of false discoveries of the plug-in wFDR procedure.Let  be the event {̂ * 0 ≤̃0}, and  the complement of  . Then * ≤ [ ( )and it suffices to focus on * = [ ( )and it suffices to bound each (or ) in order to bound * . Pick a between 1 and * and ∈ 0 . Set̂0 =̂0( ) and = (1 −̂0( 0, ))̂− 1 0 ( 0, ). Then̂0( 0, ) ≤̂0( ) for any implies̃− 1 ≤ for any . For each and , setandThen, ∩  ⊆ , and almost surely (where we have put parentheses around the conditioned random variables to avoid notational confusion. Inequality (16) together with(12)and(15)impliesAs with the proof of Theorem 2, applying Lemma 4.2 ofSarkar (2008)for super-uniform null p-values to(17)gives an upper bound for the term on the right-hand side of (17) as ( ). So,
A Agresti, Categorical data analysis. Hoboken, NJJohn Wiley & Sons2nd ed.Agresti, A. (2002). Categorical data analysis (2nd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.

Statistical design and analysis of RNA-Seq data. P Auer, R Doerge, Genetics. 185Auer, P., & Doerge, R. (2010). Statistical design and analysis of RNA-Seq data. Genetics, 185, 405-416.

Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. Y Benjamini, Y Hochberg, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B. 571Benjamini, Y., & Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B, 57(1), 289-300.

Multiple hypotheses testing with weights. Y Benjamini, Y Hochberg, Scandinavian Journal of Statistics. 243Benjamini, Y., & Hochberg, Y. (1997). Multiple hypotheses testing with weights. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 24(3), 407-418.

Adaptive false discovery rate control under independence and dependence. G Blanchard, E Roquain, Journal of Machine Learning Research. 10Blanchard, G., & Roquain, E. (2009). Adaptive false discovery rate control under independence and dependence. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10, 2837-2871.

Simultaneous testing of grouped hypotheses: Finding needles in multiple haystacks. T T Cai, W Sun, Journal of the American Statistical Association. 104488Cai, T. T., & Sun, W. (2009). Simultaneous testing of grouped hypotheses: Finding needles in multiple haystacks. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 104(488), 1467-1481.

Memory disorders associated with consumption of drugs: Updating through a case/noncase study in the French pharmacovigilance database. F Chavant, S Favrelière, C Lafay-Chebassier, C Plazanet, M.-C Pérault-Pochat, British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology. 726Chavant, F., Favrelière, S., Lafay-Chebassier, C., Plazanet, C., & Pérault-Pochat, M.-C. (2011). Memory disorders associated with consumption of drugs: Updating through a case/noncase study in the French pharmacovigilance database. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 72(6), 898- 904.

False discovery rate control for multiple testing based on discrete p-values. X Chen, Biometrical Journal. in pressChen, X. (2019). False discovery rate control for multiple testing based on discrete p-values. Biometrical Journal (in press).

Multiple testing with discrete data: proportion of true null hypotheses and two adaptive FDR procedures. X Chen, R W Doerge, J F Heyse, Biometrial Journal. 604Chen, X., Doerge, R. W., & Heyse, J. F. (2018). Multiple testing with discrete data: proportion of true null hypotheses and two adaptive FDR procedures. Biometrial Journal, 60(4), 761-779.

The functional false discovery rate with applications to genomics. X Chen, D G Robinson, J D Storey, 10.1093/biostatistics/kxz010Biostatistics. Chen, X., Robinson, D. G., & Storey, J. D. (2019). The functional false discovery rate with applications to genomics. Biostatistics. https://doi.org/10.1093/biostatistics/kxz010.

X Chen, J D Storey, arXiv:1510.03497Consistent estimation of low-dimensional latent structure in high-dimensional data. Chen, X., & Storey, J. D. (2015). Consistent estimation of low-dimensional latent structure in high-dimensional data. arXiv:1510.03497.

New FDR bounds for discrete and heterogeneous tests. S Döhler, G Durand, E Roquain, Electronic Journal of Statistics. 121Döhler, S., Durand, G., & Roquain, E. (2018). New FDR bounds for discrete and heterogeneous tests. Electronic Journal of Statistics, 12(1), 1867- 1900.

Empirical Bayes analysis of a microarray experiment. B Efron, R Tibshirani, J D Storey, V Tusher, Journal of the American Statistical Association. 96456Efron, B., Tibshirani, R., Storey, J. D., & Tusher, V. (2001). Empirical Bayes analysis of a microarray experiment. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 96(456), 1151-1160.

FDR-and FWE-controlling methods using data-driven weights. L Finos, L Salmaso, Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference. 13712Finos, L., & Salmaso, L. (2007). FDR-and FWE-controlling methods using data-driven weights. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 137(12), 3859-3870.

False discovery control with p-value weighting. C Genovese, K Roeder, L Wasserman, Biometrika. 933Genovese, C., Roeder, K., & Wasserman, L. (2006). False discovery control with p-value weighting. Biometrika, 93(3), 509-524.

A modified false discovery rate multiple-comparisons procedure for discrete data, applied to human immunodeficiency virus genetics. P B Gilbert, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C. 541Gilbert, P. B. (2005). A modified false discovery rate multiple-comparisons procedure for discrete data, applied to human immunodeficiency virus genetics. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C, 54(1), 143-158.

Differing effects of systemically administered rapamycin on consolidation and reconsolidation of context vs. cued fear memories. E M Glover, K J Ressler, M Davis, Learning & Memory. 1711Glover, E. M., Ressler, K. J., & Davis, M. (2010). Differing effects of systemically administered rapamycin on consolidation and reconsolidation of context vs. cued fear memories. Learning & Memory, 17(11), 577-581.

Multiple test functions and adjusted p-values for test statistics with discrete distributions. J D Habiger, Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference. 167Habiger, J. D. (2015). Multiple test functions and adjusted p-values for test statistics with discrete distributions. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 167, 1-13.

False discovery rate controlling procedures for discrete tests. R Heller, H Gur, Heller, R., & Gur, H. (2012). False discovery rate controlling procedures for discrete tests. http://arxiv.org/abs/1112.4627v2.

A false discovery rate procedure for categorical data. J F Heyse, Resent advances in biostatistics: False discovery rates, survival analysis, and related topics. M. Bhattacharjee, S. K. Dhar, & S. SubramanianHackensack, NJWorld Scientific Publishing4Heyse, J. F. (2011). A false discovery rate procedure for categorical data. In M. Bhattacharjee, S. K. Dhar, & S. Subramanian (Eds.), Resent advances in biostatistics: False discovery rates, survival analysis, and related topics (Vol. 4, pp. 43-58). Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific Publishing.

False discovery rate control with groups. J X Hu, H Zhao, H H Zhou, Journal of the American Statistical Association. 105491Hu, J. X., Zhao, H., & Zhou, H. H. (2010). False discovery rate control with groups. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 105(491), 1215-1227.

An optimality theory for mid p-values in 2 × 2 contingency tables. J T G Hwang, M.-C Yang, Statistica Sinica. 113Hwang, J. T. G., & Yang, M.-C. (2001). An optimality theory for mid p-values in 2 × 2 contingency tables. Statistica Sinica, 11(3), 807-826.

Covariate powered cross-weighted multiple testing with false discovery rate control. N Ignatiadis, W Huber, arXiv:1701.05179Ignatiadis, N., & Huber, W. (2018). Covariate powered cross-weighted multiple testing with false discovery rate control. arXiv:1701.05179.

Data-driven hypothesis weighting increases detection power in genome-scale multiple testing. N Ignatiadis, B Klaus, J B Zaugg, W Huber, Nature Methods. 137Ignatiadis, N., Klaus, B., Zaugg, J. B., & Huber, W. (2016). Data-driven hypothesis weighting increases detection power in genome-scale multiple testing. Nature Methods, 13(7), 577-80.

Testing statistical hypotheses. E Lehmann, J P Romano, SpringerBerlinLehmann, E., & Romano, J. P. (2005). Testing statistical hypotheses. Berlin: Springer.

Multiple testing with the structure-adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg algorithm. A Li, R F Barber, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B. 811Li, A., & Barber, R. F. (2019). Multiple testing with the structure-adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg algorithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B, 81(1), 45-74.

False discovery rate estimation for large-scale homogeneous discrete p-values. K Liang, Biometrics. 72Liang, K. (2016). False discovery rate estimation for large-scale homogeneous discrete p-values. Biometrics, 72, 639-648.

Highly integrated single-base resolution maps of the epigenome in arabidopsis. R Lister, R O&apos;malley, J Tonti-Filippini, B D Gregory, Charles C Berry, A H Millar, J R Ecker, Cell. 1333Lister, R., O'Malley, R., Tonti-Filippini, J., Gregory, B. D., Berry, Charles C., Millar, A. H., & Ecker, J. R. (2008). Highly integrated single-base resolution maps of the epigenome in arabidopsis. Cell, 133(3), 523-536.

Adapting BH to one-and two-way classified structures of hypotheses. S Nandi, S K Sarkar, S Pounds, C Cheng, arXiv:1812.06551Bioinformatics. 2216Robust estimation of the false discovery rateNandi, S., & Sarkar, S. K. (2018). Adapting BH to one-and two-way classified structures of hypotheses. arXiv:1812.06551. Pounds, S., & Cheng, C. (2006). Robust estimation of the false discovery rate. Bioinformatics, 22(16), 1979-1987.

Optimal weighting for false discovery rate control. E Roquain, M A Van De Wiel, Electronic Journal of Statistics. 3Roquain, E., & van de Wiel, M. A. (2009). Optimal weighting for false discovery rate control. Electronic Journal of Statistics, 3, 678-711.

On methods controlling the false discovery rate. S K Sarkar, Sankhyā: Series A. 702Sarkar, S. K. (2008). On methods controlling the false discovery rate. Sankhyā: Series A, 70(2), 135-168.

Strong control, conservative point estimation in simultaneous conservative consistency of false discover rates: A unified approach. J D Storey, J E Taylor, D Siegmund, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B. 661Storey, J. D., Taylor, J. E., & Siegmund, D. (2004). Strong control, conservative point estimation in simultaneous conservative consistency of false discover rates: A unified approach. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B, 66(1), 187-205.

Rapamycin-sensitive signalling in long-term consolidation of auditory cortex-dependent memory. W Tischmeyer, H Schicknick, M Kraus, C I Seidenbecher, S Staak, H Scheich, E D Gundelfinger, European Journal of Neuroscience. 184Tischmeyer, W., Schicknick, H., Kraus, M., Seidenbecher, C. I., Staak, S., Scheich, H., & Gundelfinger, E. D. (2003). Rapamycin-sensitive signalling in long-term consolidation of auditory cortex-dependent memory. European Journal of Neuroscience, 18(4), 942-950.

Genome-wide high-resolution mapping and functional analysis of DNA methylation in arabidopsis. X Zhang, J Yazaki, A Sundaresan, S Cokus, S W Chan, .-L Chen, H Ecker, J , Cell. 1266Zhang, X., Yazaki, J., Sundaresan, A., Cokus, S., Chan, S. W.-L., Chen, H., … Ecker, J. (2006). Genome-wide high-resolution mapping and functional analysis of DNA methylation in arabidopsis. Cell, 126(6), 1189-1201.