Real-Time Formulation of Atomistic Electromagnetic Models for Plasmonics
16 Jun 2024

Piero Lafiosca 
Luca Nicoli 
Silvio Pipolo 
Stefano Corni 
Tommaso Giovannini tommaso.giovannini@uniroma2.it 
Chiara Cappelli chiara.cappelli@sns.it 

†Scuola Normale Superiore
Piazza dei Cavalieri 756126PisaItaly


‡UCCS Unité de Catalyse et Chimie du Solide
UMR 8181
Université de Lille
Université d'Artois
F-59000LilleFrance


¶Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche
Università di Padova
via Marzolo 135131PadovaItaly


§Istituto di Nanoscienze del Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche CNR-NANO
via Campi 213/A41125ModenaItaly


∥Department of Physics
University of Rome Tor Vergata
Via della Ricerca Scientifica 100133RomeItaly

Real-Time Formulation of Atomistic Electromagnetic Models for Plasmonics
16 Jun 2024CFC3DD2A20CA8382EE8B0F60D5D8B2F1arXiv:2406.10926v1[cond-mat.mes-hall]
Investigating nanoplasmonics using time-dependent approaches permits shedding light on the dynamic optical properties of plasmonic structures, which are intrinsically connected with their potential applications in photochemistry and photoreactivity.This work proposes a real-time extension of our recently developed fully atomistic approaches ωFQ and ωFQFµ.These methods successfully reproduce quantum size effects in metal nanoparticles, including plasmon shifts for both simple and d-metals, even below the quantum size limit.Also, thanks to their atomistic nature and the phenomenological inclusion of quantum tunneling effects, they can effectively describe the optical response of subnanometer junctions.By incorporating real-time dynamics, the approach provides an efficient framework for studying the time-dependent optical behavior of metal nanostructures, including the decoherence of plasmon excitations.

Introduction

[27] From the experimental point of view, this can be achieved by resorting to time-resolved spectroscopies. 28,291][32][33] The most common theoretical methods generally rely on solving classical Maxwell's Equations or purely quantum mechanical (QM) methods.Classical approaches, such as the Boundary Element Method (BEM) [34][35][36] or the Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD) method, 37,38 are powerful tools for modeling nanoscale optical systems, however, they typically overlook tunneling effects and the atomistic details that are essential for an accurate description of structures defined at the subnanometer levels, [39][40][41][42][43][44][45][46][47][48] such as nanojunctions or picocavities. 20On the other hand, QM-based approaches, headed by real-time time-dependent density functional theory (RT-TDDFT) and TDDFT, 30,[49][50][51][52][53][54][55][56] provide a first-principle description of the nanostructure response by retaining the atomistic nature of the system.However, they are computationally prohibitive for large nanosystems and are generally exploited to describe systems composed at most of a few thousand atoms.

To overcome the drawbacks of classical and QM-based approaches, we have recently developed two methods, namely frequency-dependent fluctuating charges (ωFQ) [57][58][59][60][61][62][63] and frequency-dependent fluctuating charges and fluctuating dipoles (ωFQFµ). 64,65Such methods describe the nanostructure at the full atomistic level and model its optical response by integrating the Drude conduction theory, classical electrodynamics, quantum mechanical tunneling, and interband effects.In particular, in ωFQ, each atom of the nanosystem is endowed with a charge that dynamically responds to the external field as regulated by the Drude conduction model. 57,66In this way, intraband effects are incorporated into the model.To describe d-metal nanostructures, we have extended ωFQ by introducing ωFQFµ, where each atom is additionally endowed with a complex polarizability, modeling d shell polarizability and interband effects. 64In both approaches, we also introduce a phenomenological description of quantum tunneling effects regulating the charge exchange between neighbor atoms. 44,45Both ωFQ and ωFQFµ can reproduce reference ab initio and experimental data, including plasmon shifts for both simple and noble metals, and atomistically defined nanojunctions, even below the quantum size limit. 57,64In other words, they feature accuracy comparable to QM-based approaches, at a much lower computational cost.

In this work, we extend the ωFQ and ωFQFµ models to the real-time (RT) regime, enabling the simulation of the time evolution of plasmonic excitations as driven by light pulses of arbitrary profiles.The resulting RT-ωFQ and RT-ωFQFµ approaches permit the study of the dynamics of the optical response of metal nanostructures, including the decoherence of plasmon excitations.The approaches can describe the response dynamics under short impulses (in the as/fs timescale) and continuous waves (CW) using the same theoretical framework.This is particularly relevant since CW irradiation is often exploited in plasmonic catalysis. 15,25We validate the novel approaches by comparing our results with reference ab initio TDDFT data for sodium and silver nanostructures.Our method thus offers a comprehensive and efficient tool for studying the dynamics of optical response of metal nanostructures, bridging the gap between classical and QM descriptions, and paving the way for advanced applications in nanophotonics.

The manuscript is organized as follows.In the next section, we report the theoretical derivation of RT-ωFQ and RT-ωFQFµ.The methods are then applied to simulate the time evolution of the optical response of a sodium dimer, displaying a single-atom junction, and a silver icosahedral nanoparticle.The summary and conclusions end the manuscript.


Theoretical Model

In this section, we first briefly recall the theoretical foundations of the fully atomistic ωFQ and ωFQFµ approaches for nanoplasmonics.We then present and discuss their extension to the time domain.


ωFQ and ωFQFµ models

ωFQ is a fully atomistic, classical model that endows each atom of the nanostructure with a frequencydependent charge. 57When an external electric oscillating field is applied to the system, the charge exchange between the atoms is governed by the Drude conduction model.Such an interaction exponentially vanishes by phenomenologically incorporating quantum tunneling mechanisms limiting the charge transfer among the nearest neighboring atoms. 57By considering a monochromatic field oscillating at frequency ω, ωFQ charges q i (ω) are computed by solving the following equation: 57
−iωq i (ω) = 2n 0 τ 1 − iωτ N j [1 − f (l ij )] A ij l ij (ϕ el j − ϕ el i ) = 2n 0 τ 1 − iωτ N j K ij (ϕ el j − ϕ el i ) (1)
where N is the number of atoms, τ is the friction time, n 0 is the numerical density of the material, A ij is the effective area connecting i-th and j-th atoms, and l ij is their distance.ϕ el i is the electrochemical potential on each atom regulating the dynamical polarization of the system.This takes into account the interactions between the atoms and their interaction with the external electric field.Finally, f (l ij ) is a Fermi-like function mimicking quantum tunneling: 57
f (l ij ) = 1 1 + exp −d l ij s•l 0 ij − 1 (2)
where l 0 ij is the atom-atom equilibrium distance, whereas d and s determine the sharpness and the center of the damping function, respectively.The parameters entering eq. ( 1) have a microscopic physical meaning and can be extracted from the experimental permittivity or determined by comparing computed results with reference ab initio calculations. 57,59uation (1) can be recast in a compact way as the following linear system: 67
[A qq − z q (ω)I N ] q(ω) = −f q (ω)(3)
where I N is the N × N identity matrix, while A qq , z q (ω) and f q (ω) read: 67
A qq = (K − P)T qq z q (ω) = 1 2n 0 −ω 2 − iω 1 τ f q (ω) = (K − P)V ext (ω)(4)
where T qq is the charge-charge interaction kernel 57,68 and V ext (ω) is the potential associated with the external field evaluated at the position of each atom.The matrix P takes the following form: 67
P ij = k K ik δ ij(5)
ωFQ is a fully atomistic approach that models the optical response of nanostructure materials by accounting for intraband mechanisms only, via the Drude conduction model.0][71][72][73] To model these systems, we have recently developed ωFQFµ, 64 which extends ωFQ by assigning to each atom of the nanosystem an additional source of polarization, i.e., an atomic polarizability and an associated induced dipole µ i .The electric potential produced by the dipoles is included in eq. ( 1) as an external potential acting on the charges in the electrochemical potential ϕ el .The dipoles µ i are calculated by solving the following set of linear equations: 64
µ i = α IB (ω) E q i + E µ i + E ext i(6)
where E q and E µ are the electric fields generated by the charge and the other dipole moments, respectively, while E ext is the external electric field.α IB (ω) is the atomic complex polarizability describing interband transitions, which can be easily obtained by extracting interband contributions from the experimental permittivity function. 64e equations defining charges and dipoles responses can be coupled together resulting in the following linear system: 64
      A qq A qµ T µq T µµ    −    z q (ω)I N 0 0 z µ (ω)I 3N          q(ω) µ(ω)    =    −f q (ω) f µ (ω)   (7)
where T µq and T µµ are the dipole-charge and dipole-dipole interaction kernels, 64,68,74 while A qµ , z µ (ω) and f µ (ω) are defined as: 64
A qµ = (K − P)T qµ z µ (ω) = − 1 α IB (ω) f µ (ω) = E ext (ω)(8)
where T qµ = [T µq ] † is the charge-dipole interaction kernel. 64,68,74


Real-Time Extension of ωFQ and ωFQFµ models

In this section, we extend both ωFQ and ωFQFµ to the time domain by proposing their real-time extension.

Let us first focus on ωFQ.Explicating the definition of z q (ω) in eq. ( 3), we obtain:
− ω 2 2n 0 − iω 2n 0 τ q(ω) = A qq q(ω) + f q (ω)(9)
By considering the following definition of the Fourier transform
F[f ](ω) = ∞ −∞ dt e iωt f (t), F −1 [f ](t) = 1 2π ∞ −∞ dω e −iωt f (ω)(10)
we can rewrite eq. ( 9) in the time domain by applying F −1 to both sides
1 2n 0 q(t) + 1 2n 0 τ q(t) = A qq q(t) + f q (t)(11)
where we exploited the following properties of the Fourier transform:
q(t) = 1 2π ∞ −∞ dω e −iωt (−iω)q(ω) q(t) = 1 2π ∞ −∞ dω e −iωt (−ω 2 )q(ω)(12)
Equation ( 11) represents the dynamical evolution of a set of coupled forced damped oscillators with the same mass 1 2n 0 and the same damping parameter 1 τ , under the time-dependent force f q (t) that depends on the electric potential generated on each charge at the time t.Equation ( 11) defines the RT-ωFQ approach.

By moving to ωFQFµ, eq. ( 7) can be rewritten explicating z q (ω) and z µ (ω) as follows:
− ω 2 2n 0 − iω 2n 0 τ q(ω) = A qq q(ω) + A qµ µ(ω) + f q (ω)(13)µ(ω) = α IB (ω) [−T µq q(ω) − T µµ µ(ω) + f µ (ω)](14)
Before applying the inverse Fourier transform, it is convenient to rewrite eq. ( 14) to avoid the convolution in the time domain in terms of interband polarizability.To this end, we approximate the interband polarizability α IB (ω) as a sum of Drude-Lorentz oscillators (DL), similarly to what has been proposed in FDTD 37,38 and BEM 75 frameworks:
α IB (ω) ≈ α IB f it (ω) = M p A p ω 2 p − ω 2 − iωγ p (15)
where M is the total number of DL oscillators, each of them defined in terms of the parameters A p , ω p , and γ p .We can split eq. ( 14) by partitioning µ(ω) as DL-dependent terms µ p (ω) such that:
µ(ω) = M p µ p (ω)(16)µ p (ω) = A p ω 2 p − ω 2 − iωγ p [−T µq q(ω) − T µµ µ(ω) + f µ (ω)](17)
At this point, the original ωFQFµ problem in eq. ( 13) and eq.( 14) can be recast in M + 1 equations in the frequency domain, i.e.:
− ω 2 2n 0 − iω 2n 0 τ q(ω) =A qq q(ω) + A qµ µ(ω) + f q (ω) ω 2 p − ω 2 − iωγ p A p µ p (ω) = − T µq q(ω) − T µµ µ(ω) + f µ (ω)(18)
By applying F −1 Fourier transform to both charges and dipoles expressions in eq. ( 18), we finally obtain the M + 1 differential equations defining the RT-ωFQFµ model:
1 2n 0 q(t) + 1 2n 0 τ q(t) = A qq q(t) + A qµ µ(t) + f q (t)(19)1 A p μp (t) + γ p A p μp (t) = −T µq q(t) − T µµ µ(t) + f µ (t) − ω 2 p A p µ p (t)(20)
where we have exploited again the properties recalled in eq. ( 12).


Numerical propagation scheme

To propagate RT-ωFQ and RT-ωFQFµ in time, we exploit a second-order velocity Verlet algorithm in the presence of a friction term. 76Note that such a procedure has been previously exploited to deal with similar problems in the context of continuum approaches. 75Let us consider a general coordinate system x(t)

described by the following differential equation:
ẍ(t) = F(t) − γ ẋ(t)(21)
where F is the mass-normalized force acting on each coordinate and γ is the friction coefficient.By using a fixed step ∆t, the second-order velocity Verlet algorithm scheme expresses x(t) and the associated velocity ẋ(t) as:
x(t + ∆t) = x(t) + ∆t 1 − γ ∆t 2 ẋ(t) + ∆t 2 2 F(t) ẋ(t + ∆t) = 1 − γ∆t + γ 2 ∆t 2 2 ẋ(t) + ∆t 2 (1 − γ∆t) F(t) + ∆t 2 F(t + ∆t)(22)
Eq. 22 can be specified for RT-ωFQ and RT-ωFQFµ by defining the mass-normalized time-dependent force acting on charges and dipoles from eqs. ( 19) and ( 20):
F q (t) = 2n 0 [A qq q(t) + A qµ µ(t) + f q (t)](23)F µ p (t) = A p [−T µq q(t) − T µµ µ(t) + f µ (t)] − ω 2 p µ p (t)(24)
Note that for RT-ωFQ, only the forces acting on charges are calculated by discarding A qµ µ(t) in eq. ( 23).

The second-order velocity Verlet algorithm scheme in eq. ( 22) can finally be specified for the timepropagation of RT-ωFQ as follows:
q(t + ∆t) = q(t) + ∆t 1 − ∆t 2τ q(t) + ∆t 2 2 F q (t)(25)q(t + ∆t) = 1 − ∆t τ + ∆t 2 2τ 2 q(t) + ∆t 2 1 − ∆t τ F q (t) + ∆t 2 F q (t + ∆t)(26)
In RT-ωFQFµ, the dipoles' time-propagation can be obtained similarly as:
µ p (t + ∆t) = µ p (t) + ∆t 1 − γ p ∆t 2 μp (t) + ∆t 2 2 F µ (t)(27)μp (t + ∆t) = 1 − γ p ∆t + γ 2 p ∆t 2 2 μp (t) + ∆t 2 (1 − γ p ∆t) F µ (t) + ∆t 2 F µ (t + ∆t)(28)

Computational Details

RT-ωFQ and RT-ωFQFµ equations are solved by using a stand-alone Fortran 95 package.The numerical integration of charges and dipoles is performed by propagating eqs.( 25) to (28) from t = 0 and by assuming zero initial conditions, which naively correspond to the stationary solution in the absence of external field.

ωFQ and ωFQFµ parameters for Na and Ag nanostructures are recovered from Ref. 57 and 64, respectively.

For RT-ωFQFµ, the interband polarizability α IB in eq. ( 15) is fitted to experimental data by resorting to the Basin-hopping stochastic global optimization algorithm. 77The Ag interband polarizability (see Ref.

64 for its definition) is fitted with a different number of DL oscillators (M = 4, 5, 6, 7) by minimizing the residual error:
res = ωmax ω min dω α IB (ω) − α IB f it (ω)(29)
where α IB f it is the fitted permittivity that depends on the parameters A p , ω p , and γ p .For each value of M , the optimal parameters are obtained by selecting the best α IB f it from 100 Basin-hopping simulations.Each

Basin-hopping simulation is started by setting random values of ω p extracted in the range between ω min = 1

eV and ω max = 7 eV, A p and γ p equal to 1 for each p = 1, . . ., M .The fitting procedure is implemented in Python by resorting to the lmfit package, 78 which exploits the Basin-hopping algorithm as implemented in the scipy library. 79Note that for M = 6, 7 the fitting procedure returns some values of ω p ≈ 0 which can
potentially

Numerical Applications

In this section, RT-ωFQ and RT-ωFQFµ approaches are first validated by comparing the absorption spectra as calculated by Fourier-transform the time-dependent responses or by using ωFQ and ωFQFµ defined in the frequency domain.RT-ωFQ and RT-ωFQFµ robustness is further demonstrated by simulating the time-resolved spectral signal of a Sodium dimer characterized by an atomistically defined junction and the dynamical response of an Icosahedral Silver NP and comparing our results with reference ab initio data.


Validation of the propagation scheme

RT-ωFQ and RT-ωFQFµ are validated by computing the optical response of a Sodium cylindrical nanorod (Na 261 , length 4.968 nm, diameter 1.242 nm, described at the RT-ωFQ level), and a silver spherical NP (Ag 164 , diameter 1.634 nm, described at the RT-ωFQFµ level).The considered nanostructures are graphically depicted in fig. 1.For both systems, we apply an external electric field described as the following Gaussian-type kick pulse linearly polarized along the x axis:
E ext ∆t (t) = E 0 exp − (t − t 0 ) 2 2(σ∆t) 2 x, 0 < t < T(30)
where t 0 = 5 fs, σ = 0.1, while ∆t and T are the time-step and the total evolution time exploited in the time propagation.The Gaussian width depends on ∆t in order to have a uniform sampling by varying the time step.

The longitudinal absorption cross-section σ k along the axis k = x, y, z is computed as:
σ k (ω) = 4πω c Im[α kk (ω)] (31)
where ω is the frequency, c is the speed of light and α kk (ω) is the frequency-dependent polarizability element, which is obtained from the time-propagation dynamics as follows:
α RT-ωFQ kk (ω) = dt N i q i (t)r i,k e iωt dtE ext k (t)e iωt α RT-ωFQFµ kk (ω) = dt N i q i (t)r i,k + µ i,k (t) e iωt dtE ext k (t)e iωt(32)
where q i is the charge of the i-th atom, whereas r i,k , µ i,k and E k are the k = x, y, z Cartesian components of the position and the electric dipole of atom i, and the external electric field.The Fourier transform in eq. ( 32) is numerically computed by resorting to the Fast Fourier Transform as implemented in the scipy package. 79-ωFQ and RT-ωFQFµ longitudinal absorption cross sections of the Na 261 nanorod and Ag 164 spherical NP are reported in fig. 1 (top panel), where they are compared to the corresponding σ x (ω) calculated by exploiting the reference ωFQ and ωFQFµ models, respectively.The relative error on σ x (ω) obtained from RT-ωFQ(Fµ) with respect to ωFQ(Fµ) is reported in the bottom panel of fig. 1.In the case of (RT-)ωFQFµ calculations, the fitted interband permittivity α IB f it obtained with M = 6 (see table S1 in the SI) is used for both RT-ωFQFµ and ωFQFµ, thus ensuring the same optical response of the system in the two cases.

To validate our integration scheme, the absorption cross-section is calculated by varying the integration For a more quantitative analysis, we investigate the relative error obtained for RT-ωFQ and RT-ωFQFµ by taking their frequency-domain counterparts as a reference.Such an analysis is performed for the same input frequencies in both the real-time and frequency-domain calculations.The numerical results are depicted in fig. 1, bottom panel, by varying the numerical parameters of the integration scheme (∆t, T ) to quantify their impact on the numerical stability of the simulation.By first focusing on RT-ωFQ (left), we observe that a large ∆t (10 as; T = 100 fs) is generally associated with the largest errors, in particular in correspondence of the maxima in the absorption spectrum, i.e., for frequencies > 1.5 eV.Differently, all calculations performed by using a smaller time-step (0.5, 1 as; T = 100 fs), are associated with a substantial reduction of relative errors for all frequencies and are overall consistent with each other.Interestingly, elongating the total time of the simulation does not significantly affect the numerical errors in the region of the spectrum characterized by absorption peaks.

The relative errors computed for RT-ωFQFµ are inherently higher than those reported for RT-ωFQ by almost 2 orders of magnitude on average.In this case, reducing the time step of the integration does not substantially reduce the relative errors.The most accurate results are obtained by increasing the precision of the Fast Fourier Transform, i.e., by elongating the time simulation of the real-time propagation (T = 1 ps), which is associated with an increase in the number of sampled frequencies.This is particularly evident in the significant regions of the spectrum (frequency > 3 eV), where the relative errors are comparable to those reported by RT-ωFQ.The relatively large errors can thus be attributed to limitations in numerical precision.

The discussed analysis validates the accuracy of our implementation and the exploited second-order procedure.In all the following calculations, the time step ∆t = 1 ps is exploited because it guarantees the best compromise between computational cost and accuracy.


Sodium NP dimer: single-atom junction

As a first test case to analyze the performance of RT-ωFQ, we consider two Na 380 icosahedral NPs that are connected by a monoatomic junction (see inset in fig.2).Such structure is extracted from a dynamical simulation of the retraction process of two fused Na 380 NPs, which has been studied at the full ab-initio level by Marchesin et al. 80 and at the ωFQ level in Ref. 57.The breaking process gradually occurs: the monoatomic junction first arises, and then the dimer dissociates as the distance increases.This study focuses on the monoatomic junction because we have recently shown that tunneling effects are essential to reproduce the ab initio reference data. 57,80As such, this system represents a perfect test case to show the capabilities of the newly developed RT-ωFQ for studying the dynamics of the optical response of atomistically defined NPs.

In fact, the simulated absorption cross-section along the longitudinal axis of the NP dimer (y) at the ωFQ level is characterized by two main bands. 57Such plasmon peaks are associated with two peculiar chargetransfer (CT) plasmonic excitations.The band occurring at 0.34 eV (see A peak in fig.2) is characterized by a dipolar plasmon in the whole dimer structure.2][83] The second band dominates the spectrum and is especially broad (2 − 4 eV), resulting from the convolution of many absorption peaks.[86] The associated plasmon shows an overall multipolar character (generally dipolar character by looking at the single nanoparticles), and it is generally called CTP'.The large inhomogeneous broadening reported for the CTP' band is due to transitions with different nodal structure at the atomic scale, but corresponding to plasmons of similar nature (see B, C, D, and E peaks in fig.2), similarly to what has been reported for other stretched sodium NPs. 57,84 study the plasmon dynamics in the time domain, we resort to RT-ωFQ.We exploit an external cosinusoidal electric field along the dimer axis (y):
E ext (t) = E 0 cos(ω 0 t)ŷ(33)
Differently from section 5.1, the used functional form resembles a continuous wave (CW) illumination of the nanostructure.This demonstrates the flexibility of our approach to describing different excitations, which can better represent the experimental conditions. 15,25The real-time simulation is carried out by using E 0 = 10 −6 au (≈ 50µV /Å), ∆t = 1 as, and T = 50 fs.In fig.2, the time propagation of the total dipole moment along the dimer axis µ y is plotted by setting ω 0 (see eq. ( 33)) in resonance with A, B, C, D, and E absorption frequencies.The numerical values are normalized with respect to the dipole moments computed at resonance with A absorption, for which the largest µ y is reported.By looking at fig. 2, we note that the stationary solution is reached for all external frequencies after about 20 fs.In such a time regime, the total dipole moment oscillates in phase with the external field at the forcing frequency, which increases moving from the A to the E band.Remarkably, the relaxation time is similar for each external frequency, since it is intrinsically related to the scattering time assigned to sodium atoms (τ , see eq. ( 1)).Furthermore, the relative amplitudes of the dipole moments associated with the diverse plasmon excitations are directly connected with the imaginary part of the polarizability of the system, which in turn is related to the absorption cross section reported in fig. 2 through eq. ( 31).This is why the largest amplitudes are reported for ω 0 in resonance with the A peak, and the relative amplitudes decrease by increasing the external frequency, following the trends highlighted by the absorption spectrum.

Our real-time model also allows for graphically investigating the dynamical oscillation of the plasmonic excitation.A similar study has also been performed at the ab initio level as derived from TDDFT calculations, assuming a periodic oscillation equal to 2π/ω 0 . 80RT-ωFQ gives direct access to this analysis, allowing an in-depth investigation of the dynamics of the plasmon.In this case, we focus on plasmonic dynamics once the system enters the stationary condition.Such a time evolution is depicted in fig. 3 for the CTP peak at 0.34 eV (all the other time evolution are graphically depicted in figs.S2 to S5 in the SI).As can be noticed, the single-atom junction behaves as an accumulation point for electron conduction, limiting the charge transfer between the two structures.Such a structure is associated with a substantial reduction of the electron current across the single-atom junction at both the ωFQ and TDDFT levels. 57,80We finally remark that the plasmon dynamics in fig. 3 qualitatively reproduces the TDDFT behavior 80 at a much lower computational cost.


Icosahedral Ag NP

Let us now consider the intricate case of d-metal nanostructures, for which a proper description of interband transitions is crucial to reproduce the correct experimental optical properties. 64As explained in section 2.2,  in order to study the dynamics of ωFQFµ plasmonic response, we approximate the interband polarizability α IB (ω) as a sum of M DL oscillators.The number M of DL oscillators is chosen to ensure the accurate reproduction of the interband polarizability.To select the minimum number of DL required for this purpose, in fig. 4 (left) we report α IB f it as fitted by exploiting 4, 5, and 6 DL oscillators For all cases, the reproduction of the experimental polarizability is particularly satisfactory, especially for frequencies larger than 4 eV.Some larger discrepancies are instead observed for smaller frequencies (1-4 eV), because α IB (ω) imaginary part is close to zero, and the DL functional form is not ideal in this case.The numerical fitting values are reported in table S1 in SI.Note however that in such a region the optical response is dominated by intraband transitions, thus the effect of interband transitions is expected to be small.It is also worth pointing out that some amplitudes A p are negative (as also obtained in ref. 75), however, the overall sign of the interband polarizability is positive.

To further evaluate the accuracy of the fitting procedure, in fig.15)).(right) RT-ωFQFµ absorption cross section using α IB as fitted using M = 4, 5, 6 DL oscillators.ωFQFµ reference spectrum as calculated by using the experimental α IB is also reported for comparison's sake.

when M > 4 DL oscillators are exploited in the fitting procedure.In fact, M = 4 (top panel) provides an overall good description of the ωFQFµ spectrum, however, the maximum intensity of the plasmon peak (at about 3.5 eV) and its width are wrongly predicted (the intensity is almost twice the reference, the width is smaller).Indeed, our results remark on the crucial importance of a proper modeling of the interband transitions to reproduce the optical properties of noble metal NPs, highlighting how small differences in the interband polarizability can drastically affect the optical response.As a final comment, it is worth pointing out that the outlined discrepancies are associated with the diverse description of the interband polarizability.This is demonstrated by the perfect agreement between ωFQFµ and RT-ωFQFµ spectra computed by using the same permittivity function (see fig.S1 in the SI).

To further demonstrate the reliability and robustness of our newly developed RT-ωFQFµ approach, we simulate the time evolution of the plasmonic excitation of Ag 561 Ih NP under the effect of the following ultrafast Gaussian light pulse:
E ext (t) = E 0 cos(ω 0 (t − t 0 ))e −(t−t 0 ) 2 /(2σ 2 ) x(34)
where E 0 = 51 µV /Å and σ = 2.121 fs.ω 0 is set to the PRF (3.5 eV).The parameters are chosen to match the ab initio RT-TDDFT study performed by Rossi et al. 30 on the same structure.Their ab initio results are thus taken as a reference for challenging RT-ωFQFµ.A graphical depiction of the exploited impulse is given in fig.5, where the computed RT-ωFQFµ dipole as a function of time is also reported.The light pulse triggers a plasmonic response by generating a pronounced dipole moment within the system, which arises after a few femtoseconds (see fig. 5a).As the system evolves in time, specifically when t approaches 13 fs, the system undergoes a dephasing process.The coherence of the plasmon oscillations deteriorates, leading to a gradual decay of the dipole moment.The picture outlined by RT-ωFQFµ perfectly matches the reference ab initio RT-TDDFT time evolution (see fig. 5b).The agreement between the classical and quantum methods is excellent, not only qualitatively, but also quantitatively.In fact, only minor discrepancies are observed.The time delay of the plasmonic response for RT-ωFQFµ is smaller than RT-TDDFT as highlighted by vertical 1-3 bars in fig.5a-b.In addition, RT-ωFQFµ predicts a larger induced dipole moment, but of the same order of magnitude (∼ 0.035 eÅ vs. ∼ 0.022 eÅ).This result is particularly remarkable, especially considering the classical nature of RT-ωFQFµ and the associated low computational cost.

To quantify the effective decay timing τ associated with the dephasing mechanisms, we fit the RT-ωFQFµ and RT-TDDFT curves by using e −t/τ functional form.The resulting RT-ωFQFµ τ is 9.6 fs, showing a typical localized surface plasmon decay time.This is in very good agreement with the reference ab initio fitted τ value (7.8 fs).Therefore, RT-ωFQFµ can be as accurate as RT-TDDFT in describing the plasmonic time evolution and decay, even for nanostructures below the quantum size limit, where it is commonly accepted that an explicit quantum description is necessary.The small numerical discrepancy can be due to the fact that RT-ωFQFµ does not account for electron-surface scattering damping mechanisms 64,87,88 thus modifying the final numerical value of τ .

The fitted τ substantially differs from the Drude scattering time exploited to model intraband mechanisms in our RT-ωFQFµ calculations (∼ 39 fs).Such a finding suggests that interband effects play a non-trivial role in determining the time evolution of the response of the plasmonic decay.This is expected since interband transitions determine the optical response of noble nanostructures as demonstrated in fig. 4. In fact, the interband relaxation in Ag nanostructures is governed by the inverse of γ p in eq. ( 20) (see also table S1 in the SI).For M = 6 DL oscillators, the scattering times (1/γ p ) range from 4.5 as to 30.5 as.Therefore, intra and interband decay mechanisms non-trivially interplay, resulting in the fitted τ value.To deepen on this point, in fig.5a, the RT-ωFQFµ time evolution of the total dipole moment is decomposed in its charge and dipole contributions.In fact, our classical approach allows for dissecting the contributions from delocalized and d electrons.This is possible thanks to the formulation of RT-ωFQFµ in terms of charges and dipoles with a clear physical meaning being directly associated with intra and interband mechanisms, respectively. 64gure 5a shows that charges and dipole dynamics are inherently connected, generally oscillating in counter phase for the whole duration of the plasmonic excitation (especially for t > 13 fs).Also, note that both charge and dipole decay with the same effective time, although the time scattering related to the two underlying mechanisms is defined in two different timescales.This is not surprising considering that charges and dipoles act as coupled oscillators in our model (see eqs. ( 19) and ( 20)).However, their dynamics non-trivially couple, thus resulting in the total dipole moment time evolution which has been previously discussed.

To further investigate this point, we analyze the time evolution of the plasmonic response by plotting the plasmon densities at relevant times (see 1-5, in fig.5a By comparing RT-ωFQFµ and RT-TDDFT, we note that such an interplay is correctly reproduced by our classical RT-ωFQFµ approach, thanks to the proper inclusion of intraband and interband decay mechanisms.


Summary and Conclusions

In this work we have presented two novel approaches, namely RT-ωFQ and RT-ωFQFµ, to describe the time evolution of plasmonic excitations in simple and noble metal nanoparticles.The developed methods are the real-time extension of ωFQ and ωFQFµ, which have been previously developed in the frequency domain.Such models provide an accurate fully atomistic modeling of plasmonic nanoparticles, by properly describing intra and interband effects and also tunneling mechanisms.Our real-time extension can handle short impulses (in the as/fs timescale) and CW within the same theoretical formulation.

RT-ωFQ and RT-ωFQFµ are first numerically validated taking the frequency-domain counterparts' results as reference.Then the models have been tested against two different challenging nanostructures: a sodium dimer characterized by a single atom junction, and an Ih Ag NP.To show the flexibility of our implementation, the first system is studied under CW illumination, while a Gaussian pulse is used to excite the Ag NP.As a result, while in the first case, after a transient, the total dipole moment of the nanostructure oscillates in phase with the external CW field, Ag NP total dipole moment is first excited and then fast decays in the fs timescale.In the latter, we directly compared with ab initio RT-TDDFT, demonstrating a qualitative and even quantitative agreement between our classical and the quantum approach.As a consequence, our approach can serve as a powerful approach for simulating the plasmonic response dynamics even for NP size below the quantum size limit.We note that we can further increase the agreement between our approach and full quantum treatments by including electron surface scattering damping decay mechanisms, which can serve as an additional decay channel. 87e development of RT-ωFQ and RT-ωFQFµ paves the way for the investigation of the decoherence of the plasmonic response in nanostructures of sizes considerably larger than those that can be treated at the purely quantum level, without losing accuracy.2][93][94] Such an extension will be the topic of future papers.

Figure 1 :
1
Figure 1: (left) RT-ωFQ and ωFQ absorption cross section (σ x ) of a Na 261 nanorod as polarized along the x axis.RT-ωFQ results are obtained by varying the parameters of the time evolution (∆t and T ) under the action of the external pulse in eq.(30).Relative RT-ωFQ-ωFQ errors are reported in the bottom panel.(right) RT-ωFQFµ and ωFQFµ absorption cross section (σ x ) of a Ag 164 spherical NP as polarized along the x axis.RT-ωFQFµ results are obtained by varying the parameters of the time evolution (∆t and T ) under the action of the external pulse in eq.(30).Relative RT-ωFQ-ωFQ errors are reported in the bottom panel.


Figure 2 :
2
Figure 2: (top) ωFQ absorption cross section of Na 380 dimer as polarized along the y axis.(bottom) RT-ωFQ total dipole moment induced in the y direction as a function of time for A, B, C, D, and E peaks highlighted in the top panel.


Figure 3 :
3
Figure 3: RT-ωFQ time evolution of the plasmon excitation of Na 380 dimer excited using a monochromatic field oscillating at 0.34 eV (A peak in fig.2, top panel).The plasmon oscillation is reported for the time region highlighted in green in fig.2, bottom panel.The isovalue is set to 0.001 au.




Figure 4: (left) Fitting of the experimental interband polarizability α IB (ω) by using M = 4, 5, 6 DL oscillators (see eq. (15)).(right) RT-ωFQFµ absorption cross section using α IB as fitted using M = 4, 5, 6 DL oscillators.ωFQFµ reference spectrum as calculated by using the experimental α IB is also reported for comparison's sake.


Figure 5 :
5
Figure 5: (a-b) RT-ωFQFµ (a) and RT-TDDFT 30 (b) time evolution of the plasmon excitation of Ag 561 Ih NP excited using a monochromatic Gaussian pulse (top panel).In panel a, the total RT-ωFQFµ response (red) is also decomposed in charge (blue) and dipole (orange) components.(c-d) RT-ωFQFµ (c) and RT-TDDFT 30 (d) plasmon densities at specific times (1-5) as depicted in panels a-b, respectively.The isovalue is set to 0.035.RT-TDDFT data in panels b and d are adapted with permission from Ref. 30.




,b), which are given in fig.5c.The RT-TDDFT plasmon densities, reproduced from Ref.30, are given in fig.5das a reference.The plasmonic excitation is characterized by electron density oscillations, which can be dissected into two main components.The first component is a surface-to-surface element, predominantly associated with delocalized valence electrons and intraband mechanisms.These electrons exhibit collective behavior and mainly determine the overall electron density oscillations.The second component arises from atom-localized contributions, which are linked to the screening effect due to interband transitions originating from the d-band.The plasmon decay (plots 4-5 in fig.5c) is directly correlated with the diminishing surface-to-surface electron density oscillations, marking the end of the collective plasmonic activity.The intricate interplay between the delocalized valence electrons and the localized d-band electrons therefore forms the basis of the observed electron density oscillations.














generate numerical issues in the time propagation.However, these values can be safely discarded

because α IB f it is correctly reproduced in the experimental frequency region of interest (vide infra).Three sets of parameters with M = 4, 5, 6 are finally generated.The numerical values of A p , ω p , and γ p are reported in table S1 in the Supporting Information -SI.

AcknowledgmentsWe thank Giulia Dall'Osto for the discussions on the dielectric function fitting.We gratefully acknowledge the Center for High-Performance Computing (CHPC) at SNS for providing the computational infrastructure.Funding SourcesThis work has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No. 818064).SC thanks the Horizon 2020 EU grant ProID (grant agreement No. 964363) for funding.Supporting Information AvailableNumerical values of A p , ω p , and γ p for M = 4, 5, 6 DLs.Graphical depiction of plasmon time evolution for B, C, D, and E peaks depicted in fig.3.
Theory of surface plasmons and surface-plasmon polaritons. J Pitarke, V Silkin, E Chulkov, P Echenique, Rep. Prog. Phys. 7012006

Plasmonic nanoantennas: fundamentals and their use in controlling the radiative properties of nanoemitters. V Giannini, A I Fernández-Domínguez, S C Heck, S A Maier, Chem. Rev. 1112011

Plasmons in strongly coupled metallic nanostructures. N J Halas, S Lal, W.-S Chang, S Link, P Nordlander, Chem. Rev. 1112011

The optical properties of metal nanoparticles: the influence of size, shape, and dielectric environment. K L Kelly, E Coronado, L L Zhao, G C Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B. 1072003

Tailoring surface plasmons through the morphology and assembly of metal nanoparticles. Langmuir. L M Liz-Marzán, 200622

Unraveling the effects of size, composition, and substrate on the localized surface plasmon resonance frequencies of gold and silver nanocubes: a systematic single-particle approach. E Ringe, J M Mcmahon, K Sohn, C Cobley, Y Xia, J Huang, G C Schatz, L D Marks, R P Van Duyne, J. Phys. Chem. C. 1142010

Present and Future of Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. J Langer, ACS Nano. 142020

Localized surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy and sensing. K A Willets, R P Van Duyne, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 582007

Chemical mapping of a single molecule by plasmon-enhanced Raman scattering. R Zhang, Y Zhang, Z Dong, S Jiang, C Zhang, L Chen, L Zhang, Y Liao, J Aizpurua, Y Luo, J L Yang, J G Hou, Nature. 4982013

Distinguishing adjacent molecules on a surface using plasmon-enhanced Raman scattering. S Jiang, Y Zhang, R Zhang, C Hu, M Liao, Y Luo, J Yang, Z Dong, J Hou, Nat. Nanotechnol. 102015

Conformational contrast of surface-mediated molecular switches yields Ångstrom-scale spatial resolution in ultrahigh vacuum tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy. N Chiang, X Chen, G Goubert, D V Chulhai, X Chen, E A Pozzi, N Jiang, M C Hersam, T Seideman, L Jensen, R P Van Duyne, Nano Lett. 162016

Single-molecule optomechanics in "picocavities. F Benz, M K Schmidt, A Dreismann, R Chikkaraddy, Y Zhang, A Demetriadou, C Carnegie, H Ohadi, B De Nĳs, R Esteban, Science. 3542016

Sub-nanometre resolution in single-molecule photoluminescence imaging. B Yang, G Chen, A Ghafoor, Y Zhang, Y Zhang, Y Zhang, Y Luo, J Yang, V Sandoghdar, J Aizpurua, Nat. Photonics. 142020

Single-Molecule Imaging Using Atomistic Near-Field Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. P Liu, D V Chulhai, L Jensen, ACS Nano. 112017

Earth-abundant photocatalyst for H2 generation from NH3 with light-emitting diode illumination. Y Yuan, L Zhou, H Robatjazi, J L Bao, J Zhou, A Bayles, L Yuan, M Lou, M Lou, S Khatiwada, Science. 3782022

Hybrid plasmonic nanomaterials for hydrogen generation and carbon dioxide reduction. S Ezendam, M Herran, L Nan, C Gruber, Y Kang, F Gröbmeyer, R Lin, J Gargiulo, A Sousa-Castillo, E Cortés, ACS Energy Lett. 72022

Pulsed Photothermal Heterogeneous Catalysis. A Baldi, S H Askes, ACS Catal. 132023

Tailoring plasmonic bimetallic nanocatalysts toward sunlight-driven H2 production. M Herran, A Sousa-Castillo, C Fan, S Lee, W Xie, M Döblinger, B Auguié, E Cortés, Adv. Funct. Mater. 322022. 2203418

Plasmonic Photocatalysis with Chemically and Spatially Specific Antenna-Dual Reactor Complexes. L Yuan, J Zhou, M Zhang, X Wen, J M P Martirez, H Robatjazi, L Zhou, E A Carter, P Nordlander, N J Halas, ACS Nano. 162022

Picocavities: a primer. J J Baumberg, Nano Lett. 222022

Recent advances in plasmonic nanostructures for enhanced photocatalysis and electrocatalysis. S Li, P Miao, Y Zhang, J Wu, B Zhang, Y Du, X Han, J Sun, P Xu, Adv. Mater. 332021. 2000086

From optical to chemical hot spots in plasmonics. J Gargiulo, R Berté, Y Li, S A Maier, E Cortés, Acc. Chem. Res. 522019

Hot electrons do the impossible: plasmon-induced dissociation of H2 on Au. S Mukherjee, F Libisch, N Large, O Neumann, L V Brown, J Cheng, J B Lassiter, E A Carter, P Nordlander, N J Halas, Nano Lett. 132013

Plasmon-induced hot-electron generation at nanoparticle/metal-oxide interfaces for photovoltaic and photocatalytic devices. C Clavero, Nat. Photonics. 82014

Plasmon-driven carbon-fluorine (C (sp 3)-F) bond activation with mechanistic insights into hot-carriermediated pathways. H Robatjazi, J L Bao, M Zhang, L Zhou, P Christopher, E A Carter, P Nordlander, N J Halas, Nat. Catal. 32020

Recent progress and prospects in plasmon-mediated chemical reaction. Matter. C Zhan, M Moskovits, Z.-Q Tian, 20203

Plasmonic Catalysis: New Opportunity for Selective Chemical Bond Evolution. Y Dong, C Hu, H Xiong, R Long, Y Xiong, ACS Catal. 132023

Experimental characterization techniques for plasmon-assisted chemistry. E Cortés, R Grzeschik, S A Maier, S Schlücker, Nat. Rev. Chem. 62022

Nordlander, P. The Dynamics of Plasmon-Induced Hot Carrier Creation in Colloidal Gold. J Sa, A Wach, J Szlachetko, A Maximenko, T Sobol, E Partyka-Jankowska, C Bacellar, C Cirelli, P Johnson, R G Castillo, V R Silveira, P Broqvist, J Kullgren, N Halas, 2024. June 2024preprint

Hot-carrier generation in plasmonic nanoparticles: The importance of atomic structure. T P Rossi, P Erhart, M Kuisma, ACS. 2020

Relaxation of plasmon-induced hot carriers. J G Liu, H Zhang, S Link, P Nordlander, ACS Photonics. 52017

Plasmon-induced hot carriers: An atomistic perspective of the first tens of femtoseconds. C G Sánchez, M Berdakin, J. Phys. Chem. C. 1262022

Molecular dynamics study of plasmon-mediated chemical transformations. X Wu, T Van Der Heide, S Wen, T Frauenheim, S Tretiak, C Yam, Y Zhang, Chem. Sci. 142023

García de Abajo, F. J. Modelling the optical response of gold nanoparticles. V Myroshnychenko, J Rodríguez-Fernández, I Pastoriza-Santos, A M Funston, C Novo, P Mulvaney, L M Liz-Marzan, Chem. Soc. Rev. 372008

MNPBEM-A Matlab toolbox for the simulation of plasmonic nanoparticles. U Hohenester, A Trügler, Comput. Phys. Commun. 1832012

Retarded field calculation of electron energy loss in inhomogeneous dielectrics. F J García De Abajo, A Howie, Phys. Rev. B. 652002. 115418

Efficient dielectric function for FDTD simulation of the optical properties of silver and gold nanoparticles. F Hao, P Nordlander, Chem. Phys. Lett. 4462007

Optimizing the Drude-Lorentz model for material permittivity: Method, program, and examples for gold, silver, and copper. H Sehmi, W Langbein, E Muljarov, Phys. Rev. B. 1154442017

Quantum effects and nonlocality in strongly coupled plasmonic nanowire dimers. T V Teperik, P Nordlander, J Aizpurua, A G Borisov, Opt. Express. 212013

Quantum mechanical effects in plasmonic structures with subnanometre gaps. W Zhu, R Esteban, A G Borisov, J J Baumberg, P Nordlander, H J Lezec, J Aizpurua, K B Crozier, Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 11495

Atomic-Scale Lightning Rod Effect in Plasmonic Picocavities: A Classical View to a Quantum Effect. M Urbieta, M Barbry, Y Zhang, P Koval, D Sánchez-Portal, N Zabala, J Aizpurua, ACS Nano. 122018

Revealing the quantum regime in tunnelling plasmonics. K J Savage, M M Hawkeye, R Esteban, A G Borisov, J Aizpurua, J J Baumberg, Nature. 4912012

Quantum plasmonics: nonlinear effects in the field enhancement of a plasmonic nanoparticle dimer. D Marinica, A Kazansky, P Nordlander, J Aizpurua, A G Borisov, Nano Lett. 122012

Bridging quantum and classical plasmonics with a quantum-corrected model. R Esteban, A G Borisov, P Nordlander, J Aizpurua, Nat. Commun. 38252012

A classical treatment of optical tunneling in plasmonic gaps: extending the quantum corrected model to practical situations. R Esteban, A Zugarramurdi, P Zhang, P Nordlander, F J García-Vidal, A G Borisov, J Aizpurua, Faraday Discuss. 1782015

Hillenkamp, M. Plasmonic quantum size effects in silver nanoparticles are dominated by interfaces and local environments. A Campos, N Troc, E Cottancin, M Pellarin, H.-C Weissker, J Lermé, M Kociak, Nat. Phys. 152019

Observation of quantum tunneling between two plasmonic nanoparticles. J A Scholl, A García-Etxarri, A L Koh, J A Dionne, Nano Lett. 132013

Sánchez-Portal, D. Atomistic near-field nanoplasmonics: reaching atomic-scale resolution in nanooptics. M Barbry, P Koval, F Marchesin, R Esteban, A Borisov, J Aizpurua, Nano Lett. 152015

Time Evolution of Plasmonic Features in Pentagonal Ag Clusters. N Domenis, P Grobas Illobre, M Marsili, M Stener, D Toffoli, E Coccia, Molecules. 2856712023

Recent Advances in Real-Time Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory Simulations of Plasmonic Nanostructures and Plasmonic Photocatalysis. C J Herring, M Montemore, ACS Nanosci. Au. 32023

Localized surface plasmon resonance in silver nanoparticles: Atomistic first-principles time-dependent density-functional theory calculations. M Kuisma, A Sakko, T P Rossi, A H Larsen, J Enkovaara, L Lehtovaara, T T Rantala, Phys. Rev. B. 1154312015

Quantum coherent plasmon in silver nanowires: A real-time TDDFT study. F Ding, E B Guidez, C M Aikens, X Li, J. Chem. Phys. 2447052014

Real-time TDDFT investigation of optical absorption in gold nanowires. R D Senanayake, D B Lingerfelt, G U Kuda-Singappulige, X Li, C M Aikens, J. Phys. Chem. C. 1232019

A new time dependent density functional algorithm for large systems and plasmons in metal clusters. O Baseggio, G Fronzoni, M Stener, J. Chem. Phys. 241062015

Photoabsorption of icosahedral noble metal clusters: An efficient TDDFT approach to large-scale systems. O Baseggio, M De Vetta, G Fronzoni, M Stener, L Sementa, A Fortunelli, A Calzolari, J. Phys. Chem. C. 1202016

Classical and ab Initio Plasmonics Meet at Sub-nanometric Noble Metal Rods. R Sinha-Roy, P Garcia-Gonzalez, H.-C Weissker, F Rabilloud, A I Fernandez-Dominguez, ACS Photonics. 42017

A classical picture of subnanometer junctions: an atomistic Drude approach to nanoplasmonics. T Giovannini, M Rosa, S Corni, C Cappelli, Nanoscale. 112019

Plasmonic Resonances of Metal Nanoparticles: Atomistic vs. L Bonatti, G Gil, T Giovannini, S Corni, C Cappelli, Continuum Approaches. Front. Chem. 83402020

Graphene plasmonics: Fully atomistic approach for realistic structures. T Giovannini, L Bonatti, M Polini, C Cappelli, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 112020

In silico design of graphene plasmonic hot-spots. L Bonatti, L Nicoli, T Giovannini, C Cappelli, Nanoscale Adv. 42022

Strain-induced plasmon confinement in polycrystalline graphene. S Zanotto, L Bonatti, M F Pantano, V Miseikis, G Speranza, T Giovannini, C Coletti, C Cappelli, A Tredicucci, A Toncelli, ACS Photonics. 102023

Classical electronic and molecular dynamics simulation for optical response of metal system. A Yamada, J. Chem. Phys. 1552021. 174118

Time-dependent Kohn-Sham electron dynamics coupled with nonequilibrium plasmonic response via atomistic electromagnetic model. X Huang, W Zhang, W Liang, J. Chem. Phys. 2024214106

Do we really need quantum mechanics to describe plasmonic properties of metal nanostructures?. T Giovannini, L Bonatti, P Lafiosca, L Nicoli, M Castagnola, P G Illobre, S Corni, C Cappelli, ACS. 2022

Fully atomistic modeling of plasmonic bimetallic nanoparticles: nanoalloys and core-shell systems. L Nicoli, P Lafiosca, P Grobas Illobre, L Bonatti, T Giovannini, C Cappelli, Front. Photonics. 2023, 4, 1199598

Drude-Model Calculation of Dispersion Forces. I. General Theory. W Bade, J. Chem. Phys. 271957

Going Beyond the Limits of Classical Atomistic Modeling of Plasmonic Nanostructures. P Lafiosca, T Giovannini, M Benzi, C Cappelli, J. Phys. Chem. C. 1252021

Formulation in terms of normalized propagators of a charge-dipole model enabling the calculation of the polarization properties of fullerenes and carbon nanotubes. A Mayer, Phys. Rev. B. 454072007

Optical properties of metallic nanoparticles: influence of interface effects and interband transitions. A Pinchuk, U Kreibig, A Hilger, Surf. Sci. 5572004

Influence of interband electronic transitions on the optical absorption in metallic nanoparticles. A Pinchuk, G Von Plessen, U Kreibig, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 31332004

Evidence of an enhanced interband absorption in Au nanoparticles: size-dependent electronic structure and optical properties. B Balamurugan, T Maruyama, Appl. Phys. Lett. 1431052005

Surface-plasmon dispersion and size dependence of Mie resonance: silver versus simple metals. A Liebsch, Phys. Rev. B. 113171993

Efficiency of hot-electron generation in plasmonic nanocrystals with complex shapes: surface-induced scattering, hot spots, and interband transitions. E Y Santiago, L V Besteiro, X.-T Kong, M A Correa-Duarte, Z Wang, A O Govorov, ACS Photonics. 72020

Polarizable QM/MM approach with fluctuating charges and fluctuating dipoles: the QM/FQFµ model. T Giovannini, A Puglisi, M Ambrosetti, C Cappelli, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 152019

Real-time dynamics of plasmonic resonances in nanoparticles described by a boundary element method with generic dielectric function. G Dall'osto, G Gil, S Pipolo, S Corni, J. Chem. Phys. 1841142020

Second-order integrators for Langevin equations with holonomic constraints. E Vanden-Eĳnden, G Ciccotti, Chem. Phys. Lett. 4292006

Global optimization by basin-hopping and the lowest energy structures of Lennard-Jones clusters containing up to 110 atoms. D J Wales, J P Doye, J. Phys. Chem. A. 1011997

LMFIT: Non-Linear Least-Square Minimization and Curve-Fitting for Python. M Newville, T Stensitzki, D B Allen, A Ingargiola, 10.5281/zenodo.118132015

SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python. P Virtanen, Nat. Methods. 172020

Plasmonic response of metallic nanojunctions driven by single atom motion: quantum transport revealed in optics. F Marchesin, P Koval, M Barbry, J Aizpurua, D Sánchez-Portal, ACS Photonics. 32016

Plasmon hybridization model generalized to conductively bridged nanoparticle dimers. L Liu, Y Wang, Z Fang, K Zhao, J. Chem. Phys. 643102013

Optical characterization of charge transfer and bonding dimer plasmons in linked interparticle gaps. O Pérez-González, N Zabala, J Aizpurua, New J. Phys. 830132011

Nanoplasmonics: classical down to the nanometer scale. H Duan, A I Fernández-Domínguez, M Bosman, S A Maier, J K Yang, Nano Lett. 122012

Quantized evolution of the plasmonic response in a stretched nanorod. T P Rossi, A Zugarramurdi, M J Puska, R M Nieminen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2368042015

Quantum plasmonics: from jellium models to ab initio calculations. A Varas, P García-González, J Feist, F García-Vidal, A Rubio, Nanophotonics. 52016

Ab initio nanoplasmonics: The impact of atomic structure. P Zhang, J Feist, A Rubio, P García-González, F García-Vidal, Phys. Rev. B. 1614072014

Generating hot carriers in plasmonic nanoparticles: when quantization does matter? ACS Photonics. J B Khurgin, U Levy, 20207

Landau damping and limit to field confinement and enhancement in plasmonic dimers. J Khurgin, W.-Y Tsai, D P Tsai, G Sun, ACS Photonics. 42017

Qm/classical modeling of surface enhanced Raman scattering based on atomistic electromagnetic models. P Lafiosca, L Nicoli, L Bonatti, T Giovannini, S Corni, C Cappelli, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 192023

Multiscale Modeling of Surface Enhanced Fluorescence. P G Illobre, P Lafiosca, T Guidone, F Mazza, T Giovannini, C Cappelli, 10.1039/D4NA00080CNanoscale Adv. 2024

Real-time description of the electronic dynamics for a molecule close to a plasmonic nanoparticle. S Pipolo, S Corni, J. Phys. Chem. C. 1202016

Electronic dynamics of a molecular system coupled to a plasmonic nanoparticle combining the polarizable continuum model and many-body perturbation theory. M Marsili, S Corni, J. Phys. Chem. C. 1262022

Hybrid theoretical models for molecular nanoplasmonics. E Coccia, J Fregoni, C Guido, M Marsili, S Pipolo, S Corni, J. Chem. Phys. 1532020. 200901

Peeking into the Femtosecond Hot-Carrier Dynamics Reveals Unexpected Mechanisms in Plasmonic Photocatalysis. G Dall'osto, M Marsili, M Vanzan, D Toffoli, M Stener, S Corni, E Coccia, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1462024