IS LESS MORE? QUALITY, QUANTITY AND CONTEXT IN IDIOM PROCESSING WITH NATURAL LANGUAGE MODELS


Agne Knietaite 
University of Sheffield Sheffield
UK

Adam Allsebrook 
University of Sheffield Sheffield
UK

Anton Minkov 
University of Sheffield Sheffield
UK

Adam Tomaszewski 
University of Sheffield Sheffield
UK

Norbert Slinko 
University of Sheffield Sheffield
UK

Richard Johnson 
University of Sheffield Sheffield
UK

Thomas Pickard tmrpickard1@sheffield.ac.uk 
University of Sheffield Sheffield
UK

Dylan Phelps 
University of Sheffield Sheffield
UK

Aline Villavicencio a.villavicencio@exeter.ac.uk 
Institute for Data Science and Artificial Intelligence
University of Exeter Exeter
UK

IS LESS MORE? QUALITY, QUANTITY AND CONTEXT IN IDIOM PROCESSING WITH NATURAL LANGUAGE MODELS
18C1301129AAEA52E759910613E500C710.15131/shef.data.25259722Compositional processingidiomatic expressionsmultiword expressions
Compositionality in language models presents a problem when processing idiomatic expressions, as their meaning often cannot be directly derived from their individual parts.Although fine-tuning and other optimization strategies can be used to improve representations of idiomatic expressions, this depends on the availability of relevant data.We present the Noun Compound Synonym Substitution in Books -NCSSB -datasets, which are created by substitution of synonyms of potentially idiomatic English noun compounds in public domain book texts.We explore the trade-off between data quantity and quality when training models for idiomaticity detection, in conjunction with contextual information obtained locally (from the surrounding sentences) or externally (through language resources).Performance on an idiomaticity detection task indicates that dataset quality is a stronger factor for context-enriched models, but quantity also plays a role in models without context inclusion.

Introduction

Pre-trained language models such as XLNet [1], GPT-3 [2] and BERT [3] employ principles of compositionality to encode the meaning of language, with sentence-level semantics derived from the combination of word and subword token-level elements.While these models perform very well on many classical text comprehension tasks [4,5,6,7,8], idiomatic language comprehension remains a challenge [9], as idiomatic multiword expressions (MWEs) carry noncompositional semantics [10].The meanings of idiomatic MWEs may therefore not be accurately captured by (sub)word composition [11,12].

Approaches to addressing this problem in the model training stages have included providing more MWE-relevant data [13] and choosing specific idioms on which to train the model [14].However, it remains unclear whether quality or quantity of data is more important for idiomatic processing tasks; Phelps [15] provides evidence for the former, and Adewumi et al. [13] the latter.

To more fully capture contextual clues that can help derive the idiomatic meaning, additional sentences from the local paragraph context can be taken into account when modeling idiomatic expressions [9].More global contextual information or "commonsense" knowledge about an idiomatic expression has also been incorporated, using glosses from external knowledge sources [16] or the whole target sentence [17].


arXiv:2405.08497v1 [cs.CL] 14 May 2024

As the impacts of data quality and quantity, the inclusion of external knowledge and their interactions on idiomaticity detection are unclear, we aim to investigate these factors; in particular:

• Does data quality or quantity play a bigger role in model performance when identifying idiomatic language?• Does additional contextual information play a role in modeling idiomatic language?

To facilitate this, we create the Noun Compound Synonym Substitution in Books (NCSSB) datasets, which vary in size and quality and contain instances of potentially idiomatic expressions together with surrounding context sentences ( §3).

Language models using several different context inclusion techniques are trained on these datasets ( §4).The performance of these models is evaluated ( §5) on the idiom representation task of SemEval 2022 Task 2 Subtask B [18].We conclude with discussion of our findings ( §6).We also make our datasets 1 and the code used for dataset creation and model enhancement2 publicly available.


Idiom Representation

The capability of large language models in processing idiomatic expressions has been the focus of shared tasks like SemEval 2022 Task 2 [18], which focuses on idiomatic MWE representation.Subtask B requires a model to return a Semantic Text Similarity (STS) score indicating the similarity between two sentences.The dataset comprises sentences containing a potentially idiomatic expression, denoted E, and two variations of E: E c is a sentence with a valid MWE replacement and E i is a sentence with an incorrect replacement given the context.See Figure 1, where the idiomatic "guinea pig" is replaced by the semantically-equivalent "test subject" in E c and by "animal" (which would be valid for a literal guinea pig) in E i .

The semantic similarity between E and E c should be equal to 1, while the similarity between E and E i should be equal to the similarity between E c and E i [18]:
sim(E, E c ) = 1 sim(E, E i ) = sim(E c , E i )
To perform well on both of these objectives, a model needs to produce similar embeddings of E and E c , which would be an indication that the model was able to capture the correct meaning of the idiomatic expression.


Idiomaticity Detection

Subtask A of SemEval 2022 Task 2 [18] focuses on the related task of idiomaticity detection -binary classification of sentences according to whether or not a given expression is used in its idiomatic sense.Hauer et al. [19] explore the idea of providing definitions of the individual component words of an expression for this task.Two glosses, sourced from BabelNet [20] and the Open Multilingual Wordnet [21], are supplied for each individual word of the MWE in a target sentence.This method achieves an increase in performance over the baseline model of 4.1% and 5.3% in the zero-shot and one-shot settings respectively [18].

In this context, GlossBERT [22] would offer a solution to the word sense disambiguation problem [23], in this case for the literal and idiomatic senses.Word senses are represented as 'context-gloss pairs', each containing a sentence including a marked target word and a single definition of this word, obtained from WordNet 3.0 [24].Although glosses for the complete MWE would be useful, these are much less available than glosses for individual words.In an analysis of the coverage of the SemEval 2022 Task 2 dataset [18], 81.6% of the 223 MWEs in the training data have at least one gloss in WordNet, and of the remaining MWEs, 68.2% are idiomatic.Wiktionary covers more of the training data, with 86.1% of MWEs having a gloss and only 22.6% of the remaining MWEs being idiomatic.

Assuming the 'idiom principle' [25], which suggests that a person has a lexicon of pre-constructed phrases [26], having access to MWE glosses would be beneficial for a model to represent potentially idiomatic expressions more accurately [27].Moreover, as native speakers seem to learn the meaning of idioms from being exposed to repeated use in context [28], a model could also be expected to learn from being exposed to sentences containing idiomatic expressions.

For NLP tasks a huge amount of data can be crawled from the web [2].However, data collected from the web can be of low quality and may often include text that is not natural language [4].Ignoring the quality of the data and using it to train models often leads to a drop in model performance [29].One method to improve such data quality is to filter down a large dataset into a smaller but higher-quality subset; Raffel et al. [4] found that the filtered Colossal Clean Crawled Corpus (C4) dataset performed better than the unfiltered variant in a range of tasks, despite being nearly 10 times smaller than the base Common Crawl.

For supervised learning tasks, any unlabelled training data gathered must be annotated, requiring costly manual annotation methods [30,31,32].For potentially idiomatic natural language data, sentences are often labelled either by language experts [33,34,35] or through crowd-sourcing [30,31,32].To minimize human error and bias in the annotations, each data point is often annotated by more than one person.Various metrics are used to calculate the quality and annotator agreement of the labels, such as Spearman correlation coefficient [30,34,32], Cohen's kappa coefficient [35,9] and Kendall's tau [33].

Data augmentation techniques can be used to increase dataset size by creating new synthetic data based on an initial set [36].If high-quality data can be enlarged by automatic methods, one can potentially reduce reliance on costly manual methods.One SemEval 22 Task 2 entry [37] used the Easy Data Augmentation (EDA) approach of Wei and Zou [38], Karimi et al. [39], reducing data requirements by around half with no impact on performance.However, this is not always a suitable solution for MWEs, as component words can be removed as a result of EDA's random insertions and edits.Thus, we hypothesise that a more targeted form of augmentation could increase performance further [40].


Datasets


Data Collection

Data was collected from the Project Gutenberg corpus [41], which consists of over forty thousand English books in the public domain.The resulting data was tokenised into individual sentences using regular expressions.The sentences obtained were then filtered for idiomatic phrases as well as their literal and figurative synonyms found in the extended noun compound senses dataset provided by Tayyar Madabushi et al. [9].The resulting dataset is split into three main tiers of data, with some subsets (see Table 1).


Bronze Dataset

Sentences in this dataset are generated by an approach outlined by Tayyar Madabushi et al. [9] (Figure 1):

1. Sentences containing synonyms of the figurative meanings of idioms are found (E c ); 2. Figurative meaning synonyms are replaced with idioms, forming E; 3. Idioms are replaced by literal meanings, forming E i .

As this approach is purely automatic, it yields many entries (approx.1,400,000) but is expected to be lacking in quality, as indicated by previous research [29,42].


Silver Dataset

A semi-automatic approach, with some concern for quality, where the Bronze dataset is filtered to exclude some of the low-quality sentences [4].Filtering is conducted by using constrained patterns to identify sentences where synonyms can be replaced by idioms without negatively affecting the meaning of the sentence itself.The SemEval data [18] is taken as a high-quality dataset, whose sentences are then compared to the Bronze dataset.The Silver 1, Silver 5, and Silver 10 are respectively the top 1%, 5% and 10% of the Bronze dataset when ranked according to cosine similarity with frequency count vectors of sentences for a given MWE in the SemEval dataset.The sizes of these datasets are approximately 10,000, 50,000 and 100,000 respectively3 .


Gold Dataset

A hand-labelled dataset, reviewed manually by (near-)native English speakers.As a base, the annotators used the Silver dataset, selecting only correctly-formed sentences, thus reducing entry size to 1,551 and assuring the best quality [15].Each data record was annotated by two annotators, with typical agreement being about 80% .In the case where the annotators disagreed on an entry, a third made the decision.


Dataset


Modeling


Base Model

A similar base model to the SemEval 2022 Task 2 Subtask B baseline [18] is used.The models are based on a pre-trained mBERT model [3].MWEs in the input are represented by randomly-initialised tokens (rather than, for example, averaging the embeddings of component words) in order to avoid invalid compositional assumptions.Multiple negatives ranking loss and triplet loss are used during training in place of the baseline's cosine similarity loss, as these were shown by Liu et al. [43] to improve performance.


Data Augmentation

Some entrants to SemEval 2022 Task 2 [18] improved their results by using data augmentation [37,19].For enhancement of our Gold dataset we adopt three different approaches, implemented using the NLPAug library [44]:

• SpellingAug -Substitute words using a spelling mistake dictionary; • WordEmbsAug -Leverage word2vec embeddings;

• TdidfAug -Determine which word is inserted or replaced based on a TF-IDF model.

Spelling Augmentation was selected as a basic approach, introducing common spelling mistakes [45].The more complex approaches include using pre-trained NLP models utilising word2vec [46] and TF-IDF scores [40].This allows insertion or replacement of likely adjacent words in sentences, rather than random augmentation.


Model Enhancements

The proposed model enhancements focus on incorporation of 'knowledge' from one of two sources: local context (using the surrounding sentences in the input text in addition to the target sentence) and global context, adding external knowledge that is not present in the text but that a human reader could be able to infer.Table 2 outlines the training input in each of the configurations.


Local Context

Input to the model is expanded to include both the previous and the following sentence (where available), in addition to the target sentence.The three sentences are simply concatenated into a single text input.extra context is likely to have mixed effects depending on the input; sentences of an entirely different topic could be concatenated together into one input, and it is unclear whether this will be more useful or harmful [9,17].


External Knowledge


ParaCOMET

The COMET model, and its discourse-aware extension ParaCOMET, have been used [17] to return inferences focusing on specific entity relation types, which are then passed into a downstream model.A similar approach was employed in our experiments, feeding the target sentence(s) into ParaCOMET to generate external context.The ParaCOMET outputs are further concatenated with the input text.


Glosses

Hauer et al. [19] showed that glosses can improve performance for Subtask A (idiomaticity detection), and a similar approach is taken here for Subtask B (idiom representation).For each component word of the MWE, up to n glosses are retrieved from WordNet [24] and appended to the input sentence.The number of glosses hyperparameter, n, was tuned on the Silver 1 dataset, and we find 5 to be the optimal value (Figure 2).


Evaluation

The three model enhancement variations are all trained using our data (sub)sets, i.e. the Gold, Silver 1, Silver 5 and Silver 10 (Table 1) .All of the models and their configurations are evaluated on the English subset of the SemEval evaluation dataset, using their provided scores as a baseline.Embeddings are compared using cosine similarity as in Sentence-BERT [47] to solve the STS task, which specifically aims to evaluate whether the model actually encodes idiom meanings correctly [18].


Results

All results are presented in terms of the Spearman rank correlation [48] between output STS scores for sentences containing idiomatic expressions and the same sentences when MWEs are replaced with non-idiomatic paraphrases; this is the same evaluation metric used to evaluate submissions to SemEval 2022 Task 2 Subtask B [18].


Dataset Factors


Automatic Generation Evaluation

To evaluate how the Silver and Gold data set generation methods affect the quality of data, two more datasets were created by randomly sampling the Bronze dataset down to the size of the Silver 10 and Gold sets.The results are presented in Figure 3, where in the Gold versus randomly sampled Bronze case, we see a minor improvement in performance, indicating some increase in dataset quality.This is to be expected as the Gold dataset creation method is manual and thus assures a high level of item quality.For the Silver comparison, there is negligible difference in performance.This suggests that the method of creating the Silver set is insufficient to meaningfully improve the quality of the dataset.This could indicate that the quality of the Bronze set is already high enough that it is difficult to further improve it without manual effort, weaknesses in our choice of the SemEval 2022 Task 2 training data as a high-quality reference, or flaws in the filtering method.

Despite a slight increase in quality in the Gold dataset, it still was outperformed by the much larger, lower-quality, Silver set.This indicates that quantity in this case seems to be the most important factor.


Data Augmentation

Figure 4 presents the results models trained using the data-augmented Gold and Gold in combination with SemEval datasets.In each case, the augmented dataset is twice the size of the unagumented set, which is included for comparison.Each model was trained for 4 epochs and used multiple negatives ranking and triplet loss.

All but one augmentation type (spelling errors) yielded a modest improvement over the baseline.TF-IDF insertion had the biggest impact with the Gold and SemEval combined dataset, whereas TF-IDF replace seemed to perform better on smaller data.Although the dataset size is doubled via an automatic process, the performance achieved indicates that the quality remains and the larger datasets are usable; data augmentation can provide an increase in data volume while maintaining overall quality.


External Knowledge Factors


Local Context

Figure 5 shows the performance of our baseline models using only the target sentence and with the addition of the preceding and following sentences (where available).We observe an increase in performance as the dataset size increases.Additionally, the performance of the paragraph-wide context models is always lower than the sentence-only context.It is possible that the adjacent sentences do not contain information related to the current idiom, and as such, simply distract the model.Another possibility is that this results from the mismatch between model training and evaluation data.As the SemEval evaluation set contains only the target potentially idiomatic sentences, models may not be able to benefit from access to the surrounding sentences.


Gloss Models

The gloss models were trained using n = 5 glosses for 15 epochs on each dataset apart from the Silver 10 dataset, which concluded at 5 epochs.Each of these gloss models is compared to their sentence-only model (n = 0) counterpart in Figure 6.The gloss model shows improvement over the sentence-only model only on the Silver 1 dataset.This could be caused by the choice of the number of glosses hyperparameter, which was tuned on the Silver 1 data.In order to test this theory, models were trained on the Gold dataset with n = 1, 3. The n = 1 model showed marginal improvement over the sentence model, though this is unconvincing evidence that hyperparameter selection is the sole reason for the performance on the Silver 1 dataset.

A comparison is made between the sentence and gloss models' performance on the general STS and MWE-specific portions of the evaluation dataset (Figure 7).The gloss model performs better on the general STS data, whereas the sentence model performs better on the MWE-specific data.This suggests that using glosses for MWE component words is beneficial for the sentence similarity task but does not improve the models' representation of idioms.


ParaCOMET Model

We investigated using sentence-only and paragraph-wide local context and ParaCOMET knowledge, generating either 5 or 12 inferences.Inferences generated were of the types xNeed, xIntent, xWant, xReact, xEffect and xAttr as suggested by Chakrabarty et al. [17].

Focusing on each model's performance on the Silver 1 dataset, a medium-sized dataset that is not handpicked, we obtained the highest performance when appending the surrounding sentences to the target sentence along with 12 inferences generated from the target sentence, as outlined in Figure 8. Results across the four datasets for models using sentence-only local context with either 5 or 12 sentence inferences are presented in Figure 9.

We observe a significant drop in performance as we move from manually-collected Gold to an automatically scraped Silver dataset.The results also suggest that a lower number of inferences is more beneficial when combined with a smaller, high-quality dataset, while a higher number of inferences helps when the dataset quality is lower.

Figure 9: Performance of two ParaCOMET-enhanced models across datasets.


Discussion

Figure 10 highlights the best-performing configurations of the three constructed models.The base model without any modifications is the only one to outperform the SemEval baseline.However, note that these models are trained without direct access to the SemEval training set -our results when combining our data with the SemEval training (see Figure 4) suggest that this would yield further improvements.

Our hypothesised rise in performance as dataset quality increases is generally not observed.However, we that the results are impacted by the small difference in quality between the datasets , especially Bronze and Silver.Furthermore, the Gold dataset, which has a more significant quality increase, might not have been of sufficient size, as its counterpart from the SemEval Task 2 is three times larger.It is worth noting, however, that in the case of context-enhanced models, performance did increase with dataset quality.

Figure 10: Best-performing model configurations.

It appears that providing the model with surrounding sentence context is not generally useful for all model configurations, with or without enhancement.It can also be observed that across context-enhanced models, context specific to the idiomatic MWE plays the most significant part, as the best-performing models occur when they are constrained to the target sentence (Figure 8) or do not have too much possibly distracting additional information attached (Figure 2, Figure 6).This leads to the intuition that if context is to be valuable for idiom representation, it should be as specific and relevant as possible to the MWE


Conclusions

In this work we introduce the Noun Compound Synonym Substitution in Books (NCSSB) datasets, and use them to investigate the impact of factors like data quality and quantity in modeling idiomatic expressions, as well as examining the inclusion of different types of contextual information.

For identification of idiomatic language, a balance between dataset quality and quantity needs to be reached: a small dataset of high quality might not be enough to fully enable the model to accurately represent idiomatic MWEs.Nonetheless, quality seems to have a stronger impact than quantity when using knowledge-enhanced models.

While the inclusion of local context from adjacent sentences led to decreased model performance in all scenarios, the use of external knowledge from glosses and ParaCOMET inferences led to better performance.These results suggest that for models where targeted external knowledge is available, increases in performance can be obtained with small but high-quality datasets.For models with no knowledge enhancement, larger training datasets led to better performance.Therefore, dataset quality and quantity seem to interact with characteristics of the model and access to contextual information.A balance including high quality data and access to context is at the core of idiomatic language understanding in natural language models.

Figure 2 :
2
Figure 2: Performance with differing number of glosses, n, on Silver 1 dataset.


Figure 3 :
3
Figure 3: Performance of Gold and Silver 10 datasets against randomly-sampled Bronze datasets of the same size.


Figure 4 :
4
Figure 4: Impact of data augmentations applied to the Gold and Gold + SemEval datasets.


Figure 5 :
5
Figure 5: Performance of sentence and paragraph context baseline models as dataset size increases.


Figure 6 :
6
Figure 6: Performance comparison of gloss and sentence-only models across datasets.


Figure 7 :
7
Figure 7: Model performance (trained on Silver 1) on general STS and MWE-specific evaluation.


Figure 8 :
8
Figure 8: Performance of each ParaCOMET knowledge enhancement combination, training on the Silver 1 dataset.


Table 1 :
1
Experimental dataset summary, SemEval dataset included for comparison.
SizeQuality(Approx.)

Table 2 :
2
The addition of this Overview of model enhancement and context configurations.
LocalGlobal (ParaCOMET)Global (Gloss)Sentence-WideTarget SentenceTarget Sentence + ParaCOMET fromTarget Sentence +ContextTarget SentenceGloss from IdiomParagraph-Target + SurroundingTarget + Surrounding Sentences +N/AWide ContextSentencesParaCOMET from Target and Sur-rounding Sentences
https://doi.org/10.15131/shef.data.25259722
https://github.com/agneknie/com4520DarwinProject
Some additional filtering of grammatically and structurally incorrect sentences is also applied.
AcknowledgmentsThis work was in part supported by the Centre for Doctoral Training in Speech and Language Technologies (SLT) and their Applications funded by UK Research and Innovation [grant number EP/S023062/1].The work was also partly supported by The Healthy Lifespan Institute (HELSI) at The University of Sheffield, UK EPSRC grants EP/T517835/1 and EP/T02450X/1, by the Turing Institute Fellowship and by the UniDive COST Action.
Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining language understanding. Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Russ R Salakhutdinov, Quoc V Le, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. H Wallach, H Larochelle, A Beygelzimer, F Alché-Buc, E Fox, R Garnett, Curran Associates, Inc201932

Language models are few-shot learners. Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mccandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, Dario Amodei, 2020

BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, 10.18653/v1/N19-1423Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. Long and Short Papers. Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, Thamar Solorio, the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language TechnologiesMinneapolis, MinnesotaAssociation for Computational LinguisticsJune 20191

Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, Peter J Liu, 2023

ERNIE: Enhanced language representation with informative entities. Zhengyan Zhang, Xu Han, Zhiyuan Liu, Xin Jiang, Maosong Sun, Qun Liu, 10.18653/v1/P19-1139Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Anna Korhonen, David Traum, Lluís Màrquez, the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational LinguisticsFlorence, ItalyAssociation for Computational LinguisticsJuly 2019

A complete process of text classification system using state-of-the-art nlp models. Varun Dogra, Sahil Verma, Pushpita Kavita, Jana Chatterjee, Jaeyoung Shafi, Muhammad Choi, Sumarga Fazal Ijaz, Sah Kumar, Tyagi, 10.1155/2022/1883698Intell. Neuroscience. 1687-52652022. jan 2022

Real-World Natural Language Processing. Asato Hagiwara, 2021Manning

AutoEQA: Auto-encoding questions for extractive question answering. Stalin Varanasi, Saadullah Amin, Guenter Neumann, 10.18653/v1/2021.findings-emnlp.403Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021. Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, Scott , Wen-Tau Yih, Punta Cana, Dominican RepublicAssociation for Computational LinguisticsNovember 2021

AStitchInLan-guageModels: Dataset and methods for the exploration of idiomaticity in pre-trained language models. Edward Harish Tayyar Madabushi, Carolina Gow-Smith, Aline Scarton, Villavicencio, 10.18653/v1/2021.findings-emnlp.294Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021. Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, Scott , Wen-Tau Yih, Punta Cana, Dominican RepublicAssociation for Computational LinguisticsNovember 2021

Survey: Multiword expression processing: A Survey. Mathieu Constant, Gülşen Eryiǧit, Johanna Monti, Lonneke Van Der Plas, Carlos Ramisch, Michael Rosner, Amalia Todirascu, 10.1162/COLI_a_00302Computational Linguistics. 434December 2017

Probing for idiomaticity in vector space models. Marcos Garcia, Tiago Kramer Vieira, Carolina Scarton, Marco Idiart, Aline Villavicencio, 10.18653/v1/2021.eacl-main.310Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume. Paola Merlo, Jorg Tiedemann, Reut Tsarfaty, the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main VolumeAssociation for Computational LinguisticsApril 2021

Assessing phrasal representation and composition in transformers. Lang Yu, Allyson Ettinger, 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.397Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). Bonnie Webber, Trevor Cohn, Yulan He, Yang Liu, the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP)Association for Computational LinguisticsNovember 2020

Potential idiomatic expression (PIE)-English: Corpus for classes of idioms. Tosin Adewumi, Roshanak Vadoodi, Aparajita Tripathy, Konstantina Nikolaido, Foteini Liwicki, Marcus Liwicki ; Philippe Blache, Khalid Choukri, Christopher Cieri, Thierry Declerck, Sara Goggi, Hitoshi Isahara, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Hélène Mazo, Proceedings of the Thirteenth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference. Nicoletta Calzolari, Frédéric Béchet, the Thirteenth Language Resources and Evaluation ConferenceMarseille, FranceEuropean Language Resources AssociationJan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis. June 2022

Shapley idioms: Analysing bert sentence embeddings for general idiom token identification. Vasudevan Nedumpozhimana, Filip Klubička, John D Kelleher, 10.3389/frai.2022.813967Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence. 2624-821252022

Dylan Phelps, 10.18653/v1/2022.semeval-1.18Proceedings of the 16th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2022). Guy Emerson, Natalie Schluter, Gabriel Stanovsky, Ritesh Kumar, Alexis Palmer, Nathan Schneider, Siddharth Singh, Shyam Ratan, the 16th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2022)Seattle, United StatesAssociation for Computational LinguisticsJuly 2022SemEval-2022 task 2: Learning idiom representations using BERTRAM

UAlberta at SemEval-2020 task 2: Using translations to predict cross-lingual entailment. Bradley Hauer, Ahmad Amir, Yixing Habibi, Arnob Luan, Grzegorz Mallik, Kondrak, 10.18653/v1/2020.semeval-1.32Proceedings of the Fourteenth Workshop on Semantic Evaluation. Aurelie Herbelot, Xiaodan Zhu, Alexis Palmer, Nathan Schneider, Jonathan May, Ekaterina Shutova, the Fourteenth Workshop on Semantic EvaluationBarcelonaInternational Committee for Computational LinguisticsDecember 2020

It's not rocket science: Interpreting figurative language in narratives. Tuhin Chakrabarty, Yejin Choi, Vered Shwartz, 10.1162/tacl_a_00478Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 102022

SemEval-2022 task 2: Multilingual idiomaticity detection and sentence embedding. Edward Harish Tayyar Madabushi, Marcos Gow-Smith, Carolina Garcia, Marco Scarton, Aline Idiart, Villavicencio, 10.18653/v1/2022.semeval-1.13Proceedings of the 16th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2022). Guy Emerson, Natalie Schluter, Gabriel Stanovsky, Ritesh Kumar, Alexis Palmer, Nathan Schneider, Siddharth Singh, Shyam Ratan, the 16th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2022)Seattle, United StatesAssociation for Computational LinguisticsJuly 2022

UAlberta at SemEval 2022 task 2: Leveraging glosses and translations for multilingual idiomaticity detection. Bradley Hauer, Seeratpal Jaura, Talgat Omarov, Grzegorz Kondrak, 10.18653/v1/2022.semeval-1.16Proceedings of the 16th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2022). Guy Emerson, Natalie Schluter, Gabriel Stanovsky, Ritesh Kumar, Alexis Palmer, Nathan Schneider, Siddharth Singh, Shyam Ratan, the 16th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2022)Seattle, United StatesAssociation for Computational LinguisticsJuly 2022

Building a very large multilingual semantic network. Roberto Navigli, Simone Paolo Ponzetto, Babelnet, Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Jan Hajič, Sandra Carberry, Stephen Clark, Joakim Nivre, the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational LinguisticsUppsala, SwedenAssociation for Computational LinguisticsJuly 2010

Linking and extending an open multilingual Wordnet. Francis Bond, Ryan Foster, Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Long Papers. Hinrich Schuetze, Pascale Fung, Massimo Poesio, the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational LinguisticsSofia, BulgariaAssociation for Computational LinguisticsAugust 20131

GlossBERT: BERT for word sense disambiguation with gloss knowledge. Luyao Huang, Chi Sun, Xipeng Qiu, Xuanjing Huang, 10.18653/v1/D19-1355Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). Kentaro Inui, Jing Jiang, Vincent Ng, Xiaojun Wan, the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP)Hong Kong, ChinaAssociation for Computational LinguisticsNovember 2019

Introduction to the special issue on word sense disambiguation: The state of the art. Nancy Ide, Jean Véronis, Computational Linguistics. 2411998

. Christiane Fellbaum, Wordnet, 1998

J M Sinclair, Corpus, Concordance, Collocation. OxfordOxford University Press1991

The idiom principle and the open choice principle. Text & Talk. Britt Erman, Beatrice Warren, 10.1515/text.1.2000.20.1.29200020

Leveraging contextual embeddings and idiom principle for detecting idiomaticity in potentially idiomatic expressions. Reyhaneh Hashempour, Aline Villavicencio, Proceedings of the Workshop on the Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon. the Workshop on the Cognitive Aspects of the LexiconAssociation for Computational LinguisticsDecember 2020

. Geoffrey Nunberg, Ivan A Sag, Thomas Wasow, 10.1353/lan.1994.0007Idioms. Language. 1535- 06657031994

A simple method for commonsense reasoning. H Trieu, Trinh, V Quoc, Le, 2018

An empirical study on compositionality in compound nouns. Siva Reddy, Diana Mccarthy, Suresh Manandhar, Proceedings of 5th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing. Haifeng Wang, David Yarowsky, 5th International Joint Conference on Natural Language ProcessingChiang Mai, ThailandNovember 2011Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing

Distributional semantics and compositionality 2011: Shared task description and results. Chris Biemann, Eugenie Giesbrecht, Proceedings of the Workshop on Distributional Semantics and Compositionality. Chris Biemann, Eugenie Giesbrecht, the Workshop on Distributional Semantics and CompositionalityPortland, Oregon, USAAssociation for Computational LinguisticsJune 2011

Unsupervised compositionality prediction of nominal compounds. Silvio Cordeiro, Aline Villavicencio, Marco Idiart, Carlos Ramisch, 10.1162/coli_a_00341Computational Linguistics. 451March 2019

Measuring the relative compositionality of verb-noun (V-n) collocations by integrating features. Sriram Venkatapathy, Aravind Joshi, Proceedings of Human Language Technology Conference and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Raymond Mooney, Chris Brew, Lee-Feng Chien, Katrin Kirchhoff, Human Language Technology Conference and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language ProcessingVancouver, British Columbia, CanadaAssociation for Computational LinguisticsOctober 2005

A multiword expression data set: Annotating noncompositionality and conventionalization for English noun compounds. Meghdad Farahmand, Aaron Smith, Joakim Nivre, 10.3115/v1/W15-0904Proceedings of the 11th Workshop on Multiword Expressions. the 11th Workshop on Multiword ExpressionsDenver, ColoradoAssociation for Computational LinguisticsJune 2015

The PARSEME shared task on automatic identification of verbal multiword expressions. Agata Savary, Carlos Ramisch, Silvio Cordeiro, Federico Sangati, Veronika Vincze, Behrang Qasemizadeh, Marie Candito, Fabienne Cap, Voula Giouli, Ivelina Stoyanova, Antoine Doucet, 10.18653/v1/W17-1704Proceedings of the 13th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2017). Stella Markantonatou, Carlos Ramisch, Agata Savary, Veronika Vincze, the 13th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2017)Valencia, SpainAssociation for Computational LinguisticsApril 2017

Text data augmentation in natural language processing with texattack. Priya Tidke, Feb 2022

HIT at SemEval-2022 task 2: Pretrained language model for idioms detection. Zheng Chu, Ziqing Yang, Yiming Cui, Zhigang Chen, Ming Liu, 10.18653/v1/2022.semeval-1.28Proceedings of the 16th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2022). Guy Emerson, Natalie Schluter, Gabriel Stanovsky, Ritesh Kumar, Alexis Palmer, Nathan Schneider, Siddharth Singh, Shyam Ratan, the 16th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2022)Seattle, United StatesAssociation for Computational LinguisticsJuly 2022

EDA: Easy data augmentation techniques for boosting performance on text classification tasks. Jason Wei, Kai Zou, 10.18653/v1/D19-1670Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). Kentaro Inui, Jing Jiang, Vincent Ng, Xiaojun Wan, the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP)Hong Kong, ChinaAssociation for Computational LinguisticsNovember 2019

AEDA: An easier data augmentation technique for text classification. Akbar Karimi, Leonardo Rossi, Andrea Prati, 10.18653/v1/2021.findings-emnlp.234Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021. Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, Scott , Wen-Tau Yih, Punta Cana, Dominican RepublicAssociation for Computational LinguisticsNovember 2021

The Effect of Text Data Augmentation Methods and Strategies in Classification Tasks of Unstructured Medical Notes. Hongxia Lu, Cyril Rakovski, 10.21203/rs.3.rs-2039417/v12022Preprint

Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, OpenAI blog. 1892019

YNU-HPCC at SemEval-2022 task 2: Representing multilingual idiomaticity based on contrastive learning. Kuanghong Liu, Jin Wang, Xuejie Zhang, 10.18653/v1/2022.semeval-1.26Proceedings of the 16th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2022). Guy Emerson, Natalie Schluter, Gabriel Stanovsky, Ritesh Kumar, Alexis Palmer, Nathan Schneider, Siddharth Singh, Shyam Ratan, the 16th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2022)Seattle, United StatesAssociation for Computational LinguisticsJuly 2022

Edward Ma, Nlp augmentation. 2019

Natural language data augmentation using nlpaug. Prasad Kulkarni, 12 2022

Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space. Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, Jeffrey Dean, 2013

Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-networks. Nils Reimers, Iryna Gurevych, 10.18653/v1/D19-1410Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). Kentaro Inui, Jing Jiang, Vincent Ng, Xiaojun Wan, the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP)Hong Kong, ChinaAssociation for Computational LinguisticsNovember 2019

A measure of similarity in textual data using spearman's rank correlation coefficient. Nino Arsov, Milan Dukovski, Blagoja Evkoski, Stefan Cvetkovski, CoRR, abs/1911.117502019