Privacy-preserving Non-negative Matrix Factorization with Outliers


Swapnil Saha 
Hafiz Imtiaz hafizimtiaz@eee.buet.ac.bd. 
• Hafiz Imtiaz 

Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
University of Engineering and Technology
DhakaBangladesh, Bangladesh


Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
University of Engineering and Technology
DhakaBangladesh, Bangladesh

Privacy-preserving Non-negative Matrix Factorization with Outliers
860A317EF1DEDB1FBEAB552A90FC0743Differential PrivacyNon-negative Matrix FactorizationRényi Differential PrivacyTopic ModellingFacial Feature
Non-negative matrix factorization is a popular unsupervised machine learning algorithm for extracting meaningful features from data which are inherently non-negative.However, such data sets may often contain privacy-sensitive user data, and therefore, we may need to take necessary steps to ensure the privacy of the users while analyzing the data.In this work, we focus on developing a Non-negative matrix factorization algorithm in the privacy-preserving framework.More specifically, we propose a novel privacy-preserving algorithm for non-negative matrix factorisation capable of operating on private data, while achieving results comparable to those of the non-private algorithm.We design the framework such that one has the control to select the degree of privacy grantee based on the utility gap.We show our proposed framework's performance in six real data sets.The experimental results show that our proposed method can achieve very close performance with the non-private algorithm under some parameter regime, while ensuring strict privacy.

INTRODUCTION

N ON-NEGATIVE matrix factorisation is an unsupervised machine learning technique for discovering the partbased representation of intrinsically non-negative data [1].For a D × N data matrix V, where N is the number of the data samples, and D is the data dimension, the entries satisfy v ij 0 ∀i ∈ {1, 2, . . ., D} and ∀j ∈ {1, 2, . . ., N }.The NMF objective is to decompose the data matrix as the following:

V ≈ WH, where W ∈ R D×K is the basis matrix, H ∈ R K×N is the coefficient matrix, and K is the reduced latent dimension.

Here, each entry of W satisfies w ik 0, and each entry of H satisfies h kj 0, ∀k ∈ {1, 2, . . ., K}.In short, NMF performs dimension reduction by mapping the ambient data dimension D into reduced latent dimension K for N data samples.The j-th column of V can be written as:
v j ≈ Wh j ,
where h j is the j-th column of H. Essentially, the j-th column of V is represented as a linear combination of all columns of W with the coefficients being the corresponding entries from h j .Therefore, the dictionary matrix W can be interpreted as storing the "parts" of the data matrix V.This part-based decomposition, and considering only the non-negative values, make NMF popular in many practical applications including, but not limited to, dimension reduction, topic modeling in text mining, representation Manuscript received XXXX XX, 2022; revised XXXX XX, XXXX.

learning, extracting local facial features from human faces, unsupervised image segmentation, speech denoising, and community detection in social networks.NMF and Privacy.In the modern era of big data, many services are customized for the users to provide better suggestions and experiences.Such customization is often done via some machine learning algorithm, which are trained or fine-tuned on users' sensitive data.As shown in both theoretical and applied works, the users may be rightfully concerned regarding their privacy being compromised by the machine learning algorithm's outputs.For example, the seminal work of Homer et al. [2] showed that the presence of an individual in a genome dataset can be identified from simple summary statistics about the dataset.In the machine learning setting, typically the model parameters (as a matrix W or vector w) are learned by training on the users' data.To that end, "Membership Inference Attacks" [3] are discussed in detail by Hu et al. [4], and Shokri et al. [5].They showed that given the learned parameters W, an adversary can identify users in the training set.Basically, the model's trained weights can be used to extract sensitive information.The weights' tendency to memorize the training examples is used to regenerate the training example.Several other works [6], [7], [8] also showed how personal data leakage occurred from modern machine learning (ML) and signal processing tasks.Additionally, it has been shown that simple anonymization of data does not provide any privacy in the presence of auxiliary information available from other/public sources [8].One of the examples is the Netflix prize, where an anonymized data set was released in 2007.This data set contained anonymized movie ratings from Netflix subscribers.Nevertheless, researchers found a way to crack the privacy of the dataset and successfully recovered 99% of the removed personal data [6] by using the publicly available IMDb datasets.In addition, privacy can leak through gradient sharing [9] as well.In the distributed machine learning system, several nodes exchange arXiv:2211.01451v3[cs.LG] 9 Dec 2022 gradient values.The authors in [9] showed how one can extract private training information from gradient sharing.These discoveries led to widespread concern over using private data for public machine learning algorithms.Evidently, personal information leakage is the main hindrance to collecting and analyzing sensor data for training machine learning and signal processing algorithms.It is, therefore, necessary to develop a framework where one can share private data without disclosing their participation or identity.Differential privacy (DP) is a rigorous mathematical framework that can protect against information leakage [10].The definition of differential privacy is motivated by the cryptographic work, which has gained significant attention in machine learning and data mining communities [11].Though the target may be the same: give privacy to data, how DP guarantees privacy is much different from the cryptography [12] and information theory [13].In a differentially private mechanism, we can learn useful information from the population while ensuring the privacy of the population members.It is done statistically by introducing randomness in the algorithm.This randomness provides confusion to attack the sensitive data of the participants.However, one may need to compromise the algorithm's utility to ensure privacy.That is, one needs to quantitatively choose the optimum privacy budget considering the required privacyutility trade-off.

Related Works.The non-negative matrix factorization is attained in the literature by minimizing the following objective function: min W∈C,h kj 0,∀k,j V − WH 2 F , where C ⊆ R D×K is the constraint set for W. Several algorithms have been proposed to obtain the optimal point of this objective function, such as the multiplicate updates [14], alternating direction method of multipliers [15], block principal pivoting [16], active set method [17], and projected gradient descent [18].Most of these algorithms are based on alternatively updating W and H.This makes the optimization problem divided into two sub-problems: each of which can be optimized using the standard optimization techniques, such as the projected gradient or the interior point method.A detailed survey of these optimization techniques can be found in [19], [20].Our work is based on the robust NMF algorithm using projected gradient descent [21].This modified robust algorithm improves two extreme scenarios: (i) when the data matrix V has a large number of data samples, and (ii) the existence of outliers in data samples.The second scenario is common in many practical cases, such as the salt and pepper noise in image data, and impulse noise in time series data.If these outliers and noises are not handled properly during matrix decomposition, the basis (or dictionary) matrix W may not be well optimized and fail to learn the part-based representation.We discuss the implementation of the algorithm in detail in the Section 2.3.

Extensive works and surveys exist in the literature on differential privacy.In particular, Dwork and Smith's survey [22] contains the earlier theoretical work.We refer the reader to [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31] for the most relevant works in differentially private machine learning, deep learning, optimization problems, gradient descent, and empirical risk minimization.Adding randomness in the gradient calculation is one of the most common approaches for implementing differential privacy [26], [29].Other common approaches are employing the output [25] and objective perturbations [32], the exponential mechanism [33], the Laplace mechanism [11] and Smooth sensitivity [34].Last but not the least, the work of Alsulaimawi [35] has introduced a privacy filter with federated learning for NMF factorization.Fu et al. [36] implemented privacy-preserving NMF for dimension reduction using Paillier Cryptosystem, Nikolaenko et al. [37] did privacy preserving matrix factorization for recommendation systems using partially homomorphic encryption with Yao's garbled circuits.Privacy Preserving Data Mining (PPDM) was implemented in [38] using combined NMF and Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) methods.The authors in [39] proposed differentially private NMF for the recommender system, and we showed the comparison analyses in Section 4.4.However, to the best of our knowledge, no work has introduced differential privacy in the universal NMF decomposition and calculated privacy composition for multi-stage implementation to account for the best privacy budget.Our Contributions.In this work, we intend to perform NMF decomposition on inherently non-negative and privacy-sensitive data.As the data matrix V contains userspecific information, an adversary can extract sensitive information regarding the users from the estimated dictionary matrix W.However, the estimated W should encompass the fundamental basis of the population.Note that, the data may have some outliers, which may cause one to capture unrepresentative dictionary matrix if the outliers are not handled properly.To that end, we propose a privacypreserving non-negative matrix factorization algorithm considering outliers.We propose to compute the dictionary matrix W satisfying a mathematically rigorous privacy guarantee, differential privacy, such that the computed W reflects very little about any particular user's data, is relatively unaffected by the presence of outliers, and closely approximates the true dictionary matrix.Our major contribution is summarized below:


•

We develop a novel privacy-preserving algorithm for non-negative matrix factorization capable of operating on privacy-sensitive data, while closely approximating the results of the non-private algorithm.


•

We consider the effect of outliers by specifically modeling them, such that the presence of outliers have very little effect on the estimated dictionary matrix W.


•

We analyze our algorithm with Rényi Differential Privacy [40] to obtain a much better accounting of the overall privacy loss, compared to the conventional strong composition rule [10].


•

We performed extensive experimentation on real datasets to show the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm.We compare the results with those of the non-private algorithm and observe that our proposed algorithm can offer close approximation to the non-private results for some parameter choices.


•

We present the result plots in a way that the user can choose between the overall privacy budget and the required "closeness" to non-private results (utilitygap).


Notations

For clarity and readability, we denote vector, matrix and scalar with different notation.Bold lower case letter (v), bold capital letter (V) and unbolded letter (M ) are used respectively for vector, matrix and scalar.To indicate the iteration instant, we use subscript t.For example, W t denotes the dictionary matrix after t iterations.The superscript + indicates a single update.The n-th column of matrix V is denoted as v n .We denote the indices with lowercase unbolded letter.For example, v ij indicates the entry of the i-th row and j-th column of the matrix V. Inequality x 0 or X 0 apply entry-wise.For element wise matrix multiplication, we use the notation .We denote the L 2 norm (Euclidean norm) with . 2 , the L 1,1 norm with .1,1 , and the Frobenius norm with .F .R , and R + denote the set of real numbers, and set of positive real numbers, respectably.P + denotes the Euclidean projector, which projects value onto the non-negative orthant.Lastly, the probability distribution function of zero mean unit variance Gaussian random variable is given as follows:
f (x) = 1 √ 2π exp −x 2
2 .We summarized the frequently used notations at Tab. 1.


Definitions and Preliminaries

In differential privacy, we define D as the domain of the databases consisting of N records.We also define neighboring data sets D, D , which differ by only one record.Definition 1. (( , δ)-DP [11]) An algorithm f : D → T provides ( , δ)differential privacy (( , δ)-DP) if P (f (D) ∈ S) δ + e P (f (D ) ∈ S) for all measurable S ⊆ T and for all neighbouring data sets D, D ∈ D.

Here, , δ 0 are the privacy parameters and determine how the algorithm will perform in providing utility and preserving privacy.The indicates how much the algorithm's output deviates in probability, when we replace one single person's data with another.The parameter δ indicates the probability that the privacy mechanism fails to give the guarantee of .Intuitively, higher privacy demand makes poor utility.A lower value of and δ guarantee more privacy but lower utility.There are several mechanisms to implement differential privacy: Gaussian [11], Laplace mechanism [10], random sampling, and exponential mechanism [33] are well-known.Among the additive noise mechanisms, the noise's standard deviation is scaled by the privacy budget and the sensitivity of the function.The L 2 sensitivity of a function gives the upper bound of how much randomness we need to perturb to the function's output, if we want to keep the guarantee of differential privacy.It captures the maximum output change by a single user in the worst-case scenario.Definition 3. (Gaussian Mechanism [10]) Let f : D → R d be an arbitrary function with L 2 sensitivity ∆.The Gaussian mechanism with parameter τ adds noise from N (0, τ 2 ) to each of the d entries of the output and satisfies ( , δ) differential privacy for ∈ (0, 1) and δ ∈ (0, 1), if τ ≥ ∆ 2 log 1.25  δ .

Here, ( , δ)differential privacy is guaranteed by adding noise drawn form N (0, τ 2 ) distribution.Note that, there is infinite combinations of ( , δ) for a given τ 2 .Definition 4. (Rényi Differential Privacy [40]) A randomized algorithm f : D → T is (α, r )-Rényi differentially private if, for any adjacent D, D ∈ D, the following holds:
D α (A(D) ||A(D )) ≤ r . Here, D α (P (x)||Q(x)) = 1 α−1 log E x∼Q P (x) Q(x)
α and P (x) and Q(x) are probability density functions defined on T .

We use Rényi Differential Privacy for calculating the total privacy budget spent in multi-stage differentially private mechanisms.RDP provides a much simpler rule for calculating overall privacy risk that is shown to be tight [40].

Proposition 1. (From RDP to DP [40]).If f is an (α, r )-RDP mechanism, it also satisfies ( r + log 1/δ α−1 , δ)-differential privacy for any 0 < δ < 1. [40]).Let f 1 : D → R 1 be (α, 1 ) and f 2 : R 1 × D → R 2 be (α, 2 )-RDP,then the mechanism defined as (X 1 , X 2 ), where


Proposition 2. (Composition of RDP
X 1 ∼ f 1 (D) and X 2 ∼ f 2 (X 1 , D) satisfies (α, 1 + 2 )-RDP.

Proposition 3. (RDP and Gaussian Mechanism
[40]). If f has L 2 sensitivity 1, then the Gaussian mechanism G σ f (D) = f (D) + E where E ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) satisfies (α, α 2σ 2 )-RDP. Addi- tionally, a composition of K such Gaussian mechanisms satisfies (α, αK2σ
2 )-RDP.


NMF Problem Formulation

Most of the algorithms discussed in the Section 1 follow the two-block coordinate descent framework shown in the Algorithm 1. First, the dictionary matrix W is updated, while keeping the coefficient H constant.Then, the updated dictionary matrix W is used to update the coefficient H.The process continues until some convergence criteria is met.In our work, we use a robust non-negative matrix factorization solver considering the outliers [21] based on projected gradient descent (PGD).We intend to decompose the noisy data matrix V as V ≈ WH + R, where W and H are defined as before.The matrix R = [r 1 , r 2 ...., r N ] ∈ R D×N Algorithm 1 General NMF Algorithms: Two-Block Coordinate Descent Method [41] Input: Data matrix V, number of iteration n Output: Dictionary matrix W Initialisation : W 0 , H 0 1: for t = 0 to n − 1 do 2:
W t+1 ← update(V,W t ,H t ) 3:
H t+1 ← update(V,W t+1 ,H t ) 4: end for 5: return Optimized dictionary matrix W is a matrix containing the outliers of the data.Thus, the NMF optimization problem is reformulated as
min W∈C,H 0,R∈Q 1 N 1 2 V − WH − R 2 F + λ R 1,1 ,(1)
where C ⊆ R D×K is the constraint set for updating W , Q is the feasible set for R and λ 0 is the regularization parameter.Intuitively, the outlier matrix R is sparse in nature and contains a smaller values compared to the noise-free original data entries.The sparsity of the outlier R is enforced by the choice of L 1,1 -norm regularization, as discussed in [21].

The level of sparsity is controlled by the hyper-parameter λ.In line with the work of [21], we used the same hyperparameters in most cases for our experiments.Evidently, a grid search can be performed to select optimal hyperparameters for our proposed differentially-private NMF.Additionally, one can compare the performance of NMF with outliers with L 2 or other norms, but we defer that for future work.Note that the robust NMF algorithm can not guarantee exact recovery of the original data matrix V, as the loss function (1) is not convex in nature [21].However, it can be shown empirically that the estimated basis matrix ∧ W can be meaningful, and the difference between the data matrix V and the new reconstructed matrix ∧ W ∧ H is negligible and sparse [21], [42], [43].Now, following the two-block coordinate descent method mentioned in the Algorithm 1, we reformulate our optimization steps as follows:

1) Update the coefficient matrix H t and outlier matrix R t based on the fixed dictionary matrix W t−1 .Here the optimization can be done as
(H t , R t ) = argmin H 0,R∈Q L(V, W t−1 , H, R),(2)
where the loss function L is
L(V, W, H, R) 1 N ( 1 2 V − WH − R 2 F + λ R 1 ).(3)
Here constraint set Q {r ∈ R D | r ∞ M } keeps the entries of outlier matrix R uniformly bounded.The value of M depends on the data set and noise distribution.For example, in the gray scale image data with 2 b − 1 levels in each pixel, we can set M = 2 b − 1 where b is the number of bits to present the pixel value.

2) After optimization with respect to H t and R t , update W t using the same loss function (3):
W t = argmin W∈C L(V, W, H t , R t ).(4)
Here, the set C constrains the columns of dictionary matrix W into a unit (non-negative) 2 ball to keep the matrix entries bounded [18], [44].

PGD Solver for (2).Equation ( 2) can be solved by following the two steps alternatively for a fixed W.
H + := argmin H 0 Q(H |H),(5)R + = argmin R ∈Q 1 N 1 2 V − WH t − R 2 F + λ R 1 ,(6)
where
Q(H |H) q(H)+ < q(H), H −H > + 1 2ηN H − H 2 2 , q(H) 1 2N V − WH − R 2 F .(7)
Here, η is the fixed step size.Minimizing both ( 5) and ( 6) have closed-form solutions.For ( 5), the solution can be formulated as following
H + := P + (H − η H q(H)).(8)
Here, we replace the step size η with η H to distinguish this from the dictionary matrix W update.We use a fixed step size to ease the hyper-parameter setting in the whole iteration process.q(H) is the gradient function derived by doing partial derivative of ( 7) with respect to H.
q(H) = 1 N W WH − W (V − R) .
We use the following matrix properties [45] to find the expression of q(H): A 2 2 = tr(A A), and tr(X A) = A, where the gradient is taken with respect to X.For (6), the solution is straightforward.
R + = S λ,M V − WH + .(9)
Here, S λ,M (X) performs element-wise thresholding as:
S λ,M (X) ij :=        0, x ij < λ x ij − sgn(x ij )λ, λ x ij λ + M sgn(x ij )M. x ij > λ + M
In the t-th iteration, we update the matrices H and R according to (8) and ( 9); until some stopping criteria is met [21].

PGD Solver for (4).We can rewrite (4) as follows
W t = argmin W∈C 1 2 tr(W WA t ) − tr(W B t ), where A t 1 N H t H t , and B t 1 N (V − R t )H t .
To calculate the gradient value, we define new function f W (W). Taking partial derivative of (10) with respect to W, we find the following expression.
f W (W) = 1 2 tr(W WA t ) − tr(W B t ). (10)f W (W) = WA − B.(11)
We use the aforementioned matrix property [45] to derive the expression (11).We write the update equation ensuring the constraints of W.
W + = P C (W − η W f W (W)).(12)
Here, η W is the step size to update W. As in (8), we use a fixed step size.The constraint projection function keeps the columns of the dictionary matrix W in unit 2 ball.In (12), each column is being updated as following
w + n := P + w n − η W f W (w n ) max 1, P + w n − η W f W (w n ) 2 , ∀n ∈ [K].
Similarly as the PGD Solver for (2), we use (12) to update the dictionary matrix W. The steps stated above are followed until we reach the optimum loss point of (1).In the Section 4, we will discuss hyper-parameter tuning and matrix initialization methods for better optimization.Now that we discussed estimating the dictionary matrix W from the data matrix V without any privacy constraint, in the next section we will show how to preserve and control privacy leakage for the NMF.


PROPOSED METHOD


Separate Private and Non-private Training Nodes

As mentioned earlier, we are interested in estimating the dictionary matrix W, which captures the meaningful population feature.The decomposition also produces two more matrices H and R. All these three matrices are estimated from the user data V; however, we only share the dictionary matrix W in public.Therefore, we need to estimate the matrix W satisfying differential privacy.Intuitively, we need to process the user-sensitive data and population feature data separately.Fig. 1 shows the basic system diagram which serves the purposes.Here, there are two data processing centers: one is the "Data Curator", which holds the sensitive data: data matrix V and the coefficient matrix H and as well as the outlier matrix R. Table 2: Summary of data sets on the privacy budget and L 2 sensitivity of the gradient function f W (W). The other data processing center is the "Data Analyst" center, where the noisy gradient values are passed to.This center then updates the dictionary matrix W with the received noisy gradient value and passes the updated W to the Data Curator center.This cycle continues until the stopping criteria is met.At the end, we get a differentially-private dictionary matrix W private at the Data Analyst center.


Derivations Related to Estimating Differentially-Private W

In this section, we will show the necessary proof and derivations related to the calculation of L 2 sensitivity for estimating the dictionary matrix W satisfying differential privacy.

As mentioned earlier, we use the Gaussian mechanism to deploy the DP mechanism in our non-private algorithm.

Prior to adding noise, we need to calculate the L 2 sensitivity of the function of whose output we will make randomize.In our implementation, it is f W (W) -the gradient function for updating W matrix:
f W (W) = WA − B. As f W (W)
depends on the statistics matrix A and B, we need to calculate their L 2 sensitivity separately.Let us first calculate the L 2 sensitivity of matrix A = 1 N HH .Consider two neighboring data sets, the corresponding coefficient matrices are H and H .By definition, they differ by only one user data.In our calculation, We consider that the difference is at the last N -th column entries.We derive the L 2 sensitivity ∆ A following the definition.
∆ A = max 1 N HH − H H F = max 1 N h N h N − h N h N F max 1 N h N h N F + h N h N F max 1 N h N 2 h N 2 + h N 2 h N 2 = max 1 N h N 2 2 + h N 2 2 = 2 N × (max L 2 norm of column of H) 2 , (13)
where we have used the triangle inequality and ab a b .To get a bounded value in (13), we need to define the max L 2 norm for the column of H.One way to do that is by normalizing each column of H, and therefore, ∆ A = 2 N .Next, we will calculate the L 2 sensitivity of B = 1 N (V − R)H .Following the definition, we consider two neighboring data matrices V and V and their corresponding neighboring coefficient matrices H and H .The details calculation of calculating L 2 sensitivity ∆ B is given as follows:
∆ B = max 1 N (V − R)H − (V − R)H F = max 1 N (v N − r N )h N − (v N − r N )h N F max 1 N (v N − r N )h N F + (v N − r N )h N F max 1 N (v N − r N ) 2 h N 2 + (v N − r N ) 2 h N 2 = max 1 N (v N − r N ) 2 + (v N − r N ) 2 = max 2 N (v N − r N ) 2 max 2 N ( v N + r N ),(14)
where the second-last equality follows from max ∀n h n 2 = 1, and the last inequality follows from a − b a + b .To get a constant L 2 sensitivity value in (14), we can normalize the columns of V and R to have unit L 2 -norm.Thus, we have ∆ B = 4

N .Note that, if we do not model the outliers explicitly, we would have ∆ B = 2 N .Now, as we have computed the L 2 sensitivities ∆ A and ∆ B , we can generate noise perturbed statistics A, B following the Gaussian mechanism [10].Using these values, we can compute the noisy gradient f W (W) and update our dictionary matrix W. At the end of optimization, we will obtain the differentially private dictionary matrix W private .The detailed step-by-step description of our proposed method is summarized in Algorithm 2.
α opt = 1 + 2 T ( ∆ 2 A σ 2 A + ∆ 2 B δ 2 B ) log 1 δ .
Proof.We now analyze Algorithm 2 with Rényi Differential Privacy (RDP) [40].Recall that, at each iteration t, we compute the noisy estimate of the gradient f W (W), using two differentially-private matrices A t and B t .According to Proposition 3, computation of these matrices satisfy α,
α 2 τ A ∆ A 2 -RDP and α, α 2 τ B ∆ B 2 -RDP, respec- tively. According to Proposition 2, each step of Algorithm 2 is (α, α 2 ( ∆ 2 A τ 2 A + ∆ 2 B τ2

B

))-RDP.If the number of required iterations for reaching convergence is T , then under T -fold composition of RDP, the overall algorithm is (α, T α 2 (
∆ 2 A τ 2 A + ∆ 2 B τ2

B

))-RDP.From Proposition 1, we have that the algorithm satisfies ( T α 2 (
∆ 2 A τ 2 A + ∆ 2 B τ2B ) + log 1 δ α−1 , δ)-DP for any 0 < δ < 1.
For a given δ, we can compute the optimal α as α opt = 1+
2 T ( ∆ 2 A τ 2 A + ∆ 2 B τ 2 B ) log1
δ .This α opt provides the smallest , i.e., the smallest privacy risk.Therefore, Algorithm 2 releases a (
T αopt 2 ( ∆ 2 A τ 2 A + ∆ 2 B τ2B ) + log 1 δ αopt−1 ,H 0,R∈Q L(V, W t−1 , H, R),
where matrices update as follow
H + := P + (H − η H q(H)). R + := S λ,M V − WH + . 3:
Calculate the noise perturbed statistics matrices
A t := 1 N H t H t + N (0, τ 2 A ) K×K , B t := 1 N (V − R t )H t + N (0, τ 2 B ) D×K , where τ A = ∆ A t 2 log 1.25 δ . τ B = ∆ B t 2 log 1.25
δ .


4:

Calculate the noisy gradient f W (W) with the noise perturbed statistics matrices:
f W (W) = W t−1 A t − B t 5:
{/* At Data Analyst */} Learn dictionary matrix with the noisy gradient f W W t := argmin W∈C 1 2 tr(W WA t ) − tr(W B t ).where dictionary matrix updates as follow
W + := P C (W − η W f W (W)).
6: end for 7: return W private Convergence of Algorithm 2. We note that the objective function is non-increasing under the two update steps (i.e., steps 2 and 5), and the objective function is bounded below.Additionally, the noisy gradient estimate f W (W) essentially contains zero mean noise.Although this does not provide guarantees on the excess error, the estimate of the gradient converges in expectation to the true gradient [46].However, if the batch size is too small, the noise can be too high for the algorithm to converge [26].Since the total additive noise variance is quite small, the convergence rate is faster.Note that a theoretical analysis of intricate relation between the excess error and the privacy parameters is beyond the scope of the current paper.We refer the reader Bassily et al. [29] for further details.


EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

In this section, we compare the utility of private and nonprivate algorithm.We define the objective value to show the comparison, quantifying how well the algorithm can decompose the matrix.The objective value is calculated using the following formula:
Objective Value = 1 2N V o − WH 2 F .(15)
Here, V o is the noise-free clean data set.In our experiments, some of the data sets contain noise, and some of them are To evaluate our proposed method, we use six real data sets.Among which, four are text data sets, and two are face image data sets.The size of the datasets and the corresponding latent dimensions K are mentioned in the Tab. 2. For selection of the latent dimension K, we mentioned one procedure in Appendix A, where we calculate the topic coherence score of the Guardian News Articles datasets to select the optimum topic number.For the rest of the data sets, similar procedures can be followed.In the experiments, we use fixed δ = 10 −5 and vary to show the effect of the privacy budget.Also, we normalized each data sample of V so that it has a unit maximum index value.


Hyper-parameter Selection and Initialization

We followed the hyper-parameter settings mentioned as [21] except for the learning rate.The authors in [21] suggested using the same learning rate for updating both the dictionary matrix W and the coefficient matrix H for ease of parameter tuning.The optimization process requires a different configuration in our privacy-preserving implementation.As discussed in Section 3, we add Gaussian noise in the gradient calculation f W (W) for updating W, wheres matrix H updates with its original gradient calculation q(H).This dissimilar nature for updating W and H motivates us to use different learning rates.We note that to get faster convergence, we need to choose the learning rates for updating W and H.To that end, we can employ a grid search to find the optimum learning rates for H and W. The time required for such a time search depends on the dataset and the search space.With sub-optimal learning rates, the convergence may be delayed, but the excess error of the proposed algorithm should be approximately the same given that sufficient time is allowed, and small enough learning rate is used.In our experiments, we performed a grid search, and found that the learning rate for updating W should be much lower (about 10,000 to 20,000 times depending on the dataset) compared to that of updating H.To initialize W 0 and H 0 , we followed the Non negative Double Singular Value Decomposition (NNDSVD) [47] approach, as we found that it performs better than random initialization in minimizing the objective value in (15).For sparseness, we initialized R 0 with all zeros.


Text Data Set

With the text data set, we apply the topic modeling algorithm.Topic modeling is a statistical algorithm that identifies the abstract topics present in the set of documents.A document generally contains multiple topics with different proportions.Suppose a document is said to be "80% about religion and 20% percent about politics".In that case, it means about 80 percent of words related to religion and 20 percent related to politics.The topic modeling algorithm tries to find the unique "cluster of words" that indicates one single topic from the document.We discuss more about it and its implementation in Appendix A.

We evaluate our proposed method by showing the learning curve with respect to variable privacy budget in each iteration, and topic word distribution.We also calculate the overall using RDP calculation and show the comparison of objective value with that of the non-private mechanism to select optimum i in each iteration.For two data sets, we compared the topic word distribution and average coherence score between non-private and private algorithm.

Here is a short description of each text data sets.Guardian News Articles.This data set consists of 4551 news articles collected from Guardian News API in 2006.The detailed mechanism of collecting the articles is described in this paper [48].Here we extract eight distinguished topics (K = 8) from the dataset and show the high-scoring word distributions corresponding to the topics.UCI News Aggregator Dataset.This data set [49] is formed by collecting news from a web aggregator from 10-March-2014 to 10-August-2014.There is a total of 422937 news articles in the data set.The topics covered in the news articles are entertainment, science and technology, business, and health.We take 750 news articles from each category and apply the NMF algorithm.RCV1.Reuters Corpus Volume I (RCV1) [50] archive consists of over 800,000 manually categorized news wires.For our experiment, we randomly select approximately 1  10 -th of the features that contain 9625 documents.TDT2.The TDT2 [51] text database contains 9394 documents of size 9394 × 36771-dimensional matrix.Here, we randomly select 1  10 -th of the features.Utility Comparison on Text Data Set Fig. 2 shows the utility gap between private and non-private mechanism's output for the text data sets.For all the data sets, there exists a little utility gap, and this gap decreases further for a higher privacy budget .Comparing the convergence speed, private learning needs more epochs to reach the optimum loss point.This is because we have to keep the learning rate lower in private learning.Also, the noisy gradient can be responsible to reach the optimum loss point lately.Average Topic Coherence Score Table 3 shows the average topic coherence score comparison for Guardian News Articles and UCI-news-aggregator data sets.Topic coherence score measures quantitatively how the topic modeling algorithm performs.In short, topic coherence attempts to represent human intractability through a mathematical framework by measuring the semantic link between highscoring words.The greater the coherence score, the more human-interpretable the "cluster of words" is.It is also used to tune the hyper-parameter, topic number K. We discuss about topic coherence in more detail in Appendix A.

As Table 3 shows, topic coherence score increases with increasing the privacy budget for Guardian News Articles data set, which is self-explanatory.For UCI-news-aggregator data set, all the scores are very close to each other in respect to privacy budget.Overall on Text Data Set Fig. 3 shows the overall and also the utility gap between private and non-private mechanisms after reaching the optimum solution.This result helps to decide how much one has to introduce privacy budget i in each stage of iteration, considering the utility gap and overall .Topic Word Comparison Fig. 4 shows the topic word comparison for private and non-private algorithm.We choose two data sets to show this comparison-UCI-newsaggregator and Guardian News Articles.The topic word distribution looks almost similar for private and non-private mechanism, which justifies the high similarity of coherence scores (Table 3).


Face Image Data Set

With the face image dataset, we generate the fundamental facial feature by which one can reconstruct all the face images of the dataset.The details of the implementation are discussed in Appendix B. Like the text dataset, we also show the overall and utility comparison to select i for each iteration.Additionally, as the effect of outliers is much visible and common in practice for image data, we conduct our experiments with additional noise outlier dataset.Short description of each text data sets are given below: YaleB.There are 2414 face images in Yaleb [52] of size 32 × 32.The sample images are captured in different light conditions.There are 38 subjects (male and females) in the data set.CBCL.The CBCL [53] database contains 2429 face images of size 19×19.The facial photos consist of 19×19 hand-aligned frontal shots.Each face image is processed beforehand.The grey scale intensities of each image are first linearly adjusted so that the pixel mean and standard deviation are equal to 0.25, and then clipped to the range [0, 1].Utility Comparison on Face Image Data Sets Fig. 5 shows the learning curve of private and non-private mechanism for the face image data sets.All the characteristics of the simulation result are similar to the text data sets result.The utility gap is very small and is even smaller for higher privacy budget ( ).Overall on Face Image Data Sets Fig. 6 shows the overall and utility gap after reaching the optimum loss point.Based on the criteria of preserving privacy as well as the tolerance of utility gap, one can select how much privacy budget i one needs to introduce in each iteration.

Basic Representation Comparison Fig. 7 shows how al- Table 4: RMSE comparison on MovieLens 1M Dataset gorithm learns the fundamental representation of face image under privacy and non-privacy mechanism.In the case of ( = 0.5, δ = 10 − 5)-DP Private, the facial features are noisy compared to the non-privacy mechanism.However, they can still generate the interpretable human facial feature Data Set with Outlier We also performed experiments to demonstrate the effect of outliers.We contaminated the Yaleb dataset with outliers, as mentioned in [21].In short, we randomly chose 10% of user data from the dataset, and then we contaminated 70% of the pixel with uniform noise distribution noise U[−1, 1].The simulation results are shown in the Fig. 8.In Section 3, it has been mathematically shown that the L 2 sensitivity of matrix B is double when we allow for updating the outlier matrix R. Higher L 2 sensitivity gives more noise to ensure the privacy budget ( , δ) we demand.Thus the basic representation of Fig. 8d is more noisy compared to the Fig. 7b.


Comparison

Compared with existing work, this work [39] proposed the Differential Private NMF algorithm (DPNMF) only for recommender systems using the Laplacian mechanism.On the contrary, our proposed method works for any partbased learning NMF-based tasks.Moreover, the Laplacian mechanism follows L 1 sensitivity to add noise, in contrast to L 2 sensitivity.In our context and many machine learning tasks where we need to add noise to vectors with many elements, L 2 sensitivity is much smaller than L 1 sensitivity [54].Furthermore, their work fails to calculate the L 1 sensitivity of the desired objective function directly, whereas we can precisely calculate the L 2 sensitivity of the gradient function.Moreover, they used the alternating nonnegative least square algorithm (ANLS) [55] for their base NMF approach, where there is no mechanism to remove the outlier effect.

We also performed simulations for comparison on the MovieLens 1M Dataset [56], and defined a similar evaluation metric, RMSE, as in [39]
: RMSE = 1 √ N V − ∧ V X 2 , where V ∈ R U ×I +
is the user-item matrix, ∧ V and X, same shape as V, are the predicted user-item matrix and the observation mask respectively, and N is the number of useritem pairs.Each entry v ui in user-item matrix denotes how much a user u ∈ U gives rating to an item i ∈ I.Each entry x ui of observation mask matrix is set to 1 if user u has rated the item i, and 0 otherwise.The findings of the simulation comparison are provided in Tab. 4. The comparison shows that ours method outperforms the DPNMF.


CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS

We proposed a novel privacy-preserving NMF algorithm that can learn the dictionary matrix W private from the   data matrix V preserving the privacy of data in any NMFrelated task.Our proposed algorithm enjoys ( , δ)differential privacy guarantee with good performance results.It adds white additive noise to the function's output based on the privacy budget and L 2 sensitivity following the Gaussian mechanism.The proposed algorithm shows a comparable result with the non-private algorithm.Moreover, we calculate the overall for multi-stage composition cases using Rényi Differential Privacy.The overall along with the utility gap plot can give control to select i in each epoch.One can choose a privacy budget i for each iteration stage depending on how much utility gap one can tolerate and how much privacy to preserve one wants.

We experimentally justified our proposed method and compared the result using six real data sets.All the results show a small utility gap compared to the non-private mechanism.When comparing the learning curve, the private mechanism needs more epochs to reach the optimum loss point because we have to use a smaller step size in private learning.Also, adding noise in the f W calculation can disturb the training.The text data set shows the similarity between the topic word distributions.We quantitatively measure this similarity by using the Topic Coherence score.In the face image data set, we compare facial feature construction.In private learning, there exists some noise in the facial feature because of the noisy gradient of f W .However, the features Here we use the private data matrix W at the single node-data curator.However, when it is not possible to accumulate all the private data at a single node, we need to transform our mechanism into federated learning and decentralized learning [57].It will be interesting to see how our proposed mechanism will work under the decentralized framework.Moreover, we use the offline method to implement the NMF algorithm in our implementation.Nevertheless, in the case of big data implementation, we need to focus on online learning and batch learning.It directs another possible privacy framework: privacy amplification by sub-sampling [58].


APPENDIX A TOPIC MODELING AND ITS IMPLEMENTATION


A.1 Topic Modeling

Topic modeling is a statistical model used in statistics and natural language processing to discover the abstract "topics" that occur in a collection of documents.Topic modeling is a common text-mining technique to uncover hidden semantic structures within a text body.Given that a document is about a specific topic, one would expect certain words to appear more or less frequently: "dog" and "bone" will appear more frequently in documents about dogs, "cat" and "meow" will appear more frequently in documents about cats, and "the" and "is" will appear roughly equally in both.A document typically addresses multiple topics in varying proportions; therefore, a document that is 10 % about cats and 90 % about dogs would likely contain nine times as many dog words as cat words.The "topics" generated by topic modeling techniques are word clusters.A topic model encapsulates this intuition in a mathematical framework, enabling the examination of a set of documents and the identification of their potential topics and balance of topics based on the statistics of their words.

Topic models are also known as probabilistic topic models, which refer to statistical algorithms for identifying the latent semantic structures of a large text body.In this information age, the amount of written material we encounter daily exceeds our capacity to process it.Extensive collections of unstructured text bodies can be organized and comprehended better with topic models.Originally developed as a tool for text mining, topic models have been used to detect instructive structures in data, including genetic information, images, and networks.They have applications in fields such as computer vision [59] and bioinformatics [60].

A text document consists of one or more topics.In the mathematical context, we can say that the linear combination of topics forms each text document.Each topic reflects its semantic meaning by some representative 'cluster of words'.In topic modeling, we find these representative clusters of words from the corpus and the coefficient weights which say how much a single topic is more present than others in a single document.In the context of NMF decomposition, data matrix V contains the text documents, dictionary matrix W contains topic words, and coefficient matrix H contains the coefficient weight.


A.2 Text Pre-processing

The first step before applying any topic modeling algorithm is to do text preprocessing.Raw documents contain textual words which need to convert into numerical form.To do so, we split each word from the document and give a unique token to each of them.

Let us say we have five documents in our corpus of documents, and there is a total of 100 unique words present in all documents.Then, after tokenizing the corpus of documents, we will form a matrix A of size 100×5.However, we need further preprocessing to do actual topic modeling.Intuitively all the words in a document do not contribute equal contributions to determine the topic category of this document.Besides, some high-frequency words (like articles and auxiliary verbs) and low-frequency words do not indicate a specific topic.We remove these unnecessary words and add weight to the important topic words.The first one is done easily by simple text preprocessing like maximum frequency filtering, minimum frequency filtering, and stop-word (which stores predefined highfrequency English words) filtering.To give extra weight to important topic words, we need to introduce a new mathematical framework: term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) [61] [62].

TF-IDF wants to calculate quantitatively how a term word is "important" to determine the nature of the specific document's topic category.The calculation involves two steps.First, it computes the frequency of word terms in that specific document.Then it computes the frequency in all the documents.The second calculation wants to penalize if the term word is common in all documents.The equation of TF-IDF is as follows [63]
w d = f w,d × log |D| f w,D .
In our implementation we use scikit-learn default function TfidfVectorizer() to produce TF-IDF normalized document-term matrix.According to our notation, TfidfVectorizer() produces matrix of size D × N where D is the number of word term after processing the text data and N is the total number of documents present in the corpus.Now the corpus of raw documents is ready to use the NMF algorithm.


A.3 Implementation through NMF

If we apply the NMF algorithm on the TF-IDF normalized document-term, we get two matrices: one is dictionary matrix W (D × K), and the other is coefficient matrix H (K × N ) where K is the topic number presented in the corpus.The W matrix shows the topic distribution word.We can tell about the topic category by observing the highest entry values.Let us revisit the experimental implementation of the Guardian News Articles dataset discussed in the Section 4. We get the following topic word distribution in Fig. 9. Here, the eight distinguish topic word distribution indicates eight distinguish topics.Applying NMF in the topic modeling algorithm requires one important hyper-parameter selection: topic number K. Though here we assume the topic number K = 8 before applying NMF, there is a systemic way to tune this hyper-parameter.This is done by measuring the Topic Coherence score.


A.4 Topic Coherence

Topic Coherence measures the semantic similarity between high-scoring words.These measurements help to differentiate between semantically interpretable topics and those that are statistical artifacts of inference.There are numerous methods for measuring coherence, such as NPMI, UMass, TC-W2V, etc [48].Our study uses the TC-W2V method to measure the coherence score.Fig. 10 shows the comparison of mean coherence scores with respect to the number of topics.This figure suggests selecting K = 8 as the topic number to get the optimum human interpretability from the topic word distribution.


APPENDIX B EXTRACTING LOCAL FACIAL FEATURE BY NMF B.1 Interpret the Decomposition of Face Image

The extraction of local facial features is one of the beautiful and practical applications of NMF.The basic idea behind this decomposition is to extract fundamental local facial features so that one can reconstruct any image of the data set using appropriate wight.To extract these fundamental features, one needs first to construct the data matrix V where each column of V represents the pixel information of the individual image.If we now apply the NMF algorithm on matrix V, we generate the two matrices: matrix W stores the facial feature, and H stores the coefficient.Fig. 11 shows the visual representation of the result.

If we want to reconstruct an image of data set: let's example we want to reconstruct the 100 th column image in matrix V. Then we will take all the facial features from matrix W and 100 t h column vector from matrix H as coefficients.Then we will multiply the features with the coefficients and add them linearly.This will reconstruct the 100 t h column image of matrix V with little loss.

Definition 2 .
2
(L 2 sensitivity [11]) The L 2 -sensitivity of vector valued function f (D) is ∆ := max D,D f (D) − f (D ) 2 , where D and D are the neighbouring dataset.


Theorem 3 . 1 ( 1 δ
311
Privacy of Algorithm 2).Consider Algorithm 2 in the setting of Section 2.3.Then Algorithm2 releases αopt−1 , δ differentially-private basis matrix W private for any 0 < δ < 1 after T iterations, where


Figure 3 :
3
Figure 3: Overall and Objective Value on Text Data Set


Figure 4
4
Figure 4: Topic Word Comparison


Figure 5 :
5
Figure 5: Utility Comparison on Face Image Data Set


Figure 6 :Figure 7 :
67
Figure 6: Overall and Objective Value on Face Image Data Set


Figure 8 :
8
Figure 8: Yaleb Data Set with Outlier


8 Figure 9 :
89
Figure 9: Word Distribution of Guardian News Articles


Figure 10 :
10
Figure 10: Mean Coherence vs Number of Topics


Figure 11 :
11
Figure 11: Face Image Decomposition


Table 1 : Notations 2 PROBLEM FORMULATION
1NotationMeaningVData MatrixWDictionary / Basis MatrixW privateDifferentially private WHCoefficient MatrixROutlier MatrixDAmbient dimension of Data matrixKLatent dimensionNNumber of users in Data matrixvnn-th user vector in Data matrix( , δ)Privacy parameters∆Sensitivityf (W )Gradient function to update Dictionary matrixf (W )Noisy gradient to learn W privateA, BStatistics matrices of f (W )A, BNoise perturbed statistics matrices of A, B



Data matrix V, step size η H and η W , maximum number of iterations T , sensitivities ∆ A and ∆ B , privacy parameters t , δ, regularization parameter λ Output: Differentially private dictionary matrix W private Initialisation : W 0 , H 0 , R 0 .1: for t = 1 to T do At Data Curator */} Learn H t and R t based on W t−1 (H t , R t ) := argmin
Algorithm 2 Privacy Preserving NMF with OutliersInput: 2: {/*
δ) differentially-private basis matrix W private for any 0 < δ < 1.


Table 3 :
3
Comparison Average Coherence Score
Guardian News Articles UCI-news-aggregator0.50.45110.99969750.60.45290.99968950.70.45350.99968490.80.45470.99968360.90.45430.99968320.9990.45400.9996839Non-Private0.46580.9996816
. not.For a fair comparison, we evaluate only how well the decomposition WH can reconstruct the noise-free data V o .




The almost equal optimum loss point for
Objective Value0.450 0.455 0.460 0.465 0.470=0.5 =0.6 =0.7 =0.8 =0.9 =0.999 Non-PrivateObjective Value0.260 0.265 0.270 0.275 0.280=0.5 =0.6 =0.7 =0.8 =0.9 =0.999 Non-Private0.4450250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 Training Epoch0200 400 600 800 1000 1200 Training EpochObjective Value0.445 0.450 0.455 0.460 0.465 0.470(a) Guardian News Articles=0.5 =0.6 =0.7 =0.8 =0.9 =0.999 Non-PrivateObjective Value0.32 0.34 0.36 0.38 0.40 0.42(b) UCI-news-aggregator=0.5 =0.6 =0.7 =0.8 =0.9 =0.999 Non-Private0.4400.300500 1000 1500 2000 2500 Training Epoch01000 2000 3000 4000 5000 Training Epoch(c) RCV1(d) TDT22: Utility Comparison on Text Data Setprivate and non-private learning in Fig. 2b also justifies thishigh similarity coherence score.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThe authors would like to express their sincere gratitude towards the authorities of the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering and Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET) for providing constant support throughout this research work.
Non-negative matrix factorization with sparseness constraints. P O Hoyer, Journal of machine learning research. 592004

Resolving individuals contributing trace amounts of dna to highly complex mixtures using high-density snp genotyping microarrays. N Homer, S Szelinger, M Redman, D Duggan, W Tembe, J Muehling, J V Pearson, D A Stephan, S F Nelson, D W Craig, PLoS genetics. 48e10001672008

Model inversion attacks that exploit confidence information and basic countermeasures. M Fredrikson, S Jha, T Ristenpart, Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security. the 22nd ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security2015

Membership inference attacks on machine learning: A survey. H Hu, Z Salcic, L Sun, G Dobbie, P S Yu, X Zhang, ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR). 5411s2022

Membership inference attacks against machine learning models. R Shokri, M Stronati, C Song, V Shmatikov, 2017 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP). IEEE2017

How to break anonymity of the netflix prize dataset. A Narayanan, V Shmatikov, arXiv preprint cs/06101052006

Differentially private filtering. J , Le Ny, G J Pappas, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control. 5922013

Only you, your doctor, and many others may know. L Sweeney, Technology Science. 20150929039292015

Deep leakage from gradients. L Zhu, Z Liu, S Han, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 201932

The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. C Dwork, A Roth, Found. Trends Theor. Comput. Sci. 93-42014

Calibrating noise to sensitivity in private data analysis. C Dwork, F Mcsherry, K Nissim, A Smith, Theory of cryptography conference. Springer2006

Privacy and data mining. J Vaidya, Y M Zhu, C W Clifton, 2006Springer

Achieving secure role-based access control on encrypted data in cloud storage. L Zhou, V Varadharajan, M Hitchens, IEEE transactions on information forensics and security. 20138

Algorithms for non-negative matrix factorization. D Lee, H S Seung, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. T Leen, T Dietterich, V Tresp, MIT Press200113

An alternating direction algorithm for matrix completion with nonnegative factors. Y Xu, W Yin, Z Wen, Y Zhang, Frontiers of Mathematics in China. 722012

Toward faster nonnegative matrix factorization: A new algorithm and comparisons. J Kim, H Park, 2008 Eighth IEEE International Conference on Data Mining. IEEE2008

Nonnegative matrix factorization based on alternating nonnegativity constrained least squares and active set method. H Kim, H Park, SIAM journal on matrix analysis and applications. 3022008

Projected gradient methods for nonnegative matrix factorization. C.-J Lin, Neural computation. 19102007

Nonnegative matrix factorization: A comprehensive review. Y.-X Wang, Y.-J Zhang, IEEE Transactions on knowledge and data engineering. 2562012

Algorithms for nonnegative matrix and tensor factorizations: A unified view based on block coordinate descent framework. J Kim, Y He, H Park, Journal of Global Optimization. 5822014

Online nonnegative matrix factorization with outliers. R Zhao, V Y Tan, IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing. 6532016

Differential privacy for statistics: What we know and what we want to learn. C Dwork, A Smith, Journal of Privacy and Confidentiality. 122010

Deep learning with differential privacy. M Abadi, A Chu, I Goodfellow, H B Mcmahan, I Mironov, K Talwar, L Zhang, Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security. the 2016 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security2016

Privacy-preserving logistic regression. K Chaudhuri, C Monteleoni, Advances in neural information processing systems. 200821

Differentially private empirical risk minimization. K Chaudhuri, C Monteleoni, A D Sarwate, Journal of Machine Learning Research. 1232011

Stochastic gradient descent with differentially private updates. S Song, K Chaudhuri, A D Sarwate, 2013 IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing. IEEE2013

Differential privacy and machine learning: a survey and review. Z Ji, Z C Lipton, C Elkan, arXiv:1412.75842014arXiv preprint

Differentially private distributed online learning. C Li, P Zhou, L Xiong, Q Wang, T Wang, IEEE transactions on knowledge and data engineering. 3082018

Private empirical risk minimization: Efficient algorithms and tight error bounds. R Bassily, A Smith, A Thakurta, 2014 IEEE 55th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science. IEEE2014

Accuracy first: Selecting a differential privacy level for accuracy constrained erm. K Ligett, S Neel, A Roth, B Waggoner, S Z Wu, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 201730

Differentially private empirical risk minimization revisited: Faster and more general. D Wang, M Ye, J Xu, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 201730

Differentially private distributed convex optimization via functional perturbation. E Nozari, P Tallapragada, J Cortés, IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems. 512016

Mechanism design via differential privacy. F Mcsherry, K Talwar, 48th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS'07. IEEE2007

Smooth sensitivity and sampling in private data analysis. K Nissim, S Raskhodnikova, A Smith, Proceedings of the thirtyninth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing. the thirtyninth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing2007

A non-negative matrix factorization framework for privacy-preserving and federated learning. Z Alsulaimawi, 2020 IEEE 22nd International Workshop on Multimedia Signal Processing (MMSP). IEEE2020

Cloudbased outsourcing for enabling privacy-preserving large-scale non-negative matrix factorization. A Fu, Z Chen, Y Mu, W Susilo, Y Sun, J Wu, IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. 2019

Privacy-preserving matrix factorization. V Nikolaenko, S Ioannidis, U Weinsberg, M Joye, N Taft, D Boneh, Proceedings of the. the2013. 2013

Privacy preserving data mining using non-negative matrix factorization and singular value decomposition. A Afrin, M K Paul, A S Sattar, 2019 4th International Conference on Electrical Information and Communication Technology (EICT). IEEE2019

A differentially private nonnegative matrix factorization for recommender system. X Ran, Y Wang, L Y Zhang, J Ma, Information Sciences. 5922022

Rényi differential privacy. I Mironov, 2017 IEEE 30th Computer Security Foundations Symposium (CSF). IEEE2017

Fast and secure distributed nonnegative matrix factorization. Y Qian, C Tan, D Ding, H Li, N Mamoulis, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering. 2020

Robust nonnegative matrix factorization via l 1 norm regularization by multiplicative updating rules. B Shen, B.-D Liu, Q Wang, R Ji, 2014 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP. IEEE2014

Nonlinear hyperspectral unmixing with robust nonnegative matrix factorization. C Févotte, N Dobigeon, IEEE Transactions on Image Processing. 24122015

On the convergence of multiplicative update algorithms for nonnegative matrix factorization. C.-J Lin, IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks. 1862007

The matrix cookbook. K B Petersen, M S Pedersen, 20087510Technical University of Denmark

On-line Learning and Stochastic Approximations. L Bottou, Online learning in neural networks. D Saad, New York, NY, USACambridge University Press1998On-line Learning in Neural Networks

Svd based initialization: A head start for nonnegative matrix factorization. C Boutsidis, E Gallopoulos, Pattern recognition. 4142008

An analysis of the coherence of descriptors in topic modeling. D O'callaghan, D Greene, J Carthy, P Cunningham, Expert Systems with Applications. 42132015

UCI machine learning repository. D Dua, C Graff, 2017

Rcv1: A new benchmark collection for text categorization research. D D Lewis, Y Yang, T G Rose, F Li, id=1005332.1005345 [51J. Mach. Learn. Res. 5Dec. 2004The tdt-2 text and speech corpus

The extended yale face database b. 

Componentbased face recognition with 3d morphable models. B Weyrauch, B Heisele, J Huang, V Blanz, ser. CVPRW '04Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshop (CVPRW'04). the 2004 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshop (CVPRW'04)Washington, DC, USAIEEE Computer Society2004585

J P Near, C Abuah, Programming Differential Privacy. 20211

Nonnegative matrix factorization: Complexity, algorithms and applications. N Gillis, 2011CORELouvain-La-NeuveUnpublished doctoral dissertation, Université catholique de Louvain

Movielens data set. F Harper, J Konstan, ACM Trans Interact Intell Syst. 512016. 2006

Federated learning with differential privacy: Algorithms and performance analysis. K Wei, J Li, M Ding, C Ma, H H Yang, F Farokhi, S Jin, T Q Quek, H V Poor, IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security. 152020

Privacy amplification by subsampling: Tight analyses via couplings and divergences. B Balle, G Barthe, M Gaboardi, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 201831

Spatially coherent latent topic model for concurrent segmentation and classification of objects and scenes. L Cao, L Fei-Fei, 2007 IEEE 11th International Conference on Computer Vision. IEEE. 2007

Probabilistic topic models. D M Blei, Communications of the ACM. 5542012

Term-weighting approaches in automatic text retrieval. G Salton, C Buckley, Information processing & management. 198824

Bridging the lexical chasm: statistical approaches to answer-finding. A Berger, R Caruana, D Cohn, D Freitag, V Mittal, Proceedings of the 23rd annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval. the 23rd annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval2000

Using tf-idf to determine word relevance in document queries. J Ramos, Proceedings of the first instructional conference on machine learning. the first instructional conference on machine learningCiteseer2003242