MQDD: Pre-training of Multimodal Question Duplicity Detection for Software Engineering Domain
29 Mar 2022

Jan Pašek pasekj@kiv.zcu.cz 
Jakub Sido sidoj@kiv.zcu.cz 
Miloslav Konopík konopik@kiv.zcu.cz 
Ondřej Pražák 

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
NTIS -New Technologies for the Information Society



Faculty of Applied Sciences
University of West Bohemia
PlzeňCzech Republic

MQDD: Pre-training of Multimodal Question Duplicity Detection for Software Engineering Domain
29 Mar 2022DF0193A2844377F4F982CE1981C23619arXiv:2203.14093v2[cs.CL]
This work proposes a new pipeline for leveraging data collected on the Stack Overflow website for pre-training a multimodal model for searching duplicates on question answering websites.Our multimodal model is trained on question descriptions and source codes in multiple programming languages.We design two new learning objectives to improve duplicate detection capabilities.The result of this work is a mature, fine-tuned Multimodal Question Duplicity Detection (MQDD) model, ready to be integrated into a Stack Overflow search system, where it can help users find answers for already answered questions.Alongside the MQDD model, we release two datasets related to the software engineering domain.The first Stack Overflow Dataset (SOD) represents a massive corpus of paired questions and answers.The second Stack Overflow Duplicity Dataset (SODD) contains data for training duplicate detection models.

Introduction

The benefits of Question-Answer (QA) networks for software developers such as the Stack Overflow website are widely exploited by professionals and beginners alike during the software creation process.Many solutions to various problems, short tutorials, and other helpful tips can be found on these networks.However, access to this valuable source of information highly depends on users' ability to search for the answers.In our paper, we introduce a multimodal method for detecting duplicate questions.Apart from the primary use to prevent posting duplicate questions, this technique can be directly used for better search.When users are posting an already answered question, they can get the answer immediately without the necessity to wait until someone else links the duplicate post or answers their question.

The duplicate question detection task aims to classify whether two questions share the same in-tent.In other words, if two questions are duplicates, they relate to the same answer.The duplicate detection task is quite challenging since the classifier needs to distinguish tiny semantic nuances that can significantly change the desired answer.

The posts in the QA networks for software development mix natural language and source code snippets.The great success of neural networks for Natural Language Processing (NLP) encourages us to employ these methods for our task where natural language is intermixed with source codes.We support our decision with the findings of Hindle et al. (2012), who show that the source codes carry even less entropy than the English language.

Current state-of-the-art NLP methods build on large pre-trained models based on the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017).The Transformer-based models such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), GPT (Brown et al., 2020), RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), or T5 (Raffel et al., 2019) are usually pre-trained on massive unlabeled corpora and applied to a task with much less training data afterward.We follow this idea and introduce the pre-training phase into our solution.

In our work, we try to leverage the transfer learning techniques to build a duplicate question detection (Wang et al., 2020) model for questionanswering platforms such as Stack Overflow1 or Quora2 .Since both platforms are extensively used to ask programming-related questions, we aim to pre-train a multimodal encoder for a programming language (PL) and natural language (NL).To achieve the best possible results, we design duplicate-detection-specific pre-training objectives (see Section 3.3).

Since the source code snippets present in the Stack Overflow questions may be relatively long, we choose to base our model on the Longformer architecture (Beltagy et al., 2020); whose modified attention scheme scales linearly with the sequence length.The resulting model with ≈146M parameters is firstly pre-trained on a large semi-supervised corpus of Stack Overflow questions and answers.For detailed information about the dataset and pretraining, see Section 3.

Afterward, in Section 4, we fine-tune the obtained model on the duplicate detection task and compare our model with CodeBERT (Feng et al., 2020), which represents another NL-PL multimodal encoder.We also compare our model to a randomly initialized Longformer (Beltagy et al., 2020) and pre-trained RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) to see whether the pre-training of both models brings a significant improvement of the achieved results.The previously described experiments are visualized in Figure 1.At the end of this paper, we explore how well our model generalizes to other tasks by applying our model to the CodeSearchNet dataset (Husain et al., 2019) in Section 5.

Our main contributions are: 1) We release a finetuned Multimodal Question Duplicity Detection (MQDD) model for duplicate question detection.The model is mature enough to be deployed to Stack Overflow, where it can automatically link duplicate questions and, therefore, improve users' ability to search for desired answers.Furthermore, we release the pre-trained version of the encoder, so other researchers may reuse the most computationally intensive phase of our model training.2) We present and explore the effect of entirely new pre-training objectives specially designed for duplicate detection.3) We release a Stack Overflow Dataset (SOD) that can be used for pre-training models in a software engineering domain.Furthermore, we release a novel Stack Overflow Duplicity Dataset (SODD) for duplicate question detection, enabling other researchers to follow up on our work seamlessly.


Related Work

Deep-learning models have become more common in many new domains in recent years.The main advantage lies in processing a large volume of documents and benefiting from them.Software development is not an exception.The naturally collected massive amount of data in software management systems, issue tracker tools, and versioning systems makes the software development an ideal domain to apply deep models to increase work effectiveness.

Developers from Microsoft have introduced a system called DeepCodeReviewer, which recommends the proper review from a repository of historical peer reviews from their database (Gupta and Sundaresan, 2018).Ullah et al. (2019) have outperformed the existing techniques in source code authorship attribution using deep learning methods to express coding styles' features for each programmer and attribute the actual authors.In NLP, many recent successful models follow the BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) architecture and use the Transformer encoder (Vaswani et al., 2017) to produce contextual representations of input tokens.These contextual embeddings (Peters et al., 2018;McCann et al., 2017) can then be used for various tasks, including the classification of entire sequences (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019) or individual tokens (Liu et al., 2021;Sun et al., 2019b).Such success can probably be attributed to a wellused attention mechanism (Bahdanau et al., 2014), which allows the model to capture contextual information from the entire sequence being processed.

In deep learning, the correct choice of the training objective significantly impacts the accuracy of a final system.Adapting the pre-training phase and finding a proper objective allows the model to exploit useful features from large, naturally labeled data enabling future gains on a downstream task.An example of a model that tries to improve the pre-training objectives is ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2020), which employs a generator-discriminator setup.RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) slightly modifies the Masked Language Modeling (MLM) objective and abandons the Next Sentence Prediction (NSP).Further work then tries to modify the used neural network architecture and thus target various problems.For example, Longformer (Beltagy et al., 2020) and Reformer (Kitaev et al., 2020) models significantly modify the attention mechanism to mitigate the O(N 2 ) complexity of a vanilla attention.

With increasing computational capability and model complexity, we can observe more multilingual pre-training goals to achieve better results -mBERT (Devlin et al., 2018) and SlavicBERT (Arkhipov et al., 2019) create a joint model for representing several different languages.Unlike multilingual models, multimodal models process inputs from entirely different domains.For example, VilBERT (Lu et al., 2019) and VideoBERT (Sun et al., 2019a) process inputs consisting of both the natural language and video.

Another possible usage of multimodal encoders is to process inputs consisting of source codes and natural texts.Such models can produce contextual embeddings of source codes (Chen and Monperrus, 2019) directly applicable to downstream tasks such as programming language detection, code similarity, code search, or code fixing (Le et al., 2020).Furthermore, such a multimodal encoder can be incorporated in a Seq2Seq setup, in which it can, for example, generate source code or its documentation.

The CuBERT (Kanade et al., 2020a) is an example of a multimodal encoder for Python source codes and texts.It is pre-trained on 7.4M source files.The model outperforms BiLSTM (Schuster and Paliwal, 1997;Kanade et al., 2020b) and randomly initialized Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) approach in five different tasks, including classification of variable misuse, wrong binary operator usage, swapped operands, and functiondocstring match.Another representative of multimodal source code encoders is the CodeBERT model (Feng et al., 2020) pre-trained on a multilingual corpus of source codes from six different programming languages.The CodeBERT builds upon the RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) and follows the generator-discriminator approach laid out in ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2020).Besides the replaced token detection (RTD) learning objective from ELECTRA, the authors employ the traditional MLM objective.The resulting model shows superior results in code search, natural languageprogramming language (NL-PL) probing, and documentation generation.

Our work differs from the previous multimodal source code encoders in the following points: 1) Our model is trained using novel pre-training objectives targeting specifically the duplicate detection task.2) Unlike the CuBERT, explicitly designated for Python and CodeBERT, pre-trained on six different programming languages, our model is capable of processing inputs from an arbitrary programming language.Processing every possible programming language is crucial for deploying such a model to real-world question-answering platforms.

3) Our MQDD model employs a Transformerbased architecture with an attention scheme scaling linearly with sequence length.This enables the model to be integrated into systems that require processing long sequences in a reasonable time.


Model Pre-training

This section describes the pre-training procedure, including the construction of the new dataset from the Stack Overflow, the definition of the learning objectives, and the model itself.


Stack Overflow Dataset

For the pre-training, we construct our Stack Overflow Dataset (SOD), created from the Stack Overflow data dump4 .The original data source5 contains around 45M of posts (questions + answers) exported in an XML format.The questions represent approximately 17.7M thereof.To construct the dataset, we take all question-answer pairs, extract the textual and source code parts and apply different pre-processing on both (for pre-processing details, see appendix A).A result of the preprocessing procedure are tuples (Q t , Q c , A t , A c ) containing pre-processed texts (t) and codes (c) from both the questions (Q) and answers (A).

Afterward, we construct the training set by taking 2-combinations of the pre-processed tuples, resulting in 6 different input pair types described in Section 3. A detailed description of the dataset's structure is provided in appendix D. Furthermore, Tables 1 and  2 present a detailed analysis of the programming languages included in the corpus and dataset size, respectively.


Tokenization

Before extracting the input pairs, we employ the (Q t , Q c , A t , A c ) tuples to train a joint tokenizer for both the source codes and English texts.We use the Word Piece tokenizer (Schuster and Nakajima, 2012), whose vocabulary size is typically set to a value between 10K-100K subword tokens.In our work, we set the vocabulary size to 50K subword tokens, which is large enough to encompass both the textual and code tokens while preserving a reasonable size of the embedding layer.When constructing the dataset, we ignore all tokens that occur less than five times in the dataset.


Pre-training Objectives

Similarly to BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), we employ a Masked Language Modeling (MLM) task during the pre-training phase.The MLM objective aims to reconstruct original tokens from intentionally modified input sequences.The modification replaces randomly selected tokens with a special [MASK] token or any other token from the dictionary.Besides the MLM, we introduce two Stack Overflow dataset-specific tasks dealing with multimodal data.The first task is called Question-Answer (QA), and it aims is to classify whether the input pair originates from a question-answer relationship.The individual elements of the input pair can be either a natural language text or a programming language snippet.Therefore, we work with the following input pair types:

• Question text -Answer code (Qt-Ac)

• Question code -Answer code (Qc-Ac)

• Question text -Answer code (Qt-Ac)

• Question code -Answer text (Qc-At)

The second Stack Overflow-related task is called Same Post (SP).Similarly to the QA task, the SP works with input pairs of natural language and source code snippets.However, unlike the QA task, SP classifies whether the elements of the input pair come from the same post (a post represents either a question or an answer).The resulting possible input pair types are the following:

• Answer Text -Answer Code (At-Ac)
• Question Text -Question Code (Qt-Qc)
We designed these learning objectives specifically to achieve the best possible result on our target task -duplicate detection (Section 4).We presume that employing these tasks requiring a deep understanding of the multimodal input helps us outperform similar models such as CodeBERT (Feng et al., 2020).Furthermore, our learning objectives require comparing and matching the semantics of both the textual input and the source code that can be leveraged on downstream tasks such as code search (Heyman and Cutsem, 2020;Sachdev et al., 2018;Arwan et al., 2015).


Model Description

We choose to employ the architecture of the Longformer model (Beltagy et al., 2020) for its attention mechanism that scales linearly with the input sequence length.This addresses the fact that the processed input sequences (mainly the source code) may contain several hundreds of tokens.Processing such long sequences with the vanilla attention mechanism used in the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) can be computationally exhausting.

We use the Hugging Face's Transformers (Wolf et al., 2020) model with approximately 146M parameters (for more details on the model, see appendix B).

On top of the base model, we build two different classification heads.The first head, dealing with the MLM task, takes the input tokens' contextual embeddings as its input.It means the MLM head works with the matrix E ∈ R N ×H , where H is the hidden size and N is the length of the input sequence.MLM prediction is obtained by passing the matrix through a linear layer so that MLM output = E × W mlm , where W mlm ∈ R H×|V | , and |V | represents the size of the vocabulary.In other words, the model produces a probability distribution over the vocabulary for each of the input tokens, including the masked ones.To optimize the weights, we further calculate a cross-entropy loss over the network's prediction.

The second head classifies whether an input pair represents a question-answer pair and whether both inputs originate from the same post.To achieve this, the head takes the contextual embedding of the special [CLS] token ([CLS] ∈ R H )7 .The vector is then transformed using a linear layer with ReLu (Nair and Hinton, 2010) used as an activation function -QA_SP intermediate = relu([CLS]×W qa_sp 1 ), where W qa_sp 1 ∈ R H×D and D represents a dimensionality of the intermediate layer.In the end, the Question-Answer/Same Paragraph (QA/SP) head output is obtained using another linear layer -QA_SP output = QA_SP intermediate × W qa_sp 2 , where W qa_sp 2 ∈ R D×2 .Put differently, the QA/SP head is a multilabel classifier with two output neurons.The first one represents a probability of the input pair originating from the same post.The second one represents the probability of the input pair originating from the question-answer relationship.To optimize the weights with respect to our QA/SP objectives, we compute a binary cross-entropy loss over the two output neurons.


Pre-training Procedure

We optimize our model using Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2014) with a learning rate of 1e−5 while employing both linear warmup and linear decay to zero.The linear warmup is configured to reach the target learning rate in 45K batches.The pre-training is carried out on two Nvidia A100 GPUs and two AMD EPYC 7662 CPU cores with a batch size of 64 examples.

We perform a single iteration over the whole dataset (≈ 220M examples) with such a configuration while trimming the sequences to a sequence length of 256 tokens.Afterward, we set the sequence length to 1024 tokens and train the model for additional 10M examples, enabling us to train positional embeddings for longer sequences.


Duplicate Question Detection

Following the pre-training phase, this section focuses on applying the obtained model to the task of duplicate detection.In the first part, we describe the construction of a new dataset for duplicate detection.The next part presents how we integrate the pre-trained model into a two-tower neural network.At the end of this section, we describe the concluded experiments and present the results.


Stack Overflow Duplicity Dataset

Similarly to the pre-training phase, we employ the Stack Overflow data dump to assemble the Stack Overflow Duplicity Dataset (SODD).The data contain approximately 491K pairs of questions marked to be duplicated by the page's users.To replenish the dataset with negative samples, we employ randomly chosen questions and similar questions retrieved using ElasticSearch8 .More specifically, we sample three random questions and retrieve six similar questions for each duplicate pair.The similarities are retrieved either based on a full-text similarity of the question's body or associated tags.However, each question can be included in the dataset at most once.The resulting dataset consists of approximately 1.4M examples represented by triplets (x 1 , x 2 , y), where x 1 and x 2 represent the questions and y ∈ {duplicate, text_similar, tag_similar, different} represents the label.Although the dataset differentiates between different and similar questions, all of our experiments treat both of these classes the same.In other words, our experiments perform a binary classification task.For more information about the dataset size, see Table 3.


Type

Train Dev Test Total The question pairs acquired from the Stack Overflow are stored in the HTML format.Therefore, we employ a BeautifulSoup 9 library to re-move unwanted HTML markup and separate normal text from source code snippets.Besides, we pre-process the source code stripping all inline comments and newline characters.Moreover, we substitute the floating-point and integer numbers with placeholder tokens.Similarly to the source codes, we replace numbers and date/time information with placeholder tokens and remove newlines and punctuation in the textual part of the dataset.The resulting dataset can be obtained from our repository https://github.com/kiv-air/StackOverflowDataset.For a detailed description of the dataset structure, see appendix E.
Different 550K 64K 32K 646K Similar 526K 62K 30K 618K Duplicates 191K 22K 11K 224K Total 1.2M 148K 73K 1.4M

Model

We employ a variant of a two-tower neural network to adapt our pre-trained model to the duplicate detection task.Our setup (Figure 2) encodes both questions separately using the same pre-trained encoder, obtaining representations of the questions (x e1 , x e2 ∈ R d ).The representations are then concatenated (x e = [x e1 ; x e2 ]) and transformed using a linear layer with ReLu activation (Nair and Hinton, 2010), as stated in equation 1.

x L = max(0, x e W L + b L )

(1)
x H = sof tmax(x L W H + b H )(2)
At the top of our duplicate detection model, there is a classification head consisting of a linear layer with two neurons, whose activation is further transformed using a softmax function, (Bridle, 1990) as shown in equation 2.

An alternative approach would be to jointly pass both questions into the encoder and build a classification head at the top.However, our architecture of the two-tower model allows the representations of the whole corpus to be pre-computed and indexed in a fast vector space search library such as Faiss 10 (Johnson et al., 2019) (see the future work in Section 7).Thanks to that, it is possible to compute only the representation of the newly posted question and run a quick search inside the vector space.This is much faster than running the model for each pair of questions composed of a new question and the others in the corpus.(Feng et al., 2020), or RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019).


Experimental Setup -Duplicate Detection

Similarly to the pre-training phase, we use the Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2014) with a learning rate set to 6.35e−6 to train the model on a computation node with two cores of AMD EPYC 7662 CPU and two Nvidia A100 GPUs.In each experiment, we train the model for 24 hours with a batch size of 96 examples and observe the progress of cross-entropy loss, accuracy, and F1 score.The hyperparameters were set based on 30 hyperparameter-search experiments conducted using the Weights & Biases (Biewald, 2020) sweeps service11 .For detailed information about the hyperparameter setting, refer to appendix C.

To evaluate the effectiveness of our pre-training objectives, we compare our model with the Code-BERT (Feng et al., 2020), RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), and randomly initialized Longformer (Beltagy et al., 2020).The comparison experiments also utilize the architecture depicted in Figure 2, where we only replace the encoder with the model being compared.The training setup for the comparison experiment is identical to the setup described above.It means that we fine-tune the models for 24 hours on the same hardware.


Results

As evaluation metrics, we use an F1 score and accuracy.We summarize the results of our experiments in Table 4, where the achieved results are stated with 95% confidence intervals.From the results, we can see that our model significantly outperformed all alternative approaches.For further discussion on the results, see Section 6.For a broader discussion of the results and an interesting observation that the CodeBERT does not bring a statistically significant improvement over the basic RoBERTa, see Section 6.


Model


Generalization to Other Tasks

To explore how well our model generalizes to other tasks, we choose the code search task.The information retrieval seems to be close to our pretraining tasks.Therefore, we conjecture that the acquired results can be promising.For all the experiments, we use the CodeSearchNet dataset (Husain et al., 2019) containing approximately 2.3M examples from six different programming languages extracted from GitHub repositories.


Domain-Specific Pre-Training

Since our model is pre-trained on Stack Overflow data significantly different from the CodeSearch-Net extracted from GitHub, we employ a domainspecific pre-training to adapt our model to the target domain.

We employ the masked language modeling (MLM) learning objective for the domain-specific pre-training.We perform 20 iterations over the CodeSearchNet dataset following the same experimental setup as described in Section 3.5.


Experimental Setup -Code Search

To fine-tune our model on the CodeSearchNet dataset (Husain et al., 2019), we utilize its preprocessed version from the authors of CodeBERT (Feng et al., 2020) since it comes with negative examples, unlike the original dataset distribution.

In our experiments, we train a separate model for each of the six available programming languages and compare our results with the results obtained using the CodeBERT (Feng et al., 2020), RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), and randomly initialized Longformer (Beltagy et al., 2020).

For all of the experiments, we employ the AutoModelForSequenceClassification class from the Hugging Face's Transformers (Wolf et al., 2020) library.The models for sequence classification come with an in-build classification head that operates over the pooled output of the base model.

Similarly to the duplicate detection experiments, we perform the fine-tuning on two NVidia A100 GPUs for 24 hours with a batch size of 64 examples.For optimization, we also employ the Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014) optimizer with a learning rate of 1e−5.Furthermore, we utilize learning rate warmup during the first 256 batches and apply linear learning rate decay to zero.


Results

In the case of the code search task, we use the F1 score metric to evaluate the achieved results.The complete summary of the results with 95% confidence intervals can be found in Table 5.The results show that both the CodeBERT (Feng et al., 2020) and RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) significantly outperform our model in the code search task.


Discussion

As the results stated in Sections 4.4 and 5.3 suggest, our model excels in detecting duplicates but lags in source code retrieval.We expected the dominance of our model in the duplication detection task.However, an interesting observation is that the pre-training of the CodeBERT initialized using the RoBERTa's weights does not bring any improvement when applied to the duplicate detection.On the other hand, it is very surprising that our MQDD model does not perform comparably well as the CodeBERT on the code search since our pre-training objectives require the model to build a deep understanding of the processed source code.

This can be explained by the fact that the datasets used for pre-training of both models have very different characteristics.The SOD does not contain source code from a constrained set of six programming languages (see Table 1), as in the case of the CodeBERT.Therefore, our model may produce representations of all programming languages in average quality.In contrast, the CodeBERT may produce high-quality representations in the six programming languages it was pre-trained on but very bad representations of the other programming languages.This would also explain why CodeBERT does not perform so well on duplicates; it excels in processing the six programming languages but fails to generalize to other abundantly contained languages in the Stack Overflow dataset.However, the offered explanation does not cover that RoBERTa, whose pre-training dataset did not contain any source code, outperforms our model in the code search task.We speculate that this can be caused by the MQDD model being trapped in its local optimum due to its pre-training designed especially for the duplicate detection.This can make it difficult to get out of this local optimum when fine-tuned on a slightly different dataset and task.This phenomenon is often referred to as a negative transfer (Rosenstein et al., 2005;Zhang et al., 2020) and can be caused, among other things, by the discrepancy between the pre-training and fine-tuning domains.

Given that our research aimed to build a model designed directly for the detection of duplicates on platforms such as Stack Overflow or Quora, it can be stated that the results we achieve are satisfactory.Our resulting model far exceeds the results achieved by competitive work on a task that can be perceived as more demanding due to the need to process a general source language and distinguish seemingly insignificant semantic nuances.For example, questions "How to implement a producer-consumer in Java" and "How to implement a producer-consumer in C++" must be identified as different since the answers would significantly differ.


Future Work

Our work opens up further opportunities to build on our current research.First of all, it would be interesting to explore methods that would eliminate the effect of negative transfer and thus allow the use of our pre-trained model in other tasks.

Furthermore, the follow-up work can integrate our model into a production-ready duplicate detection system employing a fast vector space search library such as Faiss.

The proposed system can be further extended by a duplicate detection model that jointly processes both questions allowing the attention mechanism to attend across both inputs.Such a model can potentially achieve better results and be deployed along with our two-tower-based model.Our two-tower model would then be used to filter out candidate duplicate questions.Afterward, the cross-attention model could verify that the candidate questions are indeed duplicates more accurately.


Conclusion

This work presents a new pre-trained BERTlike model that detects duplicate threads on programming-related discussion platforms.Based on the Longformer architecture, the presented model is pre-trained on our novel pre-training objectives (QA and SP) that aim to target the duplicate detection task.The comparison with the competitive CodeBERT model shows that our model outperforms other approaches, suggesting the effectiveness of our learning objectives.Furthermore, we investigated the generalization capabilities of our model by applying it to a code retrieval task.In this task, it turned out that our model does not exceed the results achieved with either CodeBERT or the more general RoBERTa model.We attribute these findings to the significant differences between our pre-training dataset and the evaluation dataset for the code search task.Therefore, we consider our model an excellent choice for solving duplicate detection.However, it seems to be too specialized to solve other tasks well.

Our models are publicly available for research purposes in our Hugging Face 12 and GitHub 13 repositories.

Figure 1 :
1
Figure 1: A visualization of the pipeline of our experiments.The upper part of the figure shows the construction of our SOD and SODD datasets and their usage for pre-training and fine-tuning our MQDD model.The lower part of the figure visualizes the pre-training of the CodeBERT done by Feng et al. (2020).


Figure 2 :
2
Figure2: The neural network model architecture used for duplicate question detection.The encoder blocks in the figure share the same weights and represent either an MQDD, CodeBERT(Feng et al., 2020), or RoBERTa(Liu et al., 2019).


Table 1 :
1
3. The acquired input pairs (x 1 , x 2 ) are further processed in batches of 100 examples.For The table presents a tag-based analysis of the percentage of individual programming languages in the SOD dataset.The table shows the 15 most frequent programming languages included in the dataset.Together they form ≈70% of all the examples.The remaining 30% are then made up of less popular programming languages or specific technologies.
OrderTagPercentage1javascript10,952java9,883c#8,044php7,955python6,326html6,187css4,288c++4,159sql3,4210c2,2911objective-c1,9312r1,3613ruby1,3214swift1,0515bash0,8-total69,92Subsequently, we tokenize the input pairs andstore them in TFRecords 6 to speed up data pro-cessing during the training. The resulting datasetcontains 218.5M examples and can be downloadedfrom our GitHub repository https://github.com/kiv-air/StackOverflowDataset.
each pair in the batch, we sample one negative example by choosing a random text or code x r from the batch buffer and use it as a replacement for the second element in the pair.This results in adding pair (x 1 , x r ) to the training set.


Table 2 :
2
Detailed statistics of the released Stack Overflow Dataset (SOD).The table shows the average number of characters, tokens, and words in different source codes present in questions (QC) or answers (AC) and texts present in questions (QT) or answers (AT).Besides the average statistics, the table provides a total count of tokens, words, or characters.To calculate the statistics related to token counts, we utilized the tokenizer presented in Section 3.2, whereas we employed a simple space tokenization for the word statistics.
StatisticQCQTACATTotalaverage # of characters846519396369-average # of tokens29813014092-average # of words83894460-# of characters16.1B 13.5B 6.6B 9.6B 45.8B# of tokens5.7B3.4B 2.3B 2.4B 13.8B# of words1.6B2.3B 0.7B 1.6B6.2B

Table 3 :
3
Stack Overflow Duplicity Dataset (SODD) size summary.


Table 4 :
4
Summary of duplicate detection experiment results stated with 95% confidence intervals.The † sign marks randomly initialized models.As we expected, our model outperformed the other tested approaches.
AccuracyF1 ScoreMQDD74.83 ± 0.10 75.10 ± 0.10CodeBERT70.44 ± 0.12 70.70 ± 0.13RoBERTa70.16 ± 0.19 70.51 ± 0.22Longformer † 67.31 ± 0.12 67.71 ± 0.19

Table 5 :
5
± 0.04 80.11 ± 0.15 70.09 ± 0.48 85.58 ± 0.16 84.14 ± 0.48 82.77 ± 0.31 CodeBERT 96.68 ± 0.06 83.75 ± 0.06 83.42 ± 0.06 88.50 ± 0.03 88.25 ± 0.12 87.22 ± 0.31 RoBERTa 95.94 ± 0.06 81.58 ± 0.23 80.35 ± 0.25 86.78 ± 0.09 86.02 ± 0.11 84.06 ± 0.20 Longformer † 66.62 ± 0.14 66.51 ± 0.24 66.71 ± 0.15 66.68 ± 0.06 66.71 ± 0.10 66.74 ± 0.15 Results summary of code search experiments in six different programming languages.The F1 score is stated in percents with 95% confidence intervals.The best results in each language are highlighted in bold.The † sign marks randomly initialized models.The results show that the CodeBERT shows better results than our MQDD model.As discussed in Section 6, we conjecture that this might be caused by a negative transfer effect.Nevertheless, our model is specifically designed for duplicate question detection, and therefore, we do not place much importance on the poorer results in the code search task.
ModelGoJavaJavaScriptPHPPythonRubyMQDD95.33
https://stackoverflow.com
https://quora.com/
https://copilot.github.com
Available at: https://archive.org/download/ stackexchange.
Data dump was downloaded in June 2020. Therefore, all the stated information is valid to this date.
https://www.tensorflow.org/tutorials/ load_data/tfrecord
The[CLS]  token is an artificial token added at the begging for sequence classification tasks.
https://www.elastic.co
https://beautiful-soup-4.readthedocs. io/en/latest/
https://docs.wandb.ai/guides/sweeps
AcknowledgmentsThis work has been supported by Grant No. SGS-2022-016 Advanced methods of data processing and analysis.Computational resources were supplied by the project "e-Infrastruktura CZ" (e-INFRA CZ LM2018140 ) supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic.A Dataset Pre-processingThe data retrieved from the Stack Overflow data dump contain an HTML markup that needs to be pre-processed before being used to train a neural network.Furthermore, the natural language and source code snippets are mixed in a single HTML document, so we need to separate those two parts.We use the BeautifulSoup 14 library to extract the textual data from the HTML markup.To do so, we remove all content enclosed in <code></code> tags and strip all the remaining HTML tags.Afterward, we remove all newline characters and multiple subsequent space characters induced by stripping the HTML tags.On the other hand, while pre-processing the code snippets, we first extract all content from <pre><code></code></pre> using the BeautifulSoup library and throw away the rest.Afterward, we remove the newlines and multiple spaces, as in the case of the textual part.B Longformer Model ConfigurationThe implementation of the Longformer model that we employ in the pre-training is the transformers.LongformerModel 15 from HuggingFace Transformers library.Below, we provide a detailed listing of the model's parameters.C Duplicate Detection HyperparametersFor fine-tuning our MQDD model on the duplicate detection task, we employ the Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 6.35e−6.We train the model on sequences of 256 subword tokens with a batch size of 100 examples.Additionally, we use an L2 normalization with a normalization factor set to 0.043.Another regularization method we employ is the dropout with the following configuration:• attention dropout in the Longformer = 0.2• hidden dropout in the Longformer = 0.5• dropout at the first linear layer of the classification head = 0.26• dropout at the second linear layer of the classification head = 0.2D Stack Overflow Dataset StructureThe Stack Overflow Dataset (SOD) consists of a metadata file and several data files.Each line of the metadata file (dataset_meta.csv)contains a JSON array with the following information:• question_id -identifier of the question in format <id>-<page> (in our case the page = stackoverflow)• answer_id -identifier of the answer in format <id>-<page> (in our case the page = stackoverflow)• title -title of the question Each row in the data file then represents a single example whose metadata can be obtained from a corresponding row in the metadata file.A training example is represented by a JSON array containing two strings.For example, in the dataset_QC_AC.csv, the first element in the array contains code from a question, whereas the second element contains code from the related answer.It shall be noted that the dataset export does not contain negative examples since they would significantly increase the disk space required for storing the dataset.The negative examples must be randomly sampled during pre-processing, as discussed in Section 3.1.Since the resulting dataset takes up a lot of disk space, we split the individual data files and the metadata file into nine smaller ones.Therefore, files such as, for example, dataset_meta_1.csvand corresponding dataset_QC_AT_1.csvcan then be found in the repository.E Stack Overflow Duplicity Dataset StructureThe published SODD dataset is split into train/dev/test splits and is stored in parquet 16 files compressed using gzip.The data can be loaded using the pandas 17 library using the following code snippet:1 !pip3 install pandas pyarrow The dataframe loaded using the snippet above contains the following columns:• first_post -HTML formatted data of the first question (contains both text and code snippets) As one can see, our dataset contains accepted answers as well.Although we are not using them in our work, we included them in the dataset to open up other possibilities of using our dataset.
Tuning multilingual transformers for language-specific named entity recognition. Mikhail Arkhipov, Maria Trofimova, Yuri Kuratov, Alexey Sorokin, 10.18653/v1/W19-3712Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing. the 7th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language ProcessingFlorence, Italy2019Association for Computational Linguistics

Source code retrieval on stackoverflow using lda. Achmad Arwan, Siti Rochimah, Rizky Januar, Akbar , 10.1109/ICoICT.2015.72314392015 3rd International Conference on Information and Communication Technology (ICoICT). 2015

Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate. Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, Y Bengio, ArXiv. 2014. 1409

Deepcoder: Learning to write programs. A L Balog, Gaunt, Brockschmidt, Nowozin, Tarlow, International Conference on Learning Representations. 2017. 2017OpenReview. net

Longformer: The long-document transformer. Iz Beltagy, Matthew E Peters, Arman Cohan, CoRR, abs/2004.051502020

Experiment tracking with weights and biases. Software available from wandb. Lukas Biewald, 2020

Probabilistic interpretation of feedforward classification network outputs, with relationships to statistical pattern recognition. John S Bridle, Neurocomputing. Berlin, Heidelberg; Berlin HeidelbergSpringer1990

. Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, 12. 2005.14165Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mc-Candlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskeverand Dario Amodei. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. CoRR, abs/

Com-mit2vec: Learning distributed representations of code changes. Rocío Cabrera Lozoya, Arnaud Baumann, SN Computer Science. 232021Antonino Sabetta, and Michele Bezzi

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harrison Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian ; Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such. Joshua Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang,; Andrew N. Carr; Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer; Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlishPeter WelinderJan LeikeIlya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. CoRR, abs/2107.03374

A literature study of embeddings on source code. Zimin Chen, Martin Monperrus, CoRR, abs/1904.030612019

ELECTRA: pretraining text encoders as discriminators rather than generators. Kevin Clark, Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V Le, Christopher D Manning, CoRR, abs/2003.105552020

Xiang Deng, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Christopher Meek, Oleksandr Polozov, Huan Sun, Matthew Richardson, arXiv:2010.12773Structure-grounded pretraining for text-to-sql. 2020arXiv preprint

BERT: pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, CoRR, abs/1810.048052018

Codebert: A pre-trained model for programming and natural languages. Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng, Ming Gong, Linjun Shou, Bing Qin, Ting Liu, Daxin Jiang, Ming Zhou, CoRR, abs/2002.081552020

Intelligent code reviews using deep learning. Anshul Gupta, Neel Sundaresan, Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD'18) Deep Learning Day. the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD'18) Deep Learning Day2018

Neural code search revisited: Enhancing code snippet retrieval through natural language intent. Geert Heyman, Tom Van Cutsem, CoRR, abs/2008.121932020

On the naturalness of software. Abram Hindle, Earl Barr, Zhendong Su, Mark Gabel, Premkumar Devanbu, 10.1109/ICSE.2012.6227135Proceedings -International Conference on Software Engineering. -International Conference on Software Engineering2012

Codesearchnet challenge: Evaluating the state of semantic code search. Hamel Husain, Ho-Hsiang Wu, Tiferet Gazit, Miltiadis Allamanis, Marc Brockschmidt, CoRR, abs/1909.094362019

Billion-scale similarity search with GPUs. Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, Hervé Jégou, IEEE Transactions on Big Data. 732019

Pre-trained contextual embedding of source code. Aditya Kanade, Petros Maniatis, Gogul Balakrishnan, Kensen Shi, CoRR, abs/2001.000592020a

Pre-trained contextual embedding of source code. Aditya Kanade, Petros Maniatis, Gogul Balakrishnan, Kensen Shi, CoRR, abs/2001.000592020b

Diederik Kingma, Jimmy Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. International Conference on Learning Representations. 2014

Reformer: The efficient transformer. Nikita Kitaev, Lukasz Kaiser, Anselm Levskaya, CoRR, abs/2001.044512020

Deep learning for source code modeling and generation: Models, applications and challenges. Triet Huynh, Minh Le, Hao Chen, Muhammad Ali Babar, CoRR, abs/2002.054422020

Atom: Commit message generation based on abstract syntax tree and hybrid ranking. Shangqing Liu, Cuiyun Gao, Sen Chen, Nie Lun Yiu, Yang Liu, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering. 2020

Roberta: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach. Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, Veselin Stoyanov, CoRR, abs/1907.116922019

NER-BERT: A pre-trained model for low-resource entity tagging. Zihan Liu, Feijun Jiang, Yuxiang Hu, Chen Shi, Pascale Fung, CoRR, abs/2112.004052021

Vilbert: Pretraining task-agnostic visiolinguistic representations for vision-and-language tasks. Jiasen Lu, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, Stefan Lee, CoRR, abs/1908.022652019

Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines. Bryan Mccann, James Bradbury, Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher, CoRR, abs/1708.00107Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML'10. Vinod Nair, Geoffrey E Hinton, the 27th International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML'10Madison, WI, USAOmnipress2017. 2010Learned in translation: Contextualized word vectors

Deep contextualized word representations. Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Luke Zettlemoyer, 10.18653/v1/N18-1202Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. Long Papers. the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language TechnologiesNew Orleans, LouisianaAssociation for Computational Linguistics20181

Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, Peter J Liu, CoRR, abs/1910.106832019

Sentencebert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bertnetworks. Nils Reimers, Iryna Gurevych, CoRR, abs/1908.100842019

To transfer or not to transfer. Zvika Michael Rosenstein, Leslie Marx, Thomas Kaelbling, Dietterich, 2005

Retrieval on source code: A neural code search. Saksham Sachdev, Hongyu Li, Sifei Luan, Seohyun Kim, Koushik Sen, Satish Chandra, 10.1145/3211346.3211353Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on Machine Learning and Programming Languages. the 2nd ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on Machine Learning and Programming LanguagesNew York, NY, USAAssociation for Computing Machinery2018. 2018

Bidirectional recurrent neural networks. M Schuster, K K Paliwal, 10.1109/78.650093IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing. 45111997

Japanese and korean voice search. Mike Schuster, Kaisuke Nakajima, 10.1109/ICASSP.2012.62890792012 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). 2012

Videobert: A joint model for video and language representation learning. Chen Sun, Austin Myers, Carl Vondrick, Kevin Murphy, Cordelia Schmid, CoRR, abs/1904.017662019a

Utilizing BERT for aspect-based sentiment analysis via constructing auxiliary sentence. Chi Sun, Luyao Huang, Xipeng Qiu, CoRR, abs/1903.095882019b

Weisong Sun, Chunrong Fang, Yuchen Chen, Guanhong Tao, Tingxu Han, Quanjun Zhang, arXiv:2202.08029Code search based on context-aware code translation. 2022arXiv preprint

Deep learning similarities from different representations of source code. Michele Tufano, Cody Watson, Gabriele Bavota, 2018. 2018Massimiliano Di Penta, Martin White, and Denys Poshyvanyk

IEEE/ACM 15th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR). IEEE

Source code authorship attribution using hybrid approach of program dependence graph and deep learning model. Farhan Ullah, Junfeng Wang, Sohail Jabbar, Fadi Al-Turjman, Mamoun Alazab, IEEE Access. 72019

Attention is all you need. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, Illia Polosukhin, CoRR, abs/1706.037622017

Duplicate question detection with deep learning in stack overflow. Liting Wang, Li Zhang, Jing Jiang, 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2968391IEEE Access. 82020

Codet5: Identifier-aware unified pre-trained encoder-decoder models for code understanding and generation. Yue Wang, Weishi Wang, Shafiq R Joty, Steven C H Hoi, CoRR, abs/2109.008592021

Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Clara Patrick Von Platen, Yacine Ma, Julien Jernite, Canwen Plu, Teven Xu, Sylvain Le Scao, Mariama Gugger, Quentin Drame, Alexander M Lhoest, Rush, Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations. the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System DemonstrationsOnline. Association for Computational Linguistics2020

A syntactic neural model for general-purpose code generation. Pengcheng Yin, Graham Neubig, Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Long Papers. the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics20171

A survey on negative transfer. Wen Zhang, Lingfei Deng, Dongrui Wu, CoRR, abs/2009.009092020