Modulated Kondo screening along magnetic mirror twin boundaries in monolayer MoS 2 on graphene
18 Oct 2022

Camiel Van Efferen 
†II. Physikalisches Institut
Universität zu Köln
Zülpicher Straße 7750937KölnGermany

‡Institut für theoretische Physik
Zülpicher Straße 7750937KölnGermany

Jeison Fischer 
†II. Physikalisches Institut
Universität zu Köln
Zülpicher Straße 7750937KölnGermany

‡Institut für theoretische Physik
Zülpicher Straße 7750937KölnGermany

Achim Rosch 
Thomas Michely 
†II. Physikalisches Institut
Universität zu Köln
Zülpicher Straße 7750937KölnGermany

‡Institut für theoretische Physik
Zülpicher Straße 7750937KölnGermany

Wouter Jolie 
Modulated Kondo screening along magnetic mirror twin boundaries in monolayer MoS 2 on graphene
18 Oct 20221
A many-body resonance emerges at the Fermi energy when an electron bath screens the magnetic moment of a half-filled impurity level. This Kondo effect, originally introduced to explain the abnormal resistivity behavior in bulk magnetic alloys 1 , has been realized in many quantum systems over the past decades, such as quantum dots 2-4 , quantum point contacts 5-8 , nanowires 9 , single-molecule transistors 10-12 , heavyfermion lattices 13-15 , down to adsorbed single atoms [16][17][18] . While these experiments have provided robust signatures of electronic correlations at low temperature, the experimentally incomplete characterization of the spectral function has not only given rise to doubts about the presence of the Kondo effect itself in some seemingly wellestablished Kondo systems [19][20][21][22] , but also hindered adequate testing of theoretical models against experiment. Here we describe a unique Kondo system which allows a full experimental determination of all relevant quantities present in the spectral function, including the impurity energy levels and the spatial modulation of their wave functions. This approach, based on a discrete half-filled quantum confined state within a MoS 2 grain boundary, enables us to test the validity of the Anderson model which is the basis of the microscopic understanding of Kondo physics. The discrepancies uncovered highlight the need for further theoretical developments.The Kondo resonance of single magnetic atoms or molecules on metal surfaces has been subject of intense research since it was first observed with the scanning tunnelling microscope (STM) by Madhavan et al. 16 and Li et al. 17  . Much less is known about the atomic or molecular impurity levels, which remain experimentally inaccessible due to their hybridization with the substrate. The scarcity of experimental data has led to a strong dependence on theoretical input to clarify the origin of the measured signals. For example, the line shapes around zero bias observed in STM spectra for Co on noble metal surfaces 16 were considered as paradigms for a Kondo resonance, but have recently been argued by Bouaziz et al. 22  to originate from exotic spin excitations rather than the Kondo effect. Likewise, theoretical predictions for the dependence of the Kondo resonance on energy position and width of the impurity level 23,24 2 generally lack verification due to the absence of experimental data.A promising approach to enable local detection of the impurity levels is to spatially confine electrons, as done inside a quantum dot 2-4 . When a confined state at the Fermi level E F is filled with a single electron, strong Coulomb repulsion can lift the degeneracy of the energy level, leading to the formation of a singly occupied state below E F mimicking the half-filled orbital of a magnetic atom. A Kondo resonance emerges when the non-degenerate states couple to an electron bath in close proximity 2-4 . The advantages of the confinement approach are a small separation of the non-degenerate states, together with a large spatial extension of the confined wave function. In most quantum dot systems these wavefunctions are, however, not accessible. Here we present a system where scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) and STM with their unsurpassed energy and spatial resolution can be used to track the Kondo resonance along with the impurity levels and the spatial modulation of the wavefunctions on the atomic scale. Our Kondo system is realized in a MoS 2 mirror twin boundary (MTB), a line-defect of finite length which hosts confined states in the band gap of the semiconducting two-dimensional (2D) material 25-27 . Due to its one-dimensional nature, strong Coulomb interactions push the states around the Fermi level apart and transform higher excitations into the spin-and charge excitations of a confined Tomonaga-Luttinger liquid 27,28 . Fig. 1a sketches the local density of states around the Fermi level of a MTB placed on a graphene substrate. The electron bath is represented by graphene's Dirac electrons, which exhibit a linear energy dependence close to the Dirac point 29 . The discrete energy levels sketched in Fig. 1a, right, are quantized states within the one-dimensional MoS 2 mirror twin boundary. These energy levels, with energy spacing E Q , are analogous to the localized levels of a magnetic impurity.When the highest occupied level is filled by a single electron, the strong Coulomb interaction U prohibits a second electron to enter, creating a spin-1 2 system localized along the mirror twin boundary. This spin couples to the bath, creating a Kondo resonance pinned to E F , as we demonstrate below. 3 Figure 1: Kondo effect within a MoS 2 mirror twin boundary. a Kondo coupling of graphene (bath)with the non-degenerate states (impurity) confined along a MoS 2 mirror twin boundary. Indicated are the Fermi energy E F , Coulomb energy U and confinement energy E Q , see text. The electron inside the highest occupied states is symbolized by an arrow. b Atomically-resolved topography of a single-layer MoS 2 island on graphene, with two mirror twin boundaries separating mirror-symmetric domains. c,e Spatially averaged dI/dV spectra along a mirror twin boundary before and after pulsing, being in a state that is either c degenerate or e non-degenerate. d,f Conductance colormaps showing spatially resolved dI/dV spectra along the mirror twin boundary. Dashed white lines are added to highlight the phase relation between the states on either side of E F in the middle of the boundary. STM/STS parameters: b 20 × 20 nm 2 , V set = 500 mV, I set = 10 pA; c,d V set = 500 mV, I set = 1.0 nA; e,f V set = 500 mV, I set = 0.5 nA. V mod = 2.5 mV.4A MoS 2 monolayer island hosting two such mirror twin boundaries is shown inFig. 1b.The finite length of the mirror twin boundaries leads to confined energy levels separated by a confinement energy E Q , inversely proportional to the length of the wire 27 . When the highest energy level is filled with two electrons, there is no unpaired magnetic moment and hence no Kondo effect. This situation is depicted inFig.1c, which displays the averaged differential conductance dI/dV along a mirror twin boundary. This signal is proportional to the local density of states as a function of energy (given by the bias voltage). We find a series of peaks corresponding to quantized energy levels. Satellite peaks attributed to phonon-induced inelastic tunneling processes are observed at fixed distances 24 ± 2 and 50 ± 5 mV from the main peaks 26 . The peaks closest to E F exhibit a larger energy gap, E gap = E Q + U , with U the Coulomb energy 'penalty' incurred due to strong Coulomb interactions 27,30 . The standing waves corresponding to the energy levels closest to E F are mapped inFig.1dusing a series of dI/dV spectra taken along the mirror twin boundary. These standing waves are out of phase in the center of the boundary, as expected for succesive degenerate particle-in-a-box states 27 .The number of electrons within a mirror twin boundary can be tuned with the help of the STM, either continuously with a back gate 31 or stepwise via voltage pulses in the range |V pulse | = |1 − 2.5 | eV, as has been demonstrated previously for the isostructural 2D material MoSe 2 by Yang et al.30.Fig. 1eshows the spectrum obtained on the same boundary after such a voltage pulse. The gap at E F is now reduced to the pure Coulomb energy U , splitting the formerly degenerate energy level at the Fermi energy. The splitting leads to the existence of a singly occupied state below E F that is energetically separated from the doubly occupied state by U , which in the single electron picture is the unoccupied state visible just above E F . Theoretically, such a system is described by the Anderson model, which is considered adequate for a single, strongly-interacting impurity level coupled to an electron bath 32 . In the spatially resolved series of dI/dV spectra shown inFig. 1f, the non-degenerate nature of the energy levels closest to E F is visible as an in-phase beating of the two standing waves above and below the Fermi level, which would collapse to a degenerate standing wave without 5 Coulomb interaction U .In between the two non-degenerate states, a narrow zero-bias peak (ZBP) is found in dI/dV spectra, as shown in the bottom panel ofFig. 2a. The ZBP intensity quickly vanishes towards the graphene or MoS 2 bulk, see Supplementary Note 1. The ZBP shows a relatively low intensity compared to the non-degenerate peaks but becomes well visible when the tip-sample distance is reduced (top panel ofFig. 2a). To understand the nature of the ZBP, we investigate the influence of magnetic fields and temperature on the shape of the ZBP, shown in Figs. 2b,c. We find a clear Zeeman splitting of the ZBP with increasing magnetic field(Fig. 2b), in line with the expectation for a Kondo resonance 24 . The ZBP considerably broadens when increasing temperature. This broadening can be quantified with the half width at half maximum Γ(T ) of the ZBP, which we obtain by fitting the spectra to a phenomenological Frota function 33,34 , see Supplementary Note 1. The results are shown in the inset of Fig. 2c. The width Γ(T ) follows a linear slope in the investigated temperature range with an offset determined by the experimental broadening. A saturation of the intrinsic width at low temperatures would enable us to extract an upper bound estimate of the Kondo temperature T K 33,35 . We find no indication of such a saturation down to our lowest temperatures. Using Wilson's definition of the Kondo temperature to give an upper boundT W K , we obtain T W K = 0.27Γ/k B = 1.7 K using our smallest width obtained at T = 0.35 K 36,37 . However, based on the splitting of the Kondo peak at low magnetic fields, as well as the strong temperature dependence down to the lowest experimental temperatures, we conclude that the actual Kondo temperature is considerably lower 33 . Indeed, the quantitative analysis given below confirms that T K << T , pointing to a weak coupling between bath and confined state. To sum up, based on magnetic field and temperature-dependent measurements we attribute the ZBP to a Kondo resonance in the weak-coupling regime.Experimentally, we observe no change in the width of the Kondo resonance when varying the tip-sample distance, see Supplementary Note 2. This confirms that the tip-MoS 2 coupling is so weak that the differential conductance is proportional to the spectral function of the 6Figure 2: Kondo resonance within a magnetic mirror twin boundary. a Spatially averaged dI/dV spectrum of the non-degenerate states along the mirror twin boundary. Zooming into a small energy window, we find a pronounced ZBP around E F . b Dependence of dI/dV signal on magnetic field (T = 0.35 K). c Dependence of dI/dV signal on temperature (B = 0 T). The grey lines are a Frota function fitted to the experimental data (dots). The inset displays in red dots the width Γ(T ) obtained from the Frota fit. The red line is a linear fit to Γ(T ). STM/STS parameters: a bottom: V set = 90 mV, V mod = 1.0 mV, top: V set = 10 mV, V mod = 0.2 mV; b V set = 10 mV, V mod = 0.2 mV; c V set = 5 mV, V mod = 0.2 mV. I set = 1.0 nA for all spectra.localized level 33,38 . Due to the weak coupling to the substrate, the spectral function can be approximately obtained from the spin-1/2 Anderson-Appelbaum theory of the Kondo resonance 39,40 . This theory effectively evaluates the spectral function in next-to-leading order perturbation theory in the spin-spin exchange coupling J for a Kondo model.Fig.3acompares the experimental differential conductance with an Anderson-Applebaum fit to the data as a function of bias voltage and magnetic field. At finite magnetic fields, we observe the Zeeman splitting of the Kondo resonance, which transforms into a pronounced gap at high magnetic fields. We find excellent agreement for all investigated magnetic field strengths between experiment and models, seeFig.3a. From the fitted splitting of the Kondo resonance ∆ with magnetic field B we extract the g-factor using ∆ = gµ B B. We obtain g = 2.44 with negligible variations between different mirror twin boundaries. For an isolated spin-1 2 system g = 2 is expected. Deviations therefrom are attributed to the large spin-orbit coupling in MoS 2 . This is also confirmed by the anisotropy of the splitting of the resonance (and hence of the g-factor) for orthogonal magnetic field directions, see Fig.3b. More details on the model and fitting parameters are found in Supplementary Note 3. 7 Figure 3: Kondo screening in the weak-coupling regime. a Conductance (dI/dV signal) colormaps of the Kondo resonance as a function of bias and magnetic field, comparing experimental spectra (top) and the Anderson-Applebaum model (bottom) with ρJ = 0.05 and g = 2.44. b Vectorial magnetic field-dependence of the Kondo resonance. B z points out-of-plane, while B || (B ⊥ ) points along (across) the mirror twin boundary. All spectra are taken at 0.75 T. c Lorentzian fit (dark blue line) to a dI/dV spectrum of a non-degenerate state, with three components: the non-degenerate peak (orange line) and two phonon satellites (green and purple lines). Indicated are the Coulomb energy U , the energy spacing from E F , and the full width at half maximum of the main Lorentzian peak γ, defining the parameters of the Anderson model. d Variation of the Kondo coupling strength ρJ for different boundaries, as obtained using the Schrieffer-Wolff and Anderson-Applebaum formulas. STM/STS parameters: a V set = 10 mV, I set = 1.0 nA, V mod = 0.2 mV; d V set = 200 mV, I set = 0.2 nA, V mod = 1.0 mV.8 Having access to both the Kondo resonance and the non-degenerate states, we can test the predictive power of theoretical models used to describe the Kondo effect. From the Anderson-Appelbaum fit to the Kondo resonance, we obtain the Kondo coupling strength ρJ, which is the product of the density of states at the Fermi energy ρ and spin-spin exchange coupling J. This Kondo coupling strength can also be obtained independently from the non-degenerate levels using the Schrieffer-Wolff formula, which relates ρJ to the splitting U and the Lorentzian width of the half-filled peaks γ via 23,24 :with being the energy of the occupied state relative to the Fermi level. In the Schrieffer-Wolff formula γ is a measure of the hybridization of the non-degenerate states with the electron bath responsible for the Kondo screening. All these quantities (U , , γ) are directly accessible in our spectra, seeFig. 3c. To compute ρJ for different boundaries we fitted the non-degenerate states with up to three Lorentzians, dependent on the number of visible phonon peaks, as shown inFig. 3c. InFig. 3d, we plot ρJ as calculated using the Schrieffer-Wolff formula for 16 different mirror twin boundaries sorted by length. The Kondo coupling strength is shown to vary by 60% when extracted from the non-degenerate states, mainly due to the length-dependence of U 27 .When comparing the Kondo coupling strength obtained from the two independent fits, we find that ρJ extracted from the Kondo resonance, i.e., using the Anderson-Applebaum model, is a factor of two smaller than ρJ as derived from the spin-split levels (using the Schrieffer-Wolff formula), seeFig. 3d. Furthermore, we find no correlation between the two methods used to extract ρJ. This discrepancy can easily be overlooked when focusing on the Kondo resonance only, since it gives a seemingly good fit to the experiment, seeFig. 3a.Our comparison reveals that the effective Kondo coupling cannot be obtained from a simple Anderson impurity model. Further evidence for the overestimation of ρJ is obtained from 9 a comparison to renormalized perturbation theory, see Supplementary Note 4. Therefore the discrepancy with the Anderson model may even be larger. Our fitting inFig. 3cand d is verified by a computation of γ using renormalized perturbation theory and sum-rules for spectral functions, see Supplementary Note 4. Prime candidates to explain the discrepancy are virtual processes involving higher-excited levels of the MoS 2 mirror twin boundary and the Coulomb interaction of the extended localized levels with the electronic states in the graphene layer.Figure 4: Modulated Kondo screening along the particle in a box. a Topography along a mirror twin boundary, showing electronic beating of the confined state near E f . The red arrow indicates where the spectra shown in b,c were taken. b Conductance colormap of constant height dI/dV spectra of the nondegenerate peaks along the mirror twin boundary. c Conductance colormap showing constant height dI/dV spectra of the Kondo resonance along the same path. STM/STS parameters: a 6 × 1.1 nm 2 , V set = −10 mV, I set = 5 pA; b V set = 90 mV, V mod = 1.0 mV; c V set = 10 mV, V mod = 0.2 mV. I set = 0.5 nA for all spectra.Finally, we investigated the spatial distribution of the Kondo resonance together with the non-degenerate states along a mirror twin boundary. The non-degenerate states beat along the mirror twin boundary with a wavelength related to their Fermi wave vector 27,31,41 , as expected for a particle in a box. This beating is apparent in the topograph ofFig. 4a.Focusing on the two maxima in the boxed area inFig. 4a, the set of dI/dV spectra taken along the mirror twin boundary inFig. 4bshows the beating of the two non-degenerate states on either side of E F . The two states are in phase along the MTB as they are derived from the same energy level, which is split due to Coulomb interaction. The dI/dV line scan in 10Fig. 4c, taken at the same location, shows the Kondo resonance. The amplitude of the Kondo resonance beats in phase with the non-degenerate peaks, compareFig. 4b. In particular, we find that the amplitude of the resonance is linearly dependent on the peak amplitude of the mirror twin boundary states, emphasizing the direct relation between these elements of the Kondo effect. These results are reminiscent of the orbital symmetries observed in Shiba states on superconductors which were attributed to anisotropic scattering due to the orbital shapes of the magnetic atom 42,43 . We envision that using extended magnetic wave functions might enable direct access to the correlated behavior of Shiba states and wave function, as observed here for the Kondo effect.In summary, we established 1D magnetic mirror twin boundaries in a 2D material as a prototypical system to characterize the Kondo effect. We presented a comprehensive study of a fully accessible spin-1 2 system in the weak coupling limit. The correlated behavior of Kondo resonance and non-degenerate states has been uncovered, while deviations in the extracted Kondo coupling strength using either the Kondo resonance or the non-degenerate peaks underline the need for more sophisticated theoretical models. In particular, we find that our Kondo system is not adequately described by a simple Anderson model, despite being well located in the low coupling regime. The variability of the parameters U (via boundary length), ρ (via doping), and (via pulsing or gating), makes mirror twin boundaries in transition metal dichalcogenides a fruitful testbed for nanoscale magnetic investigations.Controlled coupling of the extended magnetic wave function to localized magnetic defects 44 or adatoms represent additional exciting perspectives.MethodsThe MoS 2 monolayers were grown in situ on a graphene substrate, supported by an Ir(111)crystal, in a preparation chamber with base pressure p < 5 × 10 −10 mbar. Ir(111) is cleaned by 1.5 keV Ar + ion erosion and annealing to temperatures T ≈ 1550 K. Gr is grown on 11 Ir(111) by two steps. First, room temperature ethylene exposure till saturation followed by 1370 K thermal decomposition gives well-oriented Gr islands. Second, exposure to 2000 L ethylene at 1370 K for 600 s yields a complete single-crystal Gr layer 45 . ML MoS 2 is grown by Mo deposition in an elemental S pressure of 7 × 10 −9 mbar 46 . Subsequently, the sample is annealed to 1050 K in the same S background pressure.STM and STS are carried out at an operating temperature of T = 0.35 K after in situ transfer from the preparation chamber. STS is performed with the lock-in technique, at modulation frequency 907.0 Hz. STM images are taken in constant current mode. Some of the data inFig. 3dwas taken using a second STM with an operating temperature of T = 6.5 K.

Abstract

A many-body resonance emerges at the Fermi energy when an electron bath screens the magnetic moment of a half-filled impurity level. This Kondo effect, originally introduced to explain the abnormal resistivity behavior in bulk magnetic alloys 1 , has been realized in many quantum systems over the past decades, such as quantum dots 2-4 , quantum point contacts [5][6][7][8] , nanowires 9 , single-molecule transistors 10-12 , heavyfermion lattices 13-15 , down to adsorbed single atoms [16][17][18]  The Kondo resonance of single magnetic atoms or molecules on metal surfaces has been subject of intense research since it was first observed with the scanning tunnelling microscope (STM) by Madhavan et al. 16 and Li et al. 17 . Much less is known about the atomic or molecular impurity levels, which remain experimentally inaccessible due to their hybridization with the substrate. The scarcity of experimental data has led to a strong dependence on theoretical input to clarify the origin of the measured signals. For example, the line shapes around zero bias observed in STM spectra for Co on noble metal surfaces 16 were considered as paradigms for a Kondo resonance, but have recently been argued by Bouaziz et al. 22 to originate from exotic spin excitations rather than the Kondo effect. Likewise, theoretical predictions for the dependence of the Kondo resonance on energy position and width of the impurity level 23,24 generally lack verification due to the absence of experimental data.

A promising approach to enable local detection of the impurity levels is to spatially confine electrons, as done inside a quantum dot [2][3][4] . When a confined state at the Fermi level E F is filled with a single electron, strong Coulomb repulsion can lift the degeneracy of the energy level, leading to the formation of a singly occupied state below E F mimicking the half-filled orbital of a magnetic atom. A Kondo resonance emerges when the non-degenerate states couple to an electron bath in close proximity [2][3][4] . The advantages of the confinement approach are a small separation of the non-degenerate states, together with a large spatial extension of the confined wave function. In most quantum dot systems these wavefunctions are, however, not accessible. Here we present a system where scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) and STM with their unsurpassed energy and spatial resolution can be used to track the Kondo resonance along with the impurity levels and the spatial modulation of the wavefunctions on the atomic scale. When the highest occupied level is filled by a single electron, the strong Coulomb interaction U prohibits a second electron to enter, creating a spin- 1 2 system localized along the mirror twin boundary. This spin couples to the bath, creating a Kondo resonance pinned to E F , as we demonstrate below. with the non-degenerate states (impurity) confined along a MoS 2 mirror twin boundary. Indicated are the Fermi energy E F , Coulomb energy U and confinement energy E Q , see text. The electron inside the highest occupied states is symbolized by an arrow. b Atomically-resolved topography of a single-layer MoS 2 island on graphene, with two mirror twin boundaries separating mirror-symmetric domains. c,e Spatially averaged dI/dV spectra along a mirror twin boundary before and after pulsing, being in a state that is either c degenerate or e non-degenerate. d,f Conductance colormaps showing spatially resolved dI/dV spectra along the mirror twin boundary. Dashed white lines are added to highlight the phase relation between the states on either side of E F in the middle of the boundary. STM/STS parameters: b 20 × 20 nm 2 , V set = 500 mV, I set = 10 pA; c,d V set = 500 mV, I set = 1.0 nA; e,f V set = 500 mV, I set = 0.5 nA. V mod = 2.5 mV.

A MoS 2 monolayer island hosting two such mirror twin boundaries is shown in Fig. 1b.

The finite length of the mirror twin boundaries leads to confined energy levels separated by a confinement energy E Q , inversely proportional to the length of the wire 27 . When the highest energy level is filled with two electrons, there is no unpaired magnetic moment and hence no Kondo effect. This situation is depicted in Fig.1c, which displays the averaged differential conductance dI/dV along a mirror twin boundary. This signal is proportional to the local density of states as a function of energy (given by the bias voltage). We find a series of peaks corresponding to quantized energy levels. Satellite peaks attributed to phonon-induced inelastic tunneling processes are observed at fixed distances 24 ± 2 and 50 ± 5 mV from the main peaks 26 . The peaks closest to E F exhibit a larger energy gap, E gap = E Q + U , with U the Coulomb energy 'penalty' incurred due to strong Coulomb interactions 27, 30 . The standing waves corresponding to the energy levels closest to E F are mapped in Fig.1d using a series of dI/dV spectra taken along the mirror twin boundary. These standing waves are out of phase in the center of the boundary, as expected for succesive degenerate particle-in-a-box states 27 .

The number of electrons within a mirror twin boundary can be tuned with the help of the STM, either continuously with a back gate 31 or stepwise via voltage pulses in the range |V pulse | = |1 − 2.5 | eV, as has been demonstrated previously for the isostructural 2D material MoSe 2 by Yang et al. 30 . Fig. 1e shows the spectrum obtained on the same boundary after such a voltage pulse. The gap at E F is now reduced to the pure Coulomb energy U , splitting the formerly degenerate energy level at the Fermi energy. The splitting leads to the existence of a singly occupied state below E F that is energetically separated from the doubly occupied state by U , which in the single electron picture is the unoccupied state visible just above E F . Theoretically, such a system is described by the Anderson model, which is considered adequate for a single, strongly-interacting impurity level coupled to an electron bath 32 . In the spatially resolved series of dI/dV spectra shown in Fig. 1f, the non-degenerate nature of the energy levels closest to E F is visible as an in-phase beating of the two standing waves above and below the Fermi level, which would collapse to a degenerate standing wave without Coulomb interaction U .

In between the two non-degenerate states, a narrow zero-bias peak (ZBP) is found in dI/dV spectra, as shown in the bottom panel of Fig T W K , we obtain T W K = 0.27Γ/k B = 1.7 K using our smallest width obtained at T = 0.35 K 36,37 . However, based on the splitting of the Kondo peak at low magnetic fields, as well as the strong temperature dependence down to the lowest experimental temperatures, we conclude that the actual Kondo temperature is considerably lower 33 . Indeed, the quantitative analysis given below confirms that T K << T , pointing to a weak coupling between bath and confined state. To sum up, based on magnetic field and temperature-dependent measurements we attribute the ZBP to a Kondo resonance in the weak-coupling regime.

Experimentally, we observe no change in the width of the Kondo resonance when varying the tip-sample distance, see Supplementary Note 2. This confirms that the tip-MoS 2 coupling is so weak that the differential conductance is proportional to the spectral function of the 
V set = 10 mV, V mod = 0.2 mV; b V set = 10 mV, V mod = 0.2 mV; c V set = 5 mV, V mod = 0.2 mV. I set = 1.0 nA for all spectra.
localized level 33,38 . Due to the weak coupling to the substrate, the spectral function can be approximately obtained from the spin-1/2 Anderson-Appelbaum theory of the Kondo resonance 39,40 . This theory effectively evaluates the spectral function in next-to-leading order perturbation theory in the spin-spin exchange coupling J for a Kondo model. Fig.3a compares the experimental differential conductance with an Anderson-Applebaum fit to the data as a function of bias voltage and magnetic field. At finite magnetic fields, we observe the Zeeman splitting of the Kondo resonance, which transforms into a pronounced gap at high magnetic fields. We find excellent agreement for all investigated magnetic field strengths between experiment and models, see Fig.3a. From the fitted splitting of the Kondo resonance ∆ with magnetic field B we extract the g-factor using ∆ = gµ B B. We obtain g = 2.44 with negligible variations between different mirror twin boundaries. For an isolated spin-   which is the product of the density of states at the Fermi energy ρ and spin-spin exchange coupling J. This Kondo coupling strength can also be obtained independently from the non-degenerate levels using the Schrieffer-Wolff formula, which relates ρJ to the splitting U and the Lorentzian width of the half-filled peaks γ via 23,24 : When comparing the Kondo coupling strength obtained from the two independent fits, we find that ρJ extracted from the Kondo resonance, i.e., using the Anderson-Applebaum model, is a factor of two smaller than ρJ as derived from the spin-split levels (using the Schrieffer-Wolff formula), see Fig. 3d. Furthermore, we find no correlation between the two methods used to extract ρJ. This discrepancy can easily be overlooked when focusing on the Kondo resonance only, since it gives a seemingly good fit to the experiment, see  Finally, we investigated the spatial distribution of the Kondo resonance together with the non-degenerate states along a mirror twin boundary. The non-degenerate states beat along the mirror twin boundary with a wavelength related to their Fermi wave vector 27,31,41 , as expected for a particle in a box. This beating is apparent in the topograph of Fig. 4a.
ρJ = γ 2π 1 + U − 1 ,(1)
Focusing on the two maxima in the boxed area in Fig. 4a, the set of dI/dV spectra taken along the mirror twin boundary in Fig. 4b shows the beating of the two non-degenerate states on either side of E F . The two states are in phase along the MTB as they are derived from the same energy level, which is split due to Coulomb interaction. The dI/dV line scan in In summary, we established 1D magnetic mirror twin boundaries in a 2D material as a prototypical system to characterize the Kondo effect. We presented a comprehensive study of a fully accessible spin-1 2 system in the weak coupling limit. The correlated behavior of Kondo resonance and non-degenerate states has been uncovered, while deviations in the extracted Kondo coupling strength using either the Kondo resonance or the non-degenerate peaks underline the need for more sophisticated theoretical models. In particular, we find that our Kondo system is not adequately described by a simple Anderson model, despite being well located in the low coupling regime. The variability of the parameters U (via boundary length), ρ (via doping), and (via pulsing or gating), makes mirror twin boundaries in transition metal dichalcogenides a fruitful testbed for nanoscale magnetic investigations.

Controlled coupling of the extended magnetic wave function to localized magnetic defects 44 or adatoms represent additional exciting perspectives.


Methods

The MoS 2 monolayers were grown in situ on a graphene substrate, supported by an Ir (111) crystal, in a preparation chamber with base pressure p < 5 × 10 −10 mbar. Ir(111) is cleaned by 1.5 keV Ar + ion erosion and annealing to temperatures T ≈ 1550 K. Gr is grown on The Kondo resonance decays rapidly when moving away from the mirror twin boundary.

Moving across the boundary towards MoS 2 , we see that the Kondo resonance is quickly suppressed. This is shown in Fig. 1a-c, where the amplitude of the resonance is expressed as the ratio of the Frota amplitude A and the background conductance T 0 , using the Frota function 1,2 :
F(V ) ∝ T 0 +   A × ie iφ iΓ eV − E F + iΓ   .
, where denotes the imaginary part of the function, φ is a form factor describing the asymmetry of the peak and the half width at half maximum of the line is given by 2.542Γ.

The resonance becomes undetectable around 1 nm away from the boundary. Similarly, we find that the Kondo resonance decays rapidly on graphene, see To rule out that the metallic tip apex of the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) is involved in the formation of the Kondo resonance, we measured a series of dI/dV spectra with progressively higher stabilization currents I set (10 mV) = 0.1 − 1.0 nA, shown in Fig. 2a.

If the electrons in the tip would contribute to Kondo screening, this effect should be enhanced when the tip is brought in close proximity to the non-degenerate states, leading to an increase in the width of the resonance peak. We find however, that an increase in the tunneling current by a factor 10, achieved by bringing the tip ≈ 0.75 Å closer to the surface, has only a minor influence on the spectral shape of the Kondo resonance, which is depicted in Fig. 2b. To quantify the dependence on tip-sample distance, we fitted the spectra with a Frota function to obtain the peak amplitude A/T 0 and width Γ. In Fig. 2c it can be seen that the amplitude slightly increases by about 10%, whereas no detectable change is observed in Γ within the confidence interval of the fit. We fit the dI/dV spectra with the Anderson-Applebaum model described in Ref. 3, for the total conductance G and the (constant) elastic background conductance G 1 :


Supplementary
G = G 1 + G 2 + G 3(1)G 3 = G 1 3 + G 2 3 + G 2 3
(2)
G 2 = K × S × (S + 1) + 0.5 M av × tanh ∆ + eV 2k B T + tanh ∆ − eV 2k B T(3)G 1 3 = 2KρJ × S×(S+1)− M 2 av +0.5 M av × tanh ∆ + eV 2k B T +tanh ∆ − eV 2k B T ×F (x) (4) G 2 3 = KρJ × S × (S + 1) + M 2 av + M av × tanh ∆ + eV 2k B T × F (x) (5) G 3 3 = KρJ × S × (S + 1) + M 2 av + M av × tanh ∆ − eV 2k B T × F (x)(6)
With:
M av = 0.5 coth ∆ 2k B T − (S + 0.5) coth(S + 0.5) ∆ k B T(7)M 2 av = M 2 av − (S + 0.5) 2 csch 2 (S + 0.5) ∆ k B T + 0.25 csch 2 ∆ 2k B T(8)
We use E 0 = 10 meV for the cutoff parameter and F (x) = log( (x 2 + (k B T ) 2 )/E 0 )) for the peak-shape approximation function 4 . We fit for a S = 1/2 system, with ∆ and ρJ as free fit parameters. The effective temperature T ef f of our system is 1.30 K, which is derived from the physical temperature T and the modulation voltage V mod (modulation amplitude) using
T eff = (T 2 + (2.5V mod / √ 2 × 3.3k B ) 2 ) 5 .
K is a constant containing the physical tunneling parameters of the system, which is normalized to 1 following Ref. 4. Fig. 3a presents the single fits to the experimental spectra for the dataset shown in the main text (Fig. 3a). To obtain the fits, a global fitting procedure was applied, where ρJ was first determined from the 0 T peak to be ρJ = 0.05 , and afterwards the g-factor, G 0 and a voltage offset V off were fitted simultaneously to all spectra, giving, g = 2.44, G 0 = 0.07 and V off = 40 µV. A direct comparison of the spectra measured at 0 T and 8 T is shown in  9 , where also a comparison of perturbative RG to numerically exact results from numerical renormalization group theory is shown. As the formulas in the finite-B case turn out to be rather complicated, we focus for the following discussion on the B = 0 case. In this case one finds to leading order in renormalized PT (using the same conventions as in Ref. 9 )
for T T K that ΓA(ω) ≈ 3π 16 1 ln 2 √ ω 2 +T 2 T K(9)
with the hybridization Γ = πρV 2 = γ/2. The term √ ω 2 + T 2 describes heuristically the thermal broadening. Using T K ≈ De −1/(2ρJ) and a straightforward Taylor expansion in ρJ one can recover the result in bare PT used for the fitting in the main part of the paper
ΓA(ω) ≈ 3π 4 (ρJ) 2 1 + 4ρJ ln D √ ω 2 + T 2 + O(J 3 ).(10)
The two results Eq. (9) and Eq (10) will coincide for ρJ ln
D √ (hω) 2 +(k B T ) 2 1.
For a comparison to experiment, is important to take the experimental broadening of the curves into account. Experimentally, we use an oscillating voltage with an amplitude of δV = 0.2·10 −3 meV, V (t) = V 0 +δV cos(ωt). As the experimental differential conductance (proportional to A(ω)) is obtained from the standard lock-in technique, we obtain a spectral function broadened by the experimental resolution fromÃ(V 0 ) = 1 2T δV T 0 dt cos(ωt)
V (t) 0 A(ω)dω.
In Fig. 4a, the spectral function (with and without broadening) obtained from renormalized PT is compared to the spectral function within third-order PT for a tiny Kondo temperature of 10 −8 K. Remarkably, there is a substantial quantitative difference of the two results when the same value of ρJ is used. The plot also shows that the experimental broadening is substantial and has to be taken into account when fitting experimental results.

In Fig. 4b  bare PT to order J 2 (black) and J 3 (red and blue) using a cutoff of D = 10 meV and ρJ ≈ 0.02 such that T K ≈ 10 −8 K. For the blue dashed curve we use (as in the experimental fits of the main part of the paper and following Ref. 5 ) an effective temperature T eff ≈ 1.3 K which also approximately takes into account the experimental broadening. Note that even for T /T K ∼ 10 8 , there is a substantial disagreement between bare and renormalized PT. Panel b: Fit to the experimental tunneling data (points) at T = 350 mK for small frequencies using renormalized PT broadened by the experimental resolution (solid line, T K ≈ 10 −8 K, corresponding to ρJ ≈ 0.022 at D = 10 meV) and third-order bare PT (dashed line, T = T eff , D = 10 meV, ρJ ≈ 0.0544, broadened using T = T eff as above). Note that the amplitude of both the experiment and of bare PT was fitted to the renormalized PT. Inset: Experimental data on a larger energy scale.

it is known 9 that renormalized PT tends to overestimate the size of the peak (the relative error is of order 


. While these experiments have provided robust signatures of electronic correlations at low temperature, the experimentally incomplete characterization of the spectral function has not only given rise to doubts about the presence of the Kondo effect itself in some seemingly wellestablished Kondo systems 19-22 , but also hindered adequate testing of theoretical models against experiment. Here we describe a unique Kondo system which allows a full experimental determination of all relevant quantities present in the spectral function, including the impurity energy levels and the spatial modulation of their wave functions. This approach, based on a discrete half-filled quantum confined state within a MoS 2 grain boundary, enables us to test the validity of the Anderson model which is the basis of the microscopic understanding of Kondo physics. The discrepancies uncovered highlight the need for further theoretical developments.

Our
Kondo system is realized in a MoS 2 mirror twin boundary (MTB), a line-defect of finite length which hosts confined states in the band gap of the semiconducting two-dimensional (2D) material 25-27 . Due to its one-dimensional nature, strong Coulomb interactions push the states around the Fermi level apart and transform higher excitations into the spin-and charge excitations of a confined Tomonaga-Luttinger liquid 27,28 . Fig. 1a sketches the local density of states around the Fermi level of a MTB placed on a graphene substrate. The electron bath is represented by graphene's Dirac electrons, which exhibit a linear energy dependence close to the Dirac point 29 . The discrete energy levels sketched in Fig. 1a, right, are quantized states within the one-dimensional MoS 2 mirror twin boundary. These energy levels, with energy spacing E Q , are analogous to the localized levels of a magnetic impurity.

Figure 1 :
1Kondo effect within a MoS 2 mirror twin boundary. a Kondo coupling of graphene (bath)


. 2a. The ZBP intensity quickly vanishes towards the graphene or MoS 2 bulk, see Supplementary Note 1. The ZBP shows a relatively low intensity compared to the non-degenerate peaks but becomes well visible when the tip-sample distance is reduced (top panel of Fig. 2a). To understand the nature of the ZBP, we investigate the influence of magnetic fields and temperature on the shape of the ZBP, shown in Figs. 2b,c. We find a clear Zeeman splitting of the ZBP with increasing magnetic field (Fig. 2b), in line with the expectation for a Kondo resonance 24 . The ZBP considerably broadens when increasing temperature. This broadening can be quantified with the half width at half maximum Γ(T ) of the ZBP, which we obtain by fitting the spectra to a phenomenological Frota function 33,34 , see Supplementary Note 1. The results are shown in the inset of Fig. 2c. The width Γ(T ) follows a linear slope in the investigated temperature range with an offset determined by the experimental broadening. A saturation of the intrinsic width at low temperatures would enable us to extract an upper bound estimate of the Kondo temperature T K 33,35 . We find no indication of such a saturation down to our lowest temperatures. Using Wilson's definition of the Kondo temperature to give an upper bound

Figure 2 :
2Kondo resonance within a magnetic mirror twin boundary. a Spatially averaged dI/dV spectrum of the non-degenerate states along the mirror twin boundary. Zooming into a small energy window, we find a pronounced ZBP around E F . b Dependence of dI/dV signal on magnetic field (T = 0.35 K). c Dependence of dI/dV signal on temperature (B = 0 T). The grey lines are a Frota function fitted to the experimental data (dots). The inset displays in red dots the width Γ(T ) obtained from the Frota fit. The red line is a linear fit to Γ(T ). STM/STS parameters: a bottom: V set = 90 mV, V mod = 1.0 mV, top:

g
= 2 is expected. Deviations therefrom are attributed to the large spin-orbit coupling in MoS 2 . This is also confirmed by the anisotropy of the splitting of the resonance (and hence of the g-factor) for orthogonal magnetic field directions, see Fig.3b. More details on the model and fitting parameters are found in Supplementary Note 3.

Figure 3 :
3Kondo screening in the weak-coupling regime. a Conductance (dI/dV signal) colormaps of the Kondo resonance as a function of bias and magnetic field, comparing experimental spectra (top) and the Anderson-Applebaum model (bottom) with ρJ = 0.05 and g = 2.44. b Vectorial magnetic field-dependence of the Kondo resonance. B z points out-of-plane, while B || (B ⊥ ) points along (across) the mirror twin boundary. All spectra are taken at 0.75 T. c Lorentzian fit (dark blue line) to a dI/dV spectrum of a non-degenerate state, with three components: the non-degenerate peak (orange line) and two phonon satellites (green and purple lines). Indicated are the Coulomb energy U , the energy spacing from E F , and the full width at half maximum of the main Lorentzian peak γ, defining the parameters of the Anderson model. d Variation of the Kondo coupling strength ρJ for different boundaries, as obtained using the Schrieffer-Wolff and Anderson-Applebaum formulas. STM/STS parameters: a V set = 10 mV, I set = 1.0 nA, V mod = 0.2 mV; d V set = 200 mV, I set = 0.2 nA, V mod = 1.0 mV.


with being the energy of the occupied state relative to the Fermi level. In the Schrieffer-Wolff formula γ is a measure of the hybridization of the non-degenerate states with the electron bath responsible for the Kondo screening. All these quantities (U , , γ) are directly accessible in our spectra, seeFig. 3c. To compute ρJ for different boundaries we fitted the non-degenerate states with up to three Lorentzians, dependent on the number of visible phonon peaks, as shown inFig. 3c. In Fig. 3d, we plot ρJ as calculated using the Schrieffer-Wolff formula for 16 different mirror twin boundaries sorted by length. The Kondo coupling strength is shown to vary by 60% when extracted from the non-degenerate states, mainly due to the length-dependence of U 27 .

Fig. 3a .
3aOur comparison reveals that the effective Kondo coupling cannot be obtained from a simple Anderson impurity model. Further evidence for the overestimation of ρJ is obtained from a comparison to renormalized perturbation theory, see Supplementary Note 4. Therefore the discrepancy with the Anderson model may even be larger. Our fitting inFig. 3c and dis verified by a computation of γ using renormalized perturbation theory and sum-rules for spectral functions, see Supplementary Note 4. Prime candidates to explain the discrepancy are virtual processes involving higher-excited levels of the MoS 2 mirror twin boundary and the Coulomb interaction of the extended localized levels with the electronic states in the graphene layer.

Figure 4 :
4Modulated Kondo screening along the particle in a box. a Topography along a mirror twin boundary, showing electronic beating of the confined state near E f . The red arrow indicates where the spectra shown in b,c were taken. b Conductance colormap of constant height dI/dV spectra of the nondegenerate peaks along the mirror twin boundary. c Conductance colormap showing constant height dI/dV spectra of the Kondo resonance along the same path. STM/STS parameters: a 6 × 1.1 nm 2 , V set = −10 mV, I set = 5 pA; b V set = 90 mV, V mod = 1.0 mV; c V set = 10 mV, V mod = 0.2 mV. I set = 0.5 nA for all spectra.

Fig. 4c ,
4ctaken at the same location, shows the Kondo resonance. The amplitude of the Kondo resonance beats in phase with the non-degenerate peaks, compareFig. 4b. In particular, we find that the amplitude of the resonance is linearly dependent on the peak amplitude of the mirror twin boundary states, emphasizing the direct relation between these elements of the Kondo effect. These results are reminiscent of the orbital symmetries observed in Shiba states on superconductors which were attributed to anisotropic scattering due to the orbital shapes of the magnetic atom42,43 . We envision that using extended magnetic wave functions might enable direct access to the correlated behavior of Shiba states and wave function, as observed here for the Kondo effect.

Figure 1 :
1Ir(111) by two steps. First, room temperature ethylene exposure till saturation followed by 1370 K thermal decomposition gives well-oriented Gr islands. Second, exposure to 2000 L ethylene at 1370 K for 600 s yields a complete single-crystal Gr layer45 . ML MoS 2 is grown by Mo deposition in an elemental S pressure of 7 × 10 −9 mbar 46 . Subsequently, the sample is annealed to 1050 K in the same S background pressure.STM and STS are carried out at an operating temperature of T = 0.35 K after in situ transfer from the preparation chamber. STS is performed with the lock-in technique, at modulation frequency 907.0 Hz. STM images are taken in constant current mode. Some of the data inFig. 3dwas taken using a second STM with an operating temperature of T = 6.5 K.AcknowledgmentsThis work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) -Project number 277146847 -CRC 1238 (subprojects A01, B06 and C02). JF acknowledges financial support from the DFG SPP 2137 -Skyrmionics (Project FI 2624/1-1) Author contributions W. J. designed the experiments. C. v. E., J. A. F. and W. J. carried our the measurements. C. v. E. did most of the analysis of the experimental data under the supervision of W. J.. A.R. contributed the Anderson model. C. v. E. mainly wrote the manuscript. All authors contributed to the discussion and interpretation of the results as well as the discussion of M.; Sethna, J. P.; Abruña, H. D.; McEuen, P. L.; Ralph, D. C. Coulomb blockade and the Kondo effect in single-atom transistors. Nature 2002, 417, 722-725. (12) Guo, L.; Yan, Y.; Xu, R.; Li, J.; Zeng, C. Zero-Bias Conductance Peaks Effectively Tuned by Gating-Controlled Rashba Spin-Orbit Coupling. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2021, 126, 57701. (13) Jiao, L.; Howard, S.; Ran, S.; Wang, Z.; Rodriguez, J. O.; Sigrist, M.; Wang, Z.; Butch, N. P.; Madhavan, V. Chiral superconductivity in heavy-fermion metal UTe 2 . Nature 2020, 579, 523-527. (14) Vaňo, V.; Amini, M.; Ganguli, S. C.; Chen, G.; Lado, J. L.; Kezilebieke, S.; Liljeroth, P. Artificial heavy fermions in a van der Waals heterostructure. Nature 2021, 599, 582-586. (15) Ruan, W.; Chen, Y.; Tang, S.; Hwang, J.; Tsai, H.-Z.; Lee, R. L.; Wu, M.; Ryu, H.; Kahn, S.; Liou, F., et al. Evidence for quantum spin liquid behaviour in single-layer 1T-TaSe 2 from scanning tunnelling microscopy. Nat. Phys. 2021, 17, 1154-1161. (16) Madhavan, V.; Chen, W.; Jamneala, T.; Crommie, M. F.; Wingreen, N. S. Tunneling into a single magnetic atom: Spectroscopic evidence of the Kondo resonance. Science 1998, 280, 567-569. (17) Li, J.; Schneider, W. D.; Berndt, R.; Delley, B. Kondo Scattering Observed at a Single Magnetic Impurity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1998, 80, 2893-2896. (18) Trishin, S.; Lotze, C.; Bogdanoff, N.; von Oppen, F.; Franke, K. J. Moiré Tuning of Spin Excitations: Individual Fe Atoms on MoS 2 /Au (111). Phys. Rev. Lett. 2021, 127, 236801. (19) Chen, T.-M.; Graham, A. C.; Pepper, M.; Farrer, I.; Ritchie, D. A. Non-Kondo zero-bias anomaly in quantum wires. Phys. Rev. B 2009, 79, 153303. (20) Sarkozy, S.; Sfigakis, F.; Das Gupta, K.; Farrer, I.; Ritchie, D. A.; Jones, G. A. C.; Pepper, M. Zero-bias anomaly in quantum wires. Phys. Rev. B 2009, 79, 161307. (21) Bauer, F.; Heyder, J.; Schubert, E.; Borowsky, D.; Taubert, D.; Bruognolo, B.; Schuh, D.; Wegscheider, W.; von Delft, J.; Ludwig, S. Microscopic origin of the '0.7-anomaly' in quantum point contacts. Nature 2013, 501, 73-78. (22) Bouaziz, J.; Mendes Guimarães, F. S.; Lounis, S. A new view on the origin of zero-bias anomalies of Co atoms atop noble metal surfaces. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 6112. (23) Schrieffer, J. R.; Wolff, P. A. Relation between the Anderson and Kondo Hamiltonians. Phys. Rev. 1966, 149, 491-492. (24) Ternes, M. Spin excitations and correlations in scanning tunneling spectroscopy. New J. Phys. 2015, 17, 063016. (25) Liu, H.; Jiao, L.; Yang, F.; Cai, Y.; Wu, X.; Ho, W.; Gao, C.; Jia, J.; Wang, N.; Fan, H., et al. Dense Network of One-Dimensional Midgap Metallic Modes in Monolayer MoSe 2 and Their Spatial Undulations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 113, 066105. (26) Barja, S. et al. Charge density wave order in 1D mirror twin boundaries of single-layer MoSe 2 . Nat. Phys. 2016, 12, 751-756. (27) Jolie, W.; Murray, C.; Weiß, P. S.; Hall, J.; Portner, F.; Atodiresei, N.; Krasheninnikov, A. V.; Busse, C.; Komsa, H. P.; Rosch, A.; Michely, T. Tomonaga-Luttinger Liquid in a Box: Electrons Confined within MoS 2 Mirror-Twin Boundaries. Phys. Rev. X 2019, 9, 11055. (28) Ma, Y.; Diaz, H. C.; Avila, J.; Chen, C.; Kalappattil, V.; Das, R.; Phan, M.-H.; Čadež, T.; Modulated Kondo screening along magnetic mirror twin boundaries in monolayer MoS 2 on graphene Camiel van Efferen, * , † Jeison Fischer, † Achim Rosch, ‡ Thomas Michely, † and Wouter Jolie † †II. Physikalisches Institut, Universität zu Köln, Zülpicher Straße 77, 50937 Köln, Germany ‡Institut für theoretische Physik, Zülpicher Straße 77, 50937 Köln, Germany E-mail: efferen@ph2.uni-koeln.de Decay of Kondo resonance away from mirror twin boundaries. a Topography of MoS 2 close to a mirror twin boundary (MTB). b,c dI/dV spectra averaged along the length of the boundary (b) and normalized amplitude A/T 0 of Frota fit (c) as a function of sample bias and perpendicular distance x (nm) from center of MTB. d Topography of MoS 2 island edge. Part of a MTB is visible on the left; on the right side the graphene substrate is shown. e,f dI/dV (e) and normalized amplitude A/T 0 of Frota fit (f ) as a function of sample bias and distance x (nm) from the edge of the island. STM/STS parameters: b 2.3 × 4 nm 2 ; b,c: V set = 5 mV, I set = 0.5 nA; e 5.7 × 2.2 nm 2 , V set = 100 mV, I set = 5.0 pA; e V set = 10 mV, I set = 1.0 nA. V mod = 0.2 mV, f mod = 907.0 Hz for all spectra.

Figure 2 :
2Tip-sample distance dependence of Kondo resonance. a dI/dV spectra obtained with various stabilization currents averaged over the same location. The lowest stabilization current is 0.1 nA, and increases stepwise by 0.1 nA between measurements. b dI/dV spectra obtained with I set (10 mV) = 0.1 nA (blue line) and I set (10 mV) = 1.0 nA (green line) stabilization current, normalized so that dI/dV (4 mV) = 1. c, d Normalized amplitude A/T 0 (∆z) (c) and width Γ (d) of Frota fits (blue dots), with a 2× standard deviation confidence interval indicated in gray. V mod = 0.2 mV, f mod = 907.0 Hz.

Figure 3 :
3Anderson-Applebaum model. a Anderson-Applebaum model fits (lines) to normalized dI/dV spectra (points). Spectra are normalized by [dI/dV (V)]/[dI/dV (V = 5mV)]. b Comparing the dI/dV (B = 0 T) and dI/dV (B = 8 T) spectra (circles), with the Anderson-Applebaum model fits. STM/STS parameters: a V set = 10 mV, I set = 1.0 nA, V mod = 0.2 mV.

Fig. 3b ,
3btogether with their fits using the Anderson-Applebaum model. Supplementary Note 4: Renormalized perturbation theory and non-thermal broadening In our experimental system the temperature is much larger than the Kondo temperature, T T K . This justifies the use of perturbation theory (PT). For most of the fits in the paper, we simply use bare PT in next-to-leading order 6,7 , the so-called Anderson-Applebaum model. Bare PT for the Kondo model depends on the product of exchange coupling and density of states at the Fermi energy, ρJ, and an effective cutoff D parameter and is organized in powers of ρJ ln(D/E) where the energy scale E depends on the process considered and can, e.g., be identified with k B T ,hω or µ B B (or sometimeshω − µ B B). Formally, bare PT is valid for ρJ ln(D/E) 1. It has been recognized early on by Anderson 8 that the leading logarithmic corrections can be re-summed using his poor man's scaling approach nowadays identified with 1-loop perturbative renormalization group (RG). Importantly, this approach correctly reproduces that a quantity like the spectral function A(ω) is fully universal and thus independent of the precise values of coupling constant J and cutoff D. For temperatures, magnetic fields and frequencies small compared to Fermi energy, level splitting, Hubbard interactions and similar scales, all parameters can be absorbed into a single scale, the Kondo temperature T K with T K ≈ De −1/(2ρJ) within 1-loop RG. The renormalized PT for T T K is then organized in powers of 1 ln[E/T K ] . For the spectral function in a magnetic field, the 1-loop result at T = 0 has been obtained in Ref.

Figure 4 :
4fits of bare and renormalized PT to the experimentally measured spectral function is shown. Here the amplitude of the signal is used as an extra fitting parameter and in contrast to panel a, different values of ρJ are used. The quality of the fit is practically identical but the fit to the more reliable renormalized PT give a value of ρJ ≈ 0.022 which is about a factor 2 smaller compared to the value obtained from the fit to bare PT, ρJ ≈ 0.054 with D = 10 meV, corresponding to T K ∼ 10 mK. From the comparison to numerical results renormalized PT, T=350 mK renormalized PT broadened bare PT O(J 2 ) bare PT O(J 3 ), T=350 mK bare PT O(J 3 ), T=T eff Renormalized and bare perturbation theory: Panel a: Spectral function (red) of the Kondo model in leading order renormalized perturbation theory (PT) for T = 350 mK and a tiny Kondo temperature of T K ≈ 10 −8 K. Blue: Same spectral function broadened by the experimental resolution. Dashed curves:

Figure 5 :
5/T K ] ≈ 0.06 9 ), and thus the values of T K and ρJ are underestimated. Thus the correct value of ρJ is probably somewhere in between those two values. The low-frequency data is apparently very well described by an effective single-channel Kondo model. An independent question is, whether the signatures of the Kondo model are fully compatible with the measured features of the underlying Anderson model consisting of a single level with energy , a local interaction U and a hybridization Γ of this level with the conduction electrons in the graphene layer. In the main text, we argue that the values for ρJ estimated from an Anderson model fit is at least a factor 2 too large. An independent check of the validity can be obtained from the amplitude of the differential conductance measured experimentally, which is expected to be proportional to the spectral function, dI/dV = cA(V ). The fit of the amplitude to the renormalized PT allows to determine ΓA(V ). Now we can use that spectral functions are normalized to 1, ΓA(E)dE = Γ. Thus assuming that a description within an Anderson model is valid, we can estimate Γ int ≈ 90meV −90meV ΓA(V ) ≈ 1.8 meV where the integral includes the two charge peaks of the Anderson model, see inset of Fig. 4b. In contrast, we obtain from a fit to the width of the upper charge peak Γ ≈ 7 meV. This discrepancy shows that an Anderson model does not give a full quantitative description of our system and, perhaps, that multiple channels contribute to the Kondo resonance. For example, virtual transitions of conduction electrons to higher-excited states of the mirror twin boundary together with spin-spin interactions give rise to further conduction channels interacting with the local spin. If these interactions are ferromagnetic, they can suppress the size of the Kondo peak in the perturbative regime and possibly explain the apparent mismatch of the spectral weight and mismatch of Kondo couplings arising from singleHybridization and Kondo spin-spin exchange coupling versus Coulomb energy. FWHM γ of non-degenerate peaks versus Coulomb energy U . We find no obvious dependence of the FWHM of the non-degenerate peaks γ on the Coulomb energy (U ∝ 1/L) for mirror twin boundaries of length L, shown in Fig. 5. For a wide range of different boundary lengths, γ scatters around a mean value of 12.8 meV. Due to the mismatch of momentum of the electronic states within the mirror twin boundary and in graphene, the coupling γ has either to be mediated by impurities or the edges of the mirror twin boundary. The lack of a clear length dependence suggests that the coupling to the substrate (of which γ can be regarded as a measure) is occurring along the whole boundary and is not mediated by the boundary ends. This suggests that the scatter of the data arises from a defect-mediated hybridization.


Having access to both the Kondo resonance and the non-degenerate states, we can test the predictive power of theoretical models used to describe the Kondo effect. From the Anderson-Appelbaum fit to the Kondo resonance, we obtain the Kondo coupling strength ρJ,

Resistance Minimum in Dilute Magnetic Alloys. J Kondo, Prog. Theor. Phys. 32Kondo, J. Resistance Minimum in Dilute Magnetic Alloys. Prog. Theor. Phys. 1964, 32, 37-49.

Kondo effect in a single-electron transistor. D Goldhaber-Gordon, H Shtrikman, D Mahalu, D Abusch-Magder, U Meirav, M Kastner, Nature. 391Goldhaber-Gordon, D.; Shtrikman, H.; Mahalu, D.; Abusch-Magder, D.; Meirav, U.; Kastner, M. Kondo effect in a single-electron transistor. Nature 1998, 391, 156-159.

A tunable Kondo effect in quantum dots. S M Cronenwett, T H Oosterkamp, L P Kouwenhoven, Science. 281Cronenwett, S. M.; Oosterkamp, T. H.; Kouwenhoven, L. P. A tunable Kondo effect in quantum dots. Science 1998, 281, 540-544.

Observation of the Kondo screening cloud. I V Borzenets, J Shim, J C Chen, A Ludwig, A D Wieck, S Tarucha, H.-S Sim, M Yamamoto, Nature. 579Borzenets, I. V.; Shim, J.; Chen, J. C.; Ludwig, A.; Wieck, A. D.; Tarucha, S.; Sim, H.-S.; Yamamoto, M. Observation of the Kondo screening cloud. Nature 2020, 579, 210-213.

Low-Temperature Fate of the 0.7 Structure in a Point Contact: A Kondo-like Correlated State in an Open System. S Cronenwett, H Lynch, D Goldhaber-Gordon, L Kouwenhoven, C Marcus, K Hirose, N Wingreen, V Umansky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 226805Cronenwett, S.; Lynch, H.; Goldhaber-Gordon, D.; Kouwenhoven, L.; Marcus, C.; Hirose, K.; Wingreen, N.; Umansky, V. Low-Temperature Fate of the 0.7 Structure in a Point Contact: A Kondo-like Correlated State in an Open System. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2002, 88, 226805.

Odd and even Kondo effects from emergent localization in quantum point contacts. M Iqbal, R Levy, E Koop, J Dekker, J De Jong, J Van Der Velde, D Reuter, A Wieck, R Aguado, Y Meir, Nature. 501Iqbal, M.; Levy, R.; Koop, E.; Dekker, J.; De Jong, J.; Van Der Velde, J.; Reuter, D.; Wieck, A.; Aguado, R.; Meir, Y., et al. Odd and even Kondo effects from emergent localization in quantum point contacts. Nature 2013, 501, 79-83.

Magnetic impurity formation in quantum point contacts. T Rejec, Y Meir, Nature. 442Rejec, T.; Meir, Y. Magnetic impurity formation in quantum point contacts. Nature 2006, 442, 900-903.

. L W Smith, H.-B Chen, C.-W Chang, C.-W Wu, S.-T Lo, S.-H Chao, I Farrer, H E Beere, J P Griffiths, G A C Jones, D A Ritchie, Y.-N Chen, Chen, Smith, L. W.; Chen, H.-B.; Chang, C.-W.; Wu, C.-W.; Lo, S.-T.; Chao, S.-H.; Farrer, I.; Beere, H. E.; Griffiths, J. P.; Jones, G. A. C.; Ritchie, D. A.; Chen, Y.-N.; Chen, T.-M.

Electrically Controllable Kondo Correlation in Spin-Orbit-Coupled Quantum Point Contacts. Phys. Rev. Lett. 202227701Electrically Controllable Kondo Correlation in Spin-Orbit-Coupled Quantum Point Contacts. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2022, 128, 027701.

Kondo physics in carbon nanotubes. J Nygård, D H Cobden, P E Lindelof, Nature. 408Nygård, J.; Cobden, D. H.; Lindelof, P. E. Kondo physics in carbon nanotubes. Nature 2000, 408, 342-346.

Angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy reveals spin charge separation in metallic MoSe 2 grain boundary. J M Carmelo, M C Asensio, Nat. Commun. 8Carmelo, J. M.; Asensio, M. C., et al. Angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy reveals spin charge separation in metallic MoSe 2 grain boundary. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 1-12.

The electronic properties of graphene. A H Castro Neto, F Guinea, N M R Peres, K S Novoselov, A K Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys. 81Castro Neto, A. H.; Guinea, F.; Peres, N. M. R.; Novoselov, K. S.; Geim, A. K. The electronic properties of graphene. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2009, 81, 109-162.

Manipulating Hubbard-type Coulomb blockade effect of metallic wires embedded in an insulator. X Yang, Natl. Sci. Rev. 2022210Yang, X. et al. Manipulating Hubbard-type Coulomb blockade effect of metallic wires embedded in an insulator. Natl. Sci. Rev. 2022, nwac210.

Imaging gate-tunable Tomonaga-Luttinger liquids in 1H-MoSe 2 mirror twin boundaries. T Zhu, Nat. Mater. 21Zhu, T. et al. Imaging gate-tunable Tomonaga-Luttinger liquids in 1H-MoSe 2 mirror twin boundaries. Nat. Mater. 2022, 21, 748-753.

A poor man s derivation of scaling laws for the Kondo problem. P W Anderson, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 3Anderson, P. W. A poor man s derivation of scaling laws for the Kondo problem. J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 1970, 3, 2436-2441.

Temperature and magnetic field dependence of a Kondo system in the weak coupling regime. Y Zhang, S Kahle, T Herden, C Stroh, M Mayor, U Schlickum, M Ternes, P Wahl, K Kern, Nat. Commun. Zhang, Y.-h.; Kahle, S.; Herden, T.; Stroh, C.; Mayor, M.; Schlickum, U.; Ternes, M.; Wahl, P.; Kern, K. Temperature and magnetic field dependence of a Kondo system in the weak coupling regime. Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2110.

Controlling the spin of Co atoms on Pt(111) by hydrogen adsorption. Q Dubout, F Donati, C Wäckerlin, F Calleja, M Etzkorn, A Lehnert, L Claude, P Gambardella, H Brune, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114106807Dubout, Q.; Donati, F.; Wäckerlin, C.; Calleja, F.; Etzkorn, M.; Lehnert, A.; Claude, L.; Gambardella, P.; Brune, H. Controlling the spin of Co atoms on Pt(111) by hydrogen adsorption. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 114, 106807.

Temperature Dependence of a Single Kondo Impurity. K Nagaoka, T Jamneala, M Grobis, M F Crommie, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77205Nagaoka, K.; Jamneala, T.; Grobis, M.; Crommie, M. F. Temperature Dependence of a Single Kondo Impurity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2002, 88, 077205.

Long-range Kondo signature of a single magnetic impurity. H Prüser, M Wenderoth, P E Dargel, A Weismann, R Peters, T Pruschke, R G Ulbrich, Nat. Phys. 7Prüser, H.; Wenderoth, M.; Dargel, P. E.; Weismann, A.; Peters, R.; Pruschke, T.; Ulbrich, R. G. Long-range Kondo signature of a single magnetic impurity. Nat. Phys. 2011, 7, 203-206.

Kondo resonance lineshape of magnetic adatoms on decoupling layers. R Žitko, Phys. Rev. B. 84Žitko, R. Kondo resonance lineshape of magnetic adatoms on decoupling layers. Phys. Rev. B 2011, 84, 195116.

Nonequilibrium transport through a Kondo dot in a magnetic field: Perturbation theory. J Paaske, A Rosch, P Wölfle, Phys. Rev. B. 155330Paaske, J.; Rosch, A.; Wölfle, P. Nonequilibrium transport through a Kondo dot in a magnetic field: Perturbation theory. Phys. Rev. B 2004, 69, 155330.

Exchange model of zero-bias tunneling anomalies. J A Appelbaum, Phys. Rev. 154633Appelbaum, J. A. Exchange model of zero-bias tunneling anomalies. Phys. Rev. 1967, 154, 633.

Zero-bias tunneling anomalies-temperature, voltage, and magnetic field dependence. L Shen, J Rowell, Phys. Rev. 165566Shen, L.; Rowell, J. Zero-bias tunneling anomalies-temperature, voltage, and magnetic field dependence. Phys. Rev. 1968, 165, 566.

Probing resonating valence bond states in artificial quantum magnets. K Yang, S.-H Phark, Y Bae, T Esat, P Willke, A Ardavan, A J Heinrich, C P Lutz, Nat. Commun. 2021. 12Yang, K.; Phark, S.-H.; Bae, Y.; Esat, T.; Willke, P.; Ardavan, A.; Heinrich, A. J.; Lutz, C. P. Probing resonating valence bond states in artificial quantum magnets. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 4-10.

Orbital Picture of Yu-Shiba-Rusinov Multiplets. M Ruby, Y Peng, F Von Oppen, B W Heinrich, K J Franke, Phys. Rev. Lett. 186801Ruby, M.; Peng, Y.; von Oppen, F.; Heinrich, B. W.; Franke, K. J. Orbital Picture of Yu-Shiba-Rusinov Multiplets. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016, 117, 186801.

Building Complex Kondo Impurities by Manipulating Entangled Spin Chains. D J Choi, R Robles, S Yan, J A Burgess, S Rolf-Pissarczyk, J P Gauyacq, N Lorente, M Ternes, S Loth, Nano Lett. 17Choi, D. J.; Robles, R.; Yan, S.; Burgess, J. A.; Rolf-Pissarczyk, S.; Gauyacq, J. P.; Lorente, N.; Ternes, M.; Loth, S. Building Complex Kondo Impurities by Manipulating Entangled Spin Chains. Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 6203-6209.

Spin-dependent vibronic response of a carbon radical ion in two-dimensional WS 2. K A Cochrane, J.-H Lee, C Kastl, J B Haber, T Zhang, A Kozhakhmetov, J A Robinson, M Terrones, J Repp, J B Neaton, Nat. Commun. 2021. 12Cochrane, K. A.; Lee, J.-H.; Kastl, C.; Haber, J. B.; Zhang, T.; Kozhakhmetov, A.; Robinson, J. A.; Terrones, M.; Repp, J.; Neaton, J. B., et al. Spin-dependent vibronic response of a carbon radical ion in two-dimensional WS 2 . Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 1-10.

Growth of graphene on Ir(111). J Coraux, A T N&apos;diaye, M Engler, C Busse, D Wall, N Buckanie, F J Meyer Zu Heringdorf, R Van Gastel, B Poelsema, T Michely, New J. Phys. 23006Coraux, J.; N'Diaye, A. T.; Engler, M.; Busse, C.; Wall, D.; Buckanie, N.; Meyer Zu Heringdorf, F. J.; Van Gastel, R.; Poelsema, B.; Michely, T. Growth of graphene on Ir(111). New J. Phys. 2009, 11, 023006.

Molecular beam epitaxy of quasi-freestanding transition metal disulphide monolayers on van der Waals substrates: a growth study. J Hall, B Pielić, C Murray, W Jolie, T Wekking, C Busse, M Kralj, T Michely, 2D Mater. 525005Hall, J.; Pielić, B.; Murray, C.; Jolie, W.; Wekking, T.; Busse, C.; Kralj, M.; Michely, T. Molecular beam epitaxy of quasi-freestanding transition metal disulphide monolayers on van der Waals substrates: a growth study. 2D Mater. 2018, 5, 025005.

Shape of the Kondo resonance. H O Frota, Phys. Rev. B. 45Frota, H. O. Shape of the Kondo resonance. Phys. Rev. B 1992, 45, 1096-1099.

The Kondo resonance line shape in scanning tunnelling spectroscopy: instrumental aspects. M Gruber, A Weismann, R Berndt, J. Phys. Condens. Matter. Gruber, M.; Weismann, A.; Berndt, R. The Kondo resonance line shape in scanning tunnelling spectroscopy: instrumental aspects. J. Phys. Condens. Matter. 2018, 30, 424001.

Exchange model of zero-bias tunneling anomalies. J A Appelbaum, Physical Review. 154633Appelbaum, J. A. Exchange model of zero-bias tunneling anomalies. Physical Review 1967, 154, 633.

Tuning emergent magnetism in a Hund's impurity. A A Khajetoorians, M Valentyuk, M Steinbrecher, T Schlenk, A Shick, J Kolorenc, A I Lichtenstein, T O Wehling, R Wiesendanger, J Wiebe, Nat. Nanotechnol. 10Khajetoorians, A. A.; Valentyuk, M.; Steinbrecher, M.; Schlenk, T.; Shick, A.; Kolorenc, J.; Lichtenstein, A. I.; Wehling, T. O.; Wiesendanger, R.; Wiebe, J. Tuning emergent magnetism in a Hund's impurity. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10, 958-964.

Probing the local density of states of dilute electron systems in different dimensions. M Morgenstern, Surf. Rev. Lett. 10Morgenstern, M. Probing the local density of states of dilute electron systems in different dimensions. Surf. Rev. Lett. 2003, 10, 933-962.

Exchange model of zero-bias tunneling anomalies. J A Appelbaum, Phys. Rev. 154633Appelbaum, J. A. Exchange model of zero-bias tunneling anomalies. Phys. Rev. 1967, 154, 633.

Zero-bias tunneling anomalies-temperature, voltage, and magnetic field dependence. L Shen, J Rowell, Phys. Rev. 165566Shen, L.; Rowell, J. Zero-bias tunneling anomalies-temperature, voltage, and magnetic field dependence. Phys. Rev. 1968, 165, 566.

A poor man s derivation of scaling laws for the Kondo problem. P W Anderson, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 3Anderson, P. W. A poor man s derivation of scaling laws for the Kondo problem. J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 1970, 3, 2436-2441.

Spectral function of the Kondo model in high magnetic fields. A Rosch, T A Costi, J Paaske, P Wölfle, Phys. Rev. B. 14430Rosch, A.; Costi, T. A.; Paaske, J.; Wölfle, P. Spectral function of the Kondo model in high magnetic fields. Phys. Rev. B 2003, 68, 014430.