On the Effectiveness of Equivariant Regularization for Robust Online Continual Learning


Lorenzo Bonicelli 
AImageLab -University of Modena


Matteo Boschini 
AImageLab -University of Modena


Emanuele Frascaroli 
AImageLab -University of Modena


Angelo Porrello 
AImageLab -University of Modena


Matteo Pennisi 
PeRCeiVe Lab -University of Catania


Giovanni Bellitto 
PeRCeiVe Lab -University of Catania


Simone Palazzo 
PeRCeiVe Lab -University of Catania


Concetto Spampinato 
PeRCeiVe Lab -University of Catania


Simone Calderara 
AImageLab -University of Modena


Reggio Emilia 
On the Effectiveness of Equivariant Regularization for Robust Online Continual Learning

Humans can learn incrementally, whereas neural networks forget previously acquired information catastrophically. Continual Learning (CL) approaches seek to bridge this gap by facilitating the transfer of knowledge to both previous tasks (backward transfer) and future ones (forward transfer) during training. Recent research has shown that self-supervision can produce versatile models that can generalize well to diverse downstream tasks. However, contrastive self-supervised learning (CSSL), a popular selfsupervision technique, has limited effectiveness in online CL (OCL). OCL only permits one iteration of the input dataset, and CSSL's low sample efficiency hinders its use on the input data-stream.In this work, we propose Continual Learning via Equivariant Regularization (CLER), an OCL approach that leverages equivariant tasks for self-supervision, avoiding CSSL's limitations. Our method represents the first attempt at combining equivariant knowledge with CL and can be easily integrated with existing OCL methods. Extensive ablations shed light on how equivariant pretext tasks affect the network's information flow and its impact on CL dynamics.

Introduction

When dealing with non-stationary input distributions, Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) show a bias towards the incoming training data and thus forget previously acquired knowledge catastrophically [39]. Continual Learning (CL) is a rapidly growing area of machine learning that aims at designing approaches to counteract this effect [42,17]. Based on either parameter segregation [38,48], regularization [31,33] or replay [47,8,9] -CL methods allow machine learning systems to adapt constantly while remaining effective on old data. To assess the merits of these works, a plethora of experimental settings have been proposed in recent years; among those, we focus on the challenging Online CL (OCL) scenario [2,12,9] in light of its applicability to real-world problems: as it only allows a single pass on training data, it embodies the realistic assumption that an in-the-wild CL learner would hardly ever be exposed to the same input twice. Motivated by the success of Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning (CSSL) [15,51,5], several recent CL approaches pivot on self-supervised representation learning [43,10,22,36]. Indeed, as self-supervised representations are generally acknowledged to be agnostic and easily transferable to diverse downstream tasks [14], their exploitation appears especially promising in the online scenario, where learning a shared representation across tasks is as important as the prevention of forgetting. Moreover, we argue that binding the incoming classes to general-purpose representations encourages the emergence of a horizontal and shareable knowledge base, that will be less subject to forgetting.

However, we reckon that the CSSL paradigm is not a silver bullet: indeed, contrastive methods are characterized by low sample efficiency as their convergence requires large amounts of resources. As a result, CL methods need a higher number of training epochs when equipped with contrastive regularization [10], which clashes with the constraints of OCL. Moreover, they usually focus their representation learning on a small memory buffer [43], which entails a high risk of overfitting [6].

This work addresses these limitations, revealing the benefits of equivariant self-supervised tasks (e.g., rotation prediction, jigsaw puzzle, ...) for the OCL scenario. To provide an insight, Fig. 1 considers a simple learner based on Finetuning (i.e., no counter-measure against forgetting) and reports its performance in the online scenario allowing only one epoch per task: in doing so, we compare the effects of the auxiliary objective based either on equivariant selfsupervised learning (in this case, four-fold rotation prediction) or on Barlow Twins [51], a recent CSSL-based approach that has also shown its merit in CL [43]. We observe that both representation learning tasks allow for a lower interference between features learned by SSL, as supported by the more favorable alignment of gradients between current and subsequent tasks (Fig. 1a). Surprisingly, Fig. 1b shows that only the rotation-aided model has a significant profit in terms of individual task accuracy for the CSSL-based objective. We conjecture that the limited amount of training steps in online CL is not sufficient for contrastive approaches (such as Barlow Twins) to produce effective representations for the downstream task.

To address the aforementioned CSSL limitations in the OCL setting, we propose Continual Learning via Equivariant Regularization (CLER), a novel OCL regularizer built on top of equivariant pretext tasks -to the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to exploit equivariant information in CL. We demonstrate that our proposal can be easily combined with existing state-of-the-art CL approaches, leading to a generalized improvement in performance. Through additional experiments, we highlight the structural and predictive properties conferred by CLER and draw a detailed comparison with CSSL-based alternatives.


Related Work

(Online) Continual Learning is a field of machine learning that studies training over sequences of non-i.i.d. tasks, with the objective of retaining as much knowledge as possible from older tasks and mitigating catastrophic forgetting [39]. The existing literature offers different techniques to tackle this problem: regularization-based [31,33] methods are designed to control parameter updates in order to prevent disruptive modifications to features important for previous tasks; segregation-based [38,48] approaches identify subsets of task-relevant parameters and prevent their alteration by combining parameter freezing, model expansion, and feature gating; replay-based [47,46,8,9] methods store examples from the past in a memory buffer, with the objective of periodically refreshing older knowledge. Despite its simplicity, the latter approach is usually regarded as the most effective solution to date [21,50,13].

These methods are typically evaluated in a relaxed training setting, where the current task can be experienced over multiple epochs. In practical applications, this requirement is rarely satisfied; Online CL (OCL) [37,35,3] is a challenging and realistic scenario that adds the condition that each sample of the stream can be seen only once. Works targeting OCL typically all belong to the replay-based family [35,13] 1 . Among recent proposals, MIR [2] and GSS [3] propose enhanced replay sample selection procedures, ER-AML/ER-ACE [9] encourage balance in learning by means of carefully designed loss functions, CoPE [18] learns by exploiting slowly evolving class summaries. Self-Supervised Representation Learning in CL. Self-Supervised Learning aims at learning useful representations directly from the data, i.e., with no need for manual annotations. Recent SSL works show that these methods are able to learn strong representations that can reach or even outperform those of supervised learning [14,15,51]. In the context of CL, SSL methods are typically trained to encourage the backbone network to be invariant to the given transformations [10,22,43,36,30]. Co 2 L [10] learns the representations for new tasks with a modified supervised contrastive learning procedure [29], where current task samples are used as anchors and elements in the buffer are used as negative samples -all this while preserving past knowledge through distillation. However, applying SSL methods in CL is not straightforward: SSL benefits from large batch sizes and require several training steps to converge [14]; this represents a limit for Co 2 L, as the number of negative samples is limited by the small buffer size. DualNet [43] decouples representation learning from the CL objective through two complementary networks: a slow net exploits buffer samples to learn an overall representation, while a fast net sequentially learns from the input stream, using the features from the slow net to guide the process. Pretext Self-Supervised Learning and Rotations. Differently from CSSL, [25] employs a four-fold rotation prediction pretext task to provide a powerful learning signal for representation learning. In [24], the rotation pretext task is applied in the context of few-shot learning; similarly, [16] pairs rotation prediction to existing SSL methods, leading to a consistent performance improvement. Recently, the authors of [1] investigated the role of invariance and equivariance in SSL, suggesting that some transformations (e.g., four-fold rotations, jigsaw puzzle) can be effective when employed to encourage equivariance, but can lead to disruptive effects when enforcing invariance.
ℒ !" ℒ # Data Augmentation Pretext Transform 180°270°90°0°ℎ $ ℎ % & Equivariant Pretext Task (Rotation or Jigsaw) 90°F igure 2.
Overview of CLER. Two versions of the input image are fed into the in-training model: i) standard data augmentation is used to train the classification head (green); ii) an equivariant transformation-based task (rotation, alternatively jigsaw) is used to train the pretext head (blue) (best in colors).


Method


Online Continual Learning

In Online Continual Learning (OCL) [3,12], a single DNN f θ is trained on a sequence of classification tasks T 1 , . . . , T T . Each task consists of disjoint input and output distributions (
T i = (X i , Y i ), with Y i ∩Y j = ∅ for i = j)
and each example-label pair may only be shown to the model once. At task T c , CL aims at optimizing f θ on all T tasks, while only having access to data from T c itself:
L = T i=1 R i = c−1 i=1 R i 1 data no longer available + R c 2 data available + T j=c+1 R j 3 data not yet available ,(1)
where
R i = E (x,y)∈Ti (f θ (x)
, y) denotes the empirical risk associated with the data of task T i . In Eq. 1, term 1 (stability) requires f θ to maintain predictive efficacy on previously encountered data, whereas term 3 (plasticity) suggests that the model should prepare for fitting novel data distributions in later tasks. Only 2 can be directly pursued by training on data; instead, 1 and 3 are achieved by means of auxiliary loss terms. CL methods endeavor to balance the three terms, which are typically understood to interfere with one another [46,4,34].


OCL via Equivariant Regularization

The objectives 1 and 3 from Eq. 1 characterize the main challenges that come when designing a CL model. However, both can be addressed by learning a representation that can be shared across multiple tasks. To achieve this, we equip the online learner with an auxiliary SSL objective. Works in current literature pursue this objective through CSSL loss terms [10,43]; instead, we follow the insights presented in Sec. 1 and opt for an equivariant pretext task [16], defined as follows.

Let
A = {A i } K i=1
be a family of input transforms A i : X → X (e.g., rotations, jigsaw puzzle), we transform each input exemplar with a randomly chosen A k and request the in-training model to recognize the transformation by predicting the correct label k ∈ Y A = {1, . . . , K}. For this purpose, we rewrite f θ as h φ • g ψ , where g ψ is the early part of the network, devoted to the extraction of features, and h φ encompasses the latter part of the model, including the final multi-layer classification head for the CL task. Subsequently, we introduce h ξ : a separate sub-network following the same structure as h φ , finally projecting the representation g ψ (·) on the set Y A .

We treat the choice of A as a hyperparameter. In our experiments, we explore two different kinds of transformations: the set of 4 non-distorting image rotations [24,25], and the 24 permutations of patches produced by a 2 × 2 jigsaw puzzle [41]. The resulting approach, called CLER, consists of a regularization term L r that can be readily applied on a backbone network as shown in Fig. 2. Let x ∈ B in be a sample coming from the input batch, we define L r as:
{Rot 0 • , Rot 90 • , Rot 180 • , Rot 270 • }L r = λ r · E x∼Bin k∼Y A CE h ξ (g ψ (A k (x))), k ,(2)
where CE is the cross-entropy loss and λ r is a scalar hyper-parameter to control the strength of the regularization. We highlight that the label space Y A of the pretext task remains constant over time. The objective of CLER can hence be compared to classification problems where only the data-generating distribution is subject to changes (Domain-Incremental learning [50]).
Equivariance & invariance. A function f θ is said to be equivariant w.r.t. A if there exists a mapping M A such that: f θ (T (x)) = M A (f θ (x)), ∀x ∈ X .(3)
While the learning objective in Eq. 2 promotes sensitivity to the chosen set of transformations, solving the CL task forces the model to become invariant w.r.t. employed data augmentations. To avoid overlapping between the two objectives, we compute Eq. 2 only on non-augmented inputs.


Experiments


Experimental setting

Benchmarks. We build our OCL benchmarks by taking image classification datasets and splitting their classes equally into a series of disjoint tasks. In the online learning scenario, the learner will then experience each task only once (single epoch). For additional details regarding the experiments, we refer the reader to the supplementary material.

• Seq. CIFAR-100 [52,45,13] is obtained by splitting the original 100 classes of CIFAR-100 [32] into 10 consecutive tasks. For each class, train and test sets include 500 and 100 32 × 32 RGB images respectively. • Seq. miniImageNet [13,20,19] is a challenging dataset that includes a total of 100 classes from the popular Ima-geNet dataset and a longer sequence of tasks. While the number of samples is the same as in Seq. CIFAR-100, images are resized to 84 × 84 and split into 20 5-way tasks.

Evaluation protocol. We primarily focus our evaluation on the online Class-Incremental (oCIL) setting, where the model is asked to gradually learn to solve all tasks, with no information regarding the task identifier (Task-ID). Differently from the online Task-Incremental (oTIL) setting, where the task Task-ID is available during inference, oCIL forces the learner to build a single-headed classifier. We present extensive results in both the oCIL and oTIL settings. Baseline methods. We report the results of CLER on a selection of current state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods viable for the oCIL setting.

• Experience Replay with Asymmetric Cross-Entropy (ER-ACE) [9]. Starting from the popular store-andreplay baseline (Experience Replay [44,47]), the authors propose an alteration aimed at preventing imbalances due to the simultaneous optimization of current and past data.

• eXtended Dark Experience Replay (X-DER) [7] is a model that combines replay with self-distillation, while adopting careful design choices to harmonically blend predictive functions learned at different times. • Continual Prototype Evolution: Learning Online from Non-Stationary Data Streams (CoPE) [18] proposes a classifier based on class prototypes, whose careful update scheme allows for learning incrementally while avoiding sudden disruptions in the latent space. Architecture. We rely on ResNet18 [27] as backbone in all experiments. For DualNet, we use this model as the slow learner and -in line with [43] -construct the fast learner as a feed-forward network with the same number of convolutional layers as residual blocks in the slow learner.

Regardless of the underlying CL method, we define the feature extractor g φ and the classification heads h φ and h ξ by splitting the ResNet backbone at the second-last residual block; namely, h φ and h ξ are comprised of the last residual block, followed by a linear projection onto the respective sets of classes Y = ∪ T i=1 Y i and Y A . Metrics. As a primary indicator of a model's performance at the end of OCL, we report its Final Average Accuracy (Ā F ). Let a j i be the accuracy of the model at the end of task j computed on the test set of task T i ,Ā F is computed as:
A F = 1 T T i=1 a T i .(4)
To further assess learning as tasks progress, we report the Final Average Adjusted Forgetting (F * F ), defined as follows:
F * F = 1 T − 1 T −1 i=1 a * i − a T i a * i + , where a * i = max t∈{i,...,T −1} a t i , ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , T − 1}.(5)
F * F is a novel measure derived from the widely employed Forgetting metric [11] to facilitate the comparison between unevenly performing approaches. In particular, while the original Forgetting is upper-bounded by a model's accuracy, F * F varies in [0, 100].F * F = 100 denotes a method that retains no accuracy on previous tasks (e.g., Finetune) and F * F = 0 one that has no performance decrease on past tasks. We repeat each experiment 10 times and report the mean A F andF * F , and the standard deviation of the former. Please refer to the supplementary material for the standard deviations and statistical significance.


Comparison with the State-Of-The-Art

We include the results of our evaluation on Seq. CIFAR-100 and Seq. miniImageNet for oCIL and oTIL in Tab. 1 and 2 respectively. For each experiment, we report the best performer among the 2×2 jigsaw and rotation pretext tasks 2 . The evidence we present strongly supports our initial claims, with CLER improving the SOTA methods in all benchmarks. Specifically, we witness an improvement across the board regarding theĀ F , whileF * F indicates stronger resistance against forgetting.

Interestingly, the effect of our regularization is maintained regardless of the choice of buffer size, with an average oCIL improvement of 3.59 and 3.40 on Seq. CIFAR-100 and 3.12 and 3.46 on Seq. miniImageNet. We find the only notable exception is in the case of DualNet on Seq. CIFAR-100. Indeed, even without our regularization, the lower FAA and higher forgetting compared with the other baselines suggests that the model cannot profit from the memory buffer. This might be due to the fact that the slow learner is only trained with a CSSL objective on samples from the buffer, which limits the quality of its representation when the latter is of moderate size. However, its results on the challenging Seq. miniImageNet, when combined with CLER, suggest that such an effect can be mitigated by leveraging equivariant SSL, which allows the fast learner to develop better representations during OCL.


Model Analysis

In the remainder, we analyze the various contributions of CLER and gather further insights on its overall effect on the CL tasks. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to consider the effect of equivariant-based pretext tasks in an incremental setting.


Effects of CLER on the Backbone

For an in-depth analysis of the effects induced on the backbone, we consider ER-ACE with and without CLER and conduct three additional experiments, drawing inspiration from the Network Pruning literature [40]. Our aim here is to unveil how the information carried by the learned features distributes across the parameters of the backbone. Importance and redundancy. First, we quantify each parameter's contribution to the overall loss after training on Seq. CIFAR-100 by computing the importance measurê I (1) m proposed in [40]. In Fig. 3a, we focus on the convolutional layers and report the proportion of parameters whose importance score is higher than the layer's average to provide a compact per-layer evaluation.  m ; (b) within-layer similarity score g after pruning with Geometric Median; (c) accuracy after dropping conv. filters and training on a few batches from T6, with the pre-drop accuracy serving as a target value (red line) (best seen in colors).

Additionally, we perform a Geometric Median pruning [28] on the model, thus discarding those filters F d that are the most redundant -i.e., averagely most similar to all others in the same layer. In Fig. 3b we report the average within-layer similarity g for the discarded kernels:
g(F d ) = 1 F F j=1 |F d − F j |,(6)
with F the total number of filters in the considered layer.

Our results reveal that CLER pushes the model to fit the learned task with dense configurations of parameters (higherÎ (1) m in Fig. 3a) that are also more similar to each other (lower g in Fig. 3b). We conjecture that this can be linked to the performance increase reported in Sec. 4.2: as the knowledge of a specific task does not rely on only a few parameters but instead appears more distributed, it is less likely that subsequent weights' updates will entirely erase the previously acquired knowledge. Moreover, the higher rate of important parameters, coupled with the higher redundancy, suggests that those important filters erased by forgetting could be restored as needed, by simply leveraging redundant groups of parameters. Recovery. To support our intuitions, we conducted an additional evaluation probing the dynamics of learning with CLER. After training on the 6 th task of Seq. CIFAR-100, we randomly drop a portion of the convolutional filters in our models and retrain using only the cross-entropy loss on a few batches from the same task, reporting the accuracy after each batch in Fig. 3c. Interestingly, the distributed importance induced by our training objective leads to a higher initial drop in accuracy for CLER. However, our proposed approach swiftly recovers its performance, reaching the target pre-drop accuracy in fewer steps w.r.t. the baseline.


Invariance & Equivariance

While in previous sections we explored the role of equivariance as a regularizer for OCL, we now wish to better    four-fold rotation prediction and 2 × 2 jigsaw solving. Both methods achieve higher results w.r.t. the baseline, with jigsaw solving usually leading to the best performance (best seen in colors).

characterize the different pretext tasks, as well as compare with an invariance-based CSSL objective.

Rotations vs Jigsaw. The results presented so far depict a clear advantage of the jigsaw puzzle pretext task, which might suggest that the performance gain is not specifically tied to equivariance but to the former. To address such concern, in Fig. 4  formations efficiently allows CLER to learn a representation robust against forgetting, by spreading the contribution of each feature on all the learnable parameters. This is in contrast with current CL literature, which instead relies on CSSL tasks [10,43] to learn a representation that is invariant to strong data augmentation and input transformations.

To further prove our contribution, in Tab. 3 we compare our proposal of an equivariant loss term against one that promotes invariance by means of a CSSL objective. For the latter, we take inspiration from [43] and opt for Barlow Twins. Our results indicate a superior regularization effect for CLER, with CSSL even hurting the performance in some scenarios. This suggests that the few training iterations allowed in OCL do not allow CSSL to transfer useful knowledge, thus eventually hindering incremental learning.

Applicability to the multi-epoch setting. While we focus our evaluation on OCL, we reckon that our proposed ap- proach might also prove beneficial in a less strict environment that allows for multiple iterations. Such a setting simulates a realistic low-latency scenario, where the desiderata is an algorithm capable of rapidly adapting to the changing data stream while retaining knowledge from the past. Results of this evaluation on the Seq. CIFAR-100 benchmark are summarized in Tab. 4. Due to space constraints, we only include results on the Class-Incremental scenario. Unsurprisingly, as the number of epochs increases, the model can start to fully leverage the knowledge that comes from the stream. However, as CSSL tasks usually require a large number of iterations to converge, our CLER remains a better choice for the task of preventing forgetting while boosting the representation of the base model.


Is CLER's advantage actually tied to OCL?

The consistently enhanced performance of baseline methods when combined with CLER could raise the suspicion that SSL regularization is generally effective and not particularly relevant to Continual Learning per se. To shed light on this point, we apply both CSSL and CLER regularization on a multi-epoch Joint upper bound (Joint-offline) and report the results in Tab. 5; this simple test clearly shows that -if enough epochs are allowed and the method achieves full convergence -the presence of additional SSL terms does not impact the attained accuracy significantly.

To complement this result, we also apply the proposed technique on top of single-epoch Joint training. In this context, CLER proves effective and more so than CSSL. In line with what shown in Fig. 1, this result confirms that SSL facilitates the convergence of the learner when having only few data-points and that the equivariant approach of CLER is more sample-efficient than typical CSSL methods.

In conclusion, we summarize that self-supervised regularization is not effective in a multi-epoch non-continual setting (Tab. 5 top); it becomes relevant in either singleepoch (Tab. 5 bottom) or continual (Tab. 4) setting. Due to its enhanced sample efficiency, the equivariant approach pursued by CLER is particularly effective when fewer epochs are performed. For this reason, its application is ideal for the OCL setting.


Method

Seq.  Table 6. Class-IL Final Average AccuracyĀF of DFCIL methods (no buffer) with and without CLER. We conduct 30, 50 epochs on CIFAR-100, miniImg respectively.


Applicability to Data-Free Continual Learning

The SOTA competitors on top of which we validate CLER in Sec. 4 belong to the rehearsal-based family of CL methods. These represent by far the preferred approach in the challenging oCIL scenario, on which the performance of other classes of methods is severely compromised [37,9,26,53]. However, a very recent line of works raises criticism on the adoption of replay, citing potential privacy issues [49,23]. They instead focus on the socalled Data-Free Class-Incremental Learning (DFCIL) setting, i.e., multi-epoch Class-Incremental Learning without a memory buffer.

To provide a clear picture of the flexibility of our proposal, we further showcase its application on top of two DFCIL methods: the model inversion-based Relation-Guided Representation Learning (R-DFCIL) [23] and the distillation-based Multi-Class Learning without Forgetting (LWF.MC) [45]. The results in Tab. 6 illustrate that CLER delivers a steady performance improvement even in DFCIL, which reveals that its effectiveness is not dependent on the availability of replay data.


Conclusions

We present Continual Learning via Equivariant Regularization (CLER), a novel approach for Online Continual Learning (OCL) that encourages representations to be sensitive to a set of input transformations. Our method introduces a regularization technique based on equivariant SSL pretext tasks (jigsaw puzzle solving and four-fold rotation prediction). By experimental means, we show that the application of CLER to state-of-the-art methods consistently leads to better performance. Furthermore, we provide an in-depth analysis of the effect of CLER on the parameters of the backbone network and compare it against other Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning methods.

Our strong results with different choices of equivariant pretext tasks further support our initial hypothesis, laying the foundation for better OCL models based on equivariant constraints. We leave this analysis for future work.

Figure 1 .
1Effects of SSL in OCL (Seq. CIFAR-100) comparing a Finetuning baseline with no additional regularization (green), with a Contrastive SSL auxiliary objective (orange) and with an Equivariant rotation prediction pretext task (blue). (a) Similarity between the gradients induced on the model by task Ti and Ti+1 after training on Ti. (b) Accuracy on task Ti after training on Ti. Results are reported after a warm-up task (best in colors).

•
DualNet[43] is a dual-backbone architecture decoupling the issue of incremental classification from the one of learning an overall transferable representation. The latter task is demanded to one of the backbones (slow learner), trained with a CSSL loss term on i.i.d. data coming from the replay buffer; the other backbone (fast learner) is instead tasked with fitting the CL tasks while taking advantage of the representations produced by the slow learner.All models are trained for a single epoch with SGD, with a fixed batch size of 10 both on the input stream and the replay buffer. We benchmark all models with two different sizes for the memory buffer: 500 and 2000 for Seq. CIFAR-100 and 2000 and 8000 for Seq. miniImageNet. For these methods the input B in in Eq. 2 is the concatenation of the images coming both from the stream and the buffer.To better compare the effect of CLER, we also include the results of a model jointly trained on all classes for one epoch (Joint-online) and for 30 and 50 epochs respectively on Seq. CIFAR-100 and Seq. miniImageNet (Joint-offline). Also, we include the results of a model trained on the task sequence with no forgetting countermeasures (Finetune).

Figure 3 .
3Structural analysis of ER-ACE with and without CLER on Seq. CIFAR-100. (a) Percentage of important neurons in each layer with higher-than-average importance scoreÎ(1) 

Figure 4 .
4Final Average AccuracyĀF of various baseline methods when equipped with different equivariant pretext tasks:


JS a result obatined with 2 × 2 jigsaw puzzle.oCIL 

Seq. CIFAR-100 
Seq. miniImageNet 

Joint-offline 
69.47 (−) 
63.31 (−) 
Joint-online 
23.14 (−) 
10.68 (−) 
Finetune 
7.00 (100) 
3.21 (100) 

Buffer Size 
500 
2000 
2000 
8000 

ER-ACE [9] 
20.17 (38.75) 
26.95 (23.69) 
15.03 (35.01) 
16.07 (37.94) 
+ CLER 
24.53 JS (33.76) 30.89 JS (20.24) 18.08 R (32.53) 18.43 JS (33.22) 
X-DER [7] 
25.80 (39.54) 
30.44 (31.52) 
17.51 (34.25) 
18.01 (50.84) 
+ CLER 
29.35 JS (35.56) 34.57 JS (29.71) 21.26 JS (34.07) 21.71 JS (34.76) 
CoPE [18] 
19.98 (75.32) 
34.09 (46.39) 
22.67 (57.96) 
24.54 (55.09) 
+ CLER 
26.15 JS (69.28) 38.48 JS (45.50) 25.91 R (57.73) 26.76 R (52.69) 

DualNet [43] 
11.09 (92.42) 
19.93 (73.44) 
16.21 (80.35) 
25.33 (59.60) 
+ CLER 
11.89 R (89.97) 20.88 JS (73.02) 18.66 R (72.74) 30.90 R (52.14) 

Table 1. Final Average AccuracyĀF (↑) and Final Average Adjusted Forgetting (F  *  
F ) (↓) on the oCIL setting. R indicates a result 
obtained with rotation, 

Table 3 .
3Performancecomparison between our proposal CLER and a similar Contrastive-based SSL (CSSL) method, as measured by 
Final Average AccuracyĀF ± std (↑) and Final Average Adjusted Forgetting (F  *  
F ) (↓) on the Seq. CIFAR-100 benchmark. 




MethodSeq. CIFAR-100 Seq. miniImageNetTable 5. Accuracy of Joint methods with CSSL and CLER. The epochs are set to 30, 50 for CIFAR-100 and miniImg respectively.Joint-offline 
69.85±1.43 
62.42±1.13 
+ CSSL 
70.24±0.47 
63.10±0.61 
+ CLER 
70.92 JS ±0.74 
63.11 JS ±0.16 

Joint-online 
23.14±0.74 
10.68±0.67 
+ CSSL 
23.16±0.82 
13.79±0.79 
+ CLER 
28.38 JS ±1.82 
14.77 JS ±0.78 




CIFAR-100 Seq. miniImageNetLWF.MC [45] 
36.15 (49.78) 
20.75 (63.67) 
+ CLER 
37.07 R (49.37) 
21.64 R (62.79) 
R-DFCIL [23] 
34.98 (54.59) 
13.15 (83.47) 
+ CLER 
36.74 R (52.31) 
18.80 JS (75.43) 


All contemporary OCL works consider only replay approaches, due to their clear performance superiority over all alternatives[37,9].
Please refer to Sec. 5.2 for a detailed comparison between the two choices of pretext task.

Towards efficient and effective selfsupervised learning of visual representations. Sravanti Addepalli, Kaushal Bhogale, Priyam Dey, R Venkatesh Babu, ECCV. 2022Sravanti Addepalli, Kaushal Bhogale, Priyam Dey, and R Venkatesh Babu. Towards efficient and effective self- supervised learning of visual representations. In ECCV, 2022. 2

Online continual learning with maximal interfered retrieval. Rahaf Aljundi, Eugene Belilovsky, Tinne Tuytelaars, Laurent Charlin, Massimo Caccia, Min Lin, Lucas Page-Caccia, ANeurIPS. 1Rahaf Aljundi, Eugene Belilovsky, Tinne Tuytelaars, Lau- rent Charlin, Massimo Caccia, Min Lin, and Lucas Page- Caccia. Online continual learning with maximal interfered retrieval. In ANeurIPS, 2019. 1, 2

Gradient Based Sample Selection for Online Continual Learning. Rahaf Aljundi, Min Lin, Baptiste Goujaud, Yoshua Bengio, ANeurIPS. 23Rahaf Aljundi, Min Lin, Baptiste Goujaud, and Yoshua Ben- gio. Gradient Based Sample Selection for Online Continual Learning. In ANeurIPS, 2019. 2, 3

Entropy-based stability-plasticity for lifelong learning. Vladimir Araujo, Julio Hurtado, Alvaro Soto, Marie-Francine Moens, CVPR. 2022Vladimir Araujo, Julio Hurtado, Alvaro Soto, and Marie- Francine Moens. Entropy-based stability-plasticity for life- long learning. In CVPR, 2022. 3

Vicreg: Variance-invariance-covariance regularization for selfsupervised learning. Adrien Bardes, Jean Ponce, Yann Lecun, ICLR. 2022Adrien Bardes, Jean Ponce, and Yann LeCun. Vi- creg: Variance-invariance-covariance regularization for self- supervised learning. In ICLR, 2022. 1

On the Effectiveness of Lipschitz-Driven Rehearsal in Continual Learning. Lorenzo Bonicelli, Matteo Boschini, Angelo Porrello, Concetto Spampinato, Simone Calderara, ANeurIPS. 2022Lorenzo Bonicelli, Matteo Boschini, Angelo Porrello, Con- cetto Spampinato, and Simone Calderara. On the Effective- ness of Lipschitz-Driven Rehearsal in Continual Learning. In ANeurIPS, 2022. 2

Class-incremental continual learning into the extended der-verse. Matteo Boschini, Lorenzo Bonicelli, Pietro Buzzega, Angelo Porrello, Simone Calderara, IEEE TPAMI. 46Matteo Boschini, Lorenzo Bonicelli, Pietro Buzzega, Angelo Porrello, and Simone Calderara. Class-incremental continual learning into the extended der-verse. IEEE TPAMI, 2022. 4, 5, 6

Dark Experience for General Continual Learning: a Strong, Simple Baseline. Pietro Buzzega, Matteo Boschini, Angelo Porrello, Davide Abati, Simone Calderara, ANeurIPS. 1Pietro Buzzega, Matteo Boschini, Angelo Porrello, Davide Abati, and Simone Calderara. Dark Experience for Gen- eral Continual Learning: a Strong, Simple Baseline. In ANeurIPS, 2020. 1, 2

New Insights on Reducing Abrupt Representation Change in Online Continual Learning. Lucas Caccia, Rahaf Aljundi, Nader Asadi, Tinne Tuytelaars, Joelle Pineau, Eugene Belilovsky, ICLR. 7Lucas Caccia, Rahaf Aljundi, Nader Asadi, Tinne Tuyte- laars, Joelle Pineau, and Eugene Belilovsky. New Insights on Reducing Abrupt Representation Change in Online Con- tinual Learning. In ICLR, 2022. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8

Co2l: Contrastive continual learning. Hyuntak Cha, Jaeho Lee, Jinwoo Shin, ICCV. Hyuntak Cha, Jaeho Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. Co2l: Con- trastive continual learning. In ICCV, 2021. 1, 2, 3, 7

Riemannian walk for incremental learning: Understanding forgetting and intransigence. Arslan Chaudhry, K Puneet, Thalaiyasingam Dokania, Philip Hs Ajanthan, Torr, In ECCV. 5Arslan Chaudhry, Puneet K Dokania, Thalaiyasingam Ajan- than, and Philip HS Torr. Riemannian walk for incremen- tal learning: Understanding forgetting and intransigence. In ECCV, 2018. 5

Using hindsight to anchor past knowledge in continual learning. Arslan Chaudhry, Albert Gordo, Puneet Dokania, Philip Torr, David Lopez-Paz, AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 13Arslan Chaudhry, Albert Gordo, Puneet Dokania, Philip Torr, and David Lopez-Paz. Using hindsight to anchor past knowledge in continual learning. In AAAI Conference on Ar- tificial Intelligence, 2021. 1, 3

On tiny episodic memories in continual learning. Arslan Chaudhry, Marcus Rohrbach, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, K Puneet, Dokania, H S Philip, Marc&apos;aurelio Torr, Ranzato, ICML Workshops. 24Arslan Chaudhry, Marcus Rohrbach, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, Puneet K Dokania, Philip HS Torr, and Marc'Aurelio Ranzato. On tiny episodic memo- ries in continual learning. In ICML Workshops, 2019. 2, 4

A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representations. Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Geoffrey Hinton, ICML, 2020. 1Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Ge- offrey Hinton. A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representations. In ICML, 2020. 1, 2

Exploring simple siamese representation learning. Xinlei Chen, Kaiming He, 1Technical reportFacebook AI ResearchXinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple siamese representation learning. Technical report, Facebook AI Re- search, 2020. 1, 2

Pulkit Agrawal, and Marin Soljačić. Equivariant contrastive learning. Rumen Dangovski, Li Jing, Charlotte Loh, Seungwook Han, Akash Srivastava, Brian Cheung, ICLR, 2022. 23Rumen Dangovski, Li Jing, Charlotte Loh, Seungwook Han, Akash Srivastava, Brian Cheung, Pulkit Agrawal, and Marin Soljačić. Equivariant contrastive learning. In ICLR, 2022. 2, 3

Ales Leonardis, Greg Slabaugh, and Tinne Tuytelaars. A continual learning survey: Defying forgetting in classification tasks. Matthias De Lange, Rahaf Aljundi, Marc Masana, Sarah Parisot, Xu Jia, IEEE TPAMI. 1Matthias De Lange, Rahaf Aljundi, Marc Masana, Sarah Parisot, Xu Jia, Ales Leonardis, Greg Slabaugh, and Tinne Tuytelaars. A continual learning survey: Defying forgetting in classification tasks. IEEE TPAMI, 2021. 1

Continual prototype evolution: Learning online from non-stationary data streams. Matthias De Lange, Tinne Tuytelaars, ICCV. 56Matthias De Lange and Tinne Tuytelaars. Continual pro- totype evolution: Learning online from non-stationary data streams. In ICCV, 2021. 2, 4, 5, 6

Kernel continual learning. Xiantong Mohammad Mahdi Derakhshani, Ling Zhen, Cees Shao, Snoek, ICML. Mohammad Mahdi Derakhshani, Xiantong Zhen, Ling Shao, and Cees Snoek. Kernel continual learning. In ICML, 2021. 4

Adversarial continual learning. Sayna Ebrahimi, Franziska Meier, Roberto Calandra, Trevor Darrell, Marcus Rohrbach, ECCV. Sayna Ebrahimi, Franziska Meier, Roberto Calandra, Trevor Darrell, and Marcus Rohrbach. Adversarial continual learn- ing. In ECCV, 2020. 4

Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning. Sebastian Farquhar, Yarin Gal, ICML Workshops. Sebastian Farquhar and Yarin Gal. Towards Robust Evalu- ations of Continual Learning. In ICML Workshops, 2018. 2

Selfsupervised models are continual learners. Enrico Fini, G Turrisi Da Victor, Xavier Costa, Elisa Alameda-Pineda, Karteek Ricci, Julien Alahari, Mairal, CVPR, 2022. 1Enrico Fini, Victor G Turrisi da Costa, Xavier Alameda- Pineda, Elisa Ricci, Karteek Alahari, and Julien Mairal. Self- supervised models are continual learners. In CVPR, 2022. 1, 2

R-DFCIL: Relation-Guided Representation Learning for Data-Free Class Incremental Learning. Qiankun Gao, Chen Zhao, Bernard Ghanem, Jian Zhang, ECCV. Qiankun Gao, Chen Zhao, Bernard Ghanem, and Jian Zhang. R-DFCIL: Relation-Guided Representation Learning for Data-Free Class Incremental Learning. In ECCV, 2022. 8

Boosting few-shot visual learning with self-supervision. Spyros Gidaris, Andrei Bursuc, Nikos Komodakis, Patrick Pérez, Matthieu Cord, ICCV. 23Spyros Gidaris, Andrei Bursuc, Nikos Komodakis, Patrick Pérez, and Matthieu Cord. Boosting few-shot visual learning with self-supervision. In ICCV, 2019. 2, 3

Unsupervised representation learning by predicting image rotations. Spyros Gidaris, Praveer Singh, Nikos Komodakis, ICLR. 23Spyros Gidaris, Praveer Singh, and Nikos Komodakis. Un- supervised representation learning by predicting image rota- tions. In ICLR, 2018. 2, 3

Not just selection, but exploration: Online class-incremental continual learning via dual view consistency. Yanan Gu, Xu Yang, Kun Wei, Cheng Deng, CVPR. Yanan Gu, Xu Yang, Kun Wei, and Cheng Deng. Not just se- lection, but exploration: Online class-incremental continual learning via dual view consistency. In CVPR, 2022. 8

Deep residual learning for image recognition. Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, Jian Sun, CVPR. Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In CVPR, 2016. 4

Filter pruning via geometric median for deep convolutional neural networks acceleration. Yang He, Ping Liu, Ziwei Wang, Zhilan Hu, Yi Yang, CVPR. Yang He, Ping Liu, Ziwei Wang, Zhilan Hu, and Yi Yang. Filter pruning via geometric median for deep convolutional neural networks acceleration. In CVPR, 2019. 6

Supervised Contrastive Learning. Prannay Khosla, Piotr Teterwak, Chen Wang, Aaron Sarna, Yonglong Tian, Phillip Isola, Aaron Maschinot, Ce Liu, Dilip Krishnan, ANeurIPS. 2020Prannay Khosla, Piotr Teterwak, Chen Wang, Aaron Sarna, Yonglong Tian, Phillip Isola, Aaron Maschinot, Ce Liu, and Dilip Krishnan. Supervised Contrastive Learning. In ANeurIPS, 2020. 2

Continual learning on noisy data streams via self-purified replay. Chris Dongjoo Kim, Jinseo Jeong, Sangwoo Moon, Gunhee Kim, ICCV. Chris Dongjoo Kim, Jinseo Jeong, Sangwoo Moon, and Gunhee Kim. Continual learning on noisy data streams via self-purified replay. In ICCV, 2021. 2

Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, PNAS1James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska- Barwinska, et al. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neu- ral networks. PNAS, 2017. 1, 2

Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Alex Krizhevsky, Citeseer. 4Technical reportAlex Krizhevsky et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, Citeseer, 2009. 4

Learning without forgetting. Zhizhong Li, Derek Hoiem, IEEE TPAMI. 12Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. Learning without forgetting. IEEE TPAMI, 2017. 1, 2

Towards better plasticity-stability trade-off in incremental learning: A simple linear connector. Guoliang Lin, Hanlu Chu, Hanjiang Lai, CVPR. 2022Guoliang Lin, Hanlu Chu, and Hanjiang Lai. Towards better plasticity-stability trade-off in incremental learning: A sim- ple linear connector. In CVPR, 2022. 3

Gradient episodic memory for continual learning. David Lopez, - Paz, Marc&apos;aurelio Ranzato, ANeurIPS. David Lopez-Paz and Marc'Aurelio Ranzato. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning. In ANeurIPS, 2017. 2

Rethinking the representational continuity: Towards unsupervised continual learning. Divyam Madaan, Jaehong Yoon, Yuanchun Li, Yunxin Liu, Sung Ju Hwang, ICLR, 2022. 1Divyam Madaan, Jaehong Yoon, Yuanchun Li, Yunxin Liu, and Sung Ju Hwang. Rethinking the representational con- tinuity: Towards unsupervised continual learning. In ICLR, 2022. 1, 2

Online continual learning in image classification: An empirical survey. Zheda Mai, Ruiwen Li, Jihwan Jeong, David Quispe, Hyunwoo Kim, Scott Sanner, Neurocomputing. 28Zheda Mai, Ruiwen Li, Jihwan Jeong, David Quispe, Hyun- woo Kim, and Scott Sanner. Online continual learning in image classification: An empirical survey. Neurocomputing, 2022. 2, 8

Packnet: Adding multiple tasks to a single network by iterative pruning. Arun Mallya, Svetlana Lazebnik, CVPR. 1Arun Mallya and Svetlana Lazebnik. Packnet: Adding mul- tiple tasks to a single network by iterative pruning. In CVPR, 2018. 1, 2

Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The sequential learning problem. Michael Mccloskey, J Neal, Cohen, Psychol. Learn. Motiv. 12Michael McCloskey and Neal J Cohen. Catastrophic inter- ference in connectionist networks: The sequential learning problem. Psychol. Learn. Motiv., 1989. 1, 2

Importance estimation for neural network pruning. Pavlo Molchanov, Arun Mallya, Stephen Tyree, Iuri Frosio, Jan Kautz, CVPR. Pavlo Molchanov, Arun Mallya, Stephen Tyree, Iuri Frosio, and Jan Kautz. Importance estimation for neural network pruning. In CVPR, 2019. 5

Unsupervised learning of visual representations by solving jigsaw puzzles. Mehdi Noroozi, Paolo Favaro, ECCV. Mehdi Noroozi and Paolo Favaro. Unsupervised learning of visual representations by solving jigsaw puzzles. In ECCV, 2016. 3

Continual lifelong learning with neural networks: A review. I German, Ronald Parisi, Kemker, L Jose, Christopher Part, Stefan Kanan, Wermter, Neural Netw. 1German I Parisi, Ronald Kemker, Jose L Part, Christopher Kanan, and Stefan Wermter. Continual lifelong learning with neural networks: A review. Neural Netw., 2019. 1

Dualnet: Continual learning, fast and slow. Quang Pham, Chenghao Liu, Steven Hoi, ANeurIPS. 67Quang Pham, Chenghao Liu, and Steven Hoi. Dualnet: Con- tinual learning, fast and slow. In ANeurIPS, 2021. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7

Connectionist models of recognition memory: constraints imposed by learning and forgetting functions. Roger Ratcliff, Psychol. Rev. 4Roger Ratcliff. Connectionist models of recognition mem- ory: constraints imposed by learning and forgetting func- tions. Psychol. Rev., 1990. 4

iCaRL: Incremental classifier and representation learning. Alexander Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Georg Kolesnikov, Christoph H Sperl, Lampert, CVPR. 4Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Alexander Kolesnikov, Georg Sperl, and Christoph H Lampert. iCaRL: Incremental classi- fier and representation learning. In CVPR, 2017. 4, 8

Learning to Learn without Forgetting by Maximizing Transfer and Minimizing Interference. Matthew Riemer, Ignacio Cases, Robert Ajemian, Miao Liu, Irina Rish, Yuhai Tu, Gerald Tesauro, ICLR. 23Matthew Riemer, Ignacio Cases, Robert Ajemian, Miao Liu, Irina Rish, Yuhai Tu, and Gerald Tesauro. Learning to Learn without Forgetting by Maximizing Transfer and Minimizing Interference. In ICLR, 2019. 2, 3

Catastrophic forgetting, rehearsal and pseudorehearsal. Anthony Robins, Conn. Sci. Anthony Robins. Catastrophic forgetting, rehearsal and pseudorehearsal. Conn. Sci., 1995. 1, 2, 4

Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting with Hard Attention to the Task. Joan Serra, Didac Suris, Marius Miron, Alexandros Karatzoglou, ICML. 1Joan Serra, Didac Suris, Marius Miron, and Alexandros Karatzoglou. Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting with Hard Attention to the Task. In ICML, 2018. 1, 2

Always be dreaming: A new approach for data-free class-incremental learning. James Smith, Yen-Chang Hsu, Jonathan Balloch, Yilin Shen, Hongxia Jin, Zsolt Kira, ICCV. James Smith, Yen-Chang Hsu, Jonathan Balloch, Yilin Shen, Hongxia Jin, and Zsolt Kira. Always be dreaming: A new approach for data-free class-incremental learning. In ICCV, 2021. 8

Three types of incremental learning. Tinne Gido M Van De Ven, Andreas S Tuytelaars, Tolias, Nat. Mach. Intell. 24Gido M van de Ven, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Andreas S To- lias. Three types of incremental learning. Nat. Mach. Intell., 2022. 2, 4

Barlow twins: Self-supervised learning via redundancy reduction. Jure Zbontar, Li Jing, Ishan Misra, Yann Lecun, Stéphane Deny, ICML, 2021. 1Jure Zbontar, Li Jing, Ishan Misra, Yann LeCun, and Stéphane Deny. Barlow twins: Self-supervised learning via redundancy reduction. In ICML, 2021. 1, 2

Continual learning through synaptic intelligence. Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, Surya Ganguli, ICML. Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Contin- ual learning through synaptic intelligence. In ICML, 2017. 4

A simple but strong baseline for online continual learning: Repeated Augmented Rehearsal. Yaqian Zhang, Bernhard Pfahringer, Eibe Frank, Albert Bifet, Nick Jin , Sean Lim, Yunzhe Jia, ANeurIPS. Yaqian Zhang, Bernhard Pfahringer, Eibe Frank, Albert Bifet, Nick Jin Sean Lim, and Yunzhe Jia. A simple but strong baseline for online continual learning: Repeated Aug- mented Rehearsal. In ANeurIPS, 2022. 8