16 Mar 2019


Carnegie Mellon University
PittsburghUSA
16 Mar 2019Extensions of Abelian Automata Groups Chris Grossack [0000−0001−7520−9747]Abelian Automata · Transducer · Module Theory
A longstanding problem in understanding abelian automata groups comes from a seemingly unnecessary parameter in the classification given by Nekrashevich and Sidki. In this paper, we show that this parameter corresponds to the presence of certain fractional group elements. Further, we show the existence of a computable universal object which removes the need for this parameter entirely.

Background

Finite State Automata are combinatorial objects which encode relations between words over some alphabet. Automata provide deep connections between combinatorics, algebra, and logic, and are essential tools in contemporary computer science. One such link is in the decidability of truth in a structure whose relations are all computable by automata. One can combine these automata into more complicated automata representing logical sentences in such a way that a sentence is true if and only if a simple reachability condition holds [1]. This gives a simple proof that the theory of N with + and <, for example, is decidable.

While the most common automata one encounters are DFAs and Turing Machines, providing a characterization of the complexity of certain languages, automata can encode functions, and therefore groups, as well. These groups are surprisingly complicated, and indeed a classification of all groups generated by three state automata over the alphabet 2 = {0, 1} is an extremely difficult problem, though much impressive progress has been made [3]. This complexity can be extremely useful, as automaton groups have become a rich source of examples and counterexamples [11,15,4]. Automaton groups provide examples of finitely generated infinite torsion groups, with application to Burnside's Problem [7], and automata groups have provided the only examples of groups of intermediate growth, providing counterexamples to Milnor's Conjecture regarding the existence of such groups [6]. In fact, one of the simplest conceivable automata (shown below) already generates the lamplighter group Z/2Z ≀ Z [5]. Because of the complexity of general automaton groups, in this paper we restrict our attention to the abelian case, over the alphabet 2. For our purposes, then, a Mealey Automaton is a tuple A = (S, τ ) where S is the State Set, and τ : S × 2 → S × 2 is the transition function. Given a state s ∈ S, we can treat it as a length preserving function s : 2 * → 2 * as follows:
s(ε) = ε s(ax) = a ′ s ′ (x) (where (s ′ , a ′ ) = τ (s, a))
Here juxtaposition is concatenation, and the empty word ε is the identity in 2 * . Clearly we can treat s as a function on 2 ω , the set of infinite words, instead. In this case, automata provide a computable way of encoding complicated continuous functions from cantor space to itself, with ties to descriptive set theory [16]. If all of these functions are invertible, we let G(A) denote the group generated by these functions, with extra structure given by residuation (we write our groups additively, and denote the identity element by I).

The 0-residual (resp. 1-residual) of a function f ∈ G(A) is the unique func-
tion ∂ 0 f such that for all w, f (0w) = f (0)∂ 0 f (w) (resp. f (1w) = f (1)∂ 1 f (w)).
For a state s ∈ S, it is clear that ∂ a s = s ′ , where (s ′ , a ′ ) = τ (s, a). Since the generators are closed under residuation, so too is the group. We will call a function Odd if it flips its first bit, and Even otherwise, and we call an automaton Abelian or Trivial exactly when its group is. We represent τ graphically by labeling an edge from s 1 to s 2 by a/b exactly when τ (s 1 , a) = (s 2 , b).

So in the above automaton, α is odd, β is even, ∂ 0 α = β, and ∂ 1 α = α. Further, α(011) = 1β(11) = 11α(1) = 110. For a more in depth description of Mealy Automata and their properties, see [14,8].

Of great importance to abelian automata theory is the result of Nekrashevich and Sidki that every such group is either torsion free abelian or boolean [12]. Because of this classification, much of the interesting structure of these groups comes from the residuation functions. To that end, for the duration of this paper, homomorphisms and isomorphisms are all restricted to those which preserve the residuation structure in addition to the group structure. It is a theorem by Sutner [17] that G(A) is abelian iff for even states ∂ 0 f − ∂ 1 f = I and for odd states
∂ 1 f −∂ 0 f = γ,
where γ is independent of f . Moreover, the case γ = I corresponds precisely to the case where G(A) is boolean. We now restrict ourselves further to the case where G(A) is free abelian, that is to say G(A) ∼ = Z m for some m, and γ = I. It was shown by Nekrashevich and Sidki [12] that Z m itself can be considered the state set of an automaton. The odd (resp. even) states are exactly the vectors with odd (resp. even) first component. To define the transition function, we require a 1 2 − integral matrix A of Q-irreducible character. This automaton group is generated by a finite automaton exactly if A is a contraction (that is, all of its complex eigenvalues should have norm < 1). By a 1 2 − integral matrix, we mean a matrix of the form     where each a ij ∈ Z. These matrices all have characteristic polynomial
χ = x n + 1 2 g(x), where g ∈ Z[x]
and has constant term ±1. Since A : 2Z ⊕ Z m−1 → Z m , residuation acts as multiplication by A for even vectors, but for odd vectors we need to first make them even. To that end, letē be odd, and define residuation as follows:

Ifv is even:
∂ 0v = ∂ 1v = Av
Ifv is odd:
∂ 0v = A(v −ē) ∂ 1v = A(v +ē)
Following Sutner [17], we call this The Complete Automaton C(A,ē). Each G(A) can also be viewed as an automaton, by taking G(A) as states, and defining τ (f, i) = ∂ i f . A is a natural subautomaton of G(A) by identifying s ∈ A with s ∈ G(A). Nekrashevich and Sidki's theorem give us a purely linear algebraic method of discussing these automaton groups, since a restatement of their theorem says that every torsion free abelian automaton group G(A) is isomorphic to C(A,ē) for some A andē, and therefore every abelian automaton A is a subautomaton of some C(A,ē). A is easily seen to be unique up to GL(Q) similarity, and so we call it the Associated Matrix of A. However there are infinitely many valid choices forē, and classifying these is the goal this paper. We say a function f ∈ G(A) is Located atv ∈ C(A,ē) iff the isomorphism between G(A) and C(A,ē) sends f tov. Further, given any statev ∈ C(A,ē), closing {v} under residuation will result in a finite automaton Av since A is a contraction. So we say an automaton A is Located Atv ∈ C(A,ē) iff the isomorphism sends A to Av ⊆ C(A,ē). Note that the location of a function or an automaton, and indeed whether a location exists or not, will depend on the choice ofē. For a more detailed discussion of these linear algebraic methods and their origins, see [11,12] 


Principal Automata

To each abelian automaton we can associate a matrix as above, however each matrix can be associated to infinitely many automata. It was shown by Okano [13] that there is a distinguished automaton, now called the Principal Automaton A, associated to each matrix. A(A) is defined to be A = Aē 1 ∪ A −ē1 ⊆ C(A,ē 1 ), though there is a longstanding conjecture that in most cases this is the same machine as Aē 1 ⊆ C(A,ē 1 ). We will write A when the matrix is clear from context.

We shall soon see that the same element of A is located atē in C(A,ē) for allē, and so we call this group element δ ∈ G(A). Notice that for allē, ∂ 0 δ = A(ē −ē) =0 = I, and so ∂ 1 δ = γ, since for any odd vector ∂ 1v − ∂ 0v = γ. Thus, γ depends on only the matrix A, rather than on individual automata.

A is clearly minimal in terms of state complexity, as its states are distinct group elements of C(A,ē 1 ) and therefore definitionally have different behavior. However, A is also minimal in the subgroup relation for nontrivial automata sharing its matrix. While there are proofs of this claim which rely heavily on the ambient linear algebraic structure [13], we present here a difference construction which uses only the given automaton A to construct A. Thus every s ∈ A is already in G(A), and the subgroup relation follows.
Theorem 1. For each nontrivial A with associated matrix A, G(A(A)) ≤ G(A).
Proof. Let A be an abelian automaton with at least one odd state. Note that if A has no odd states, its group is trivial, so we may safely ignore it.

Put γ = ∂ 1 f − ∂ 0 f for f ∈ A odd, and construct a new automaton by closing γ under residuation. Note that this can be done using only information contained in A, since it is easy to check that:
∂ 0 (f + g) = ∂ 0 f + ∂ 1 g both odd ∂ 0 f + ∂ 0 g otherwise ∂ 1 (f + g) = ∂ 1 f + ∂ 0 g both odd ∂ 1 f + ∂ 1 g otherwise ∂ 0 (−f ) = −∂ 1 f ∂ 1 (−f ) = −∂ 0 f
Thus using the characterization by Sutner [17], that a state is odd iff it has distinct residuals, we can close γ under residuation using only information in A. Since γ ∈ G(A) and G(A) is residuation closed, this entire closure is a subset of G(A).

Another theorem by Sutner [17] says that adding a state which residuates into an existing automaton does not change the group. To that end, the above closure generates the same group as the above closure with an additional state δ residuating into γ and a self loop I. This new machine is exactly Aē 1 ⊆ C(A,ē 1 ). Any state in A e1 is the negation of a state in A e1 , and so A(A) = Aē 1 ∪ A −ē1 ⊆ G(A). Then G(A(A)) ≤ G(A), as desired.


An Example

Consider the following machine, A 3 2 :

f
f 1 f 0 1/0 0/1
Here the unlabeled transitions both copy the input bit, however these have been omitted for cleanliness.

Then by letting γ = ∂ 1 f − ∂ 0 f = f 1 − f 0 , and closing under residuation using the above algorithm, we construct the following machine (γ is shown at the bottom left):
I f 1 − f f 0 − f 1 f − f 0 f 0 − f f 1 − f 0 f − f 1 0/1 1/0 0/1 1/0 1/0 0/1 1/0 0/1
It is easy to check that this is the principal machine for A = −1 1 − 1 2 0

, and further that A 3 2 as above is located atē 1 ∈ C A, 3 2 When running the algorithm in this case, we do not need to separately add ±δ or the inverse machine. Here δ = f − f 1 , and the machine is already closed under negation. The Strongly Connected Component Conjecture predicts that this will be the case whenever A has characteristic polynomial other than x m − 1 2 , which corresponds to the so called sausage automata. Unfortunately, however, this conjecture is yet unproven, and so in the above proof we had to explicitly add in these extra states.


Group Extensions

Going forward, G = Z m will denote G(A) for some principal machine A.

G clearly admits representation as a Z[x] module where x ·v = A −1v , extended linearly. Further, since A has irreducible character so does A −1 . Thus this module is cyclic, and is generated byē 1 = δ. (Note that since A sends 2Z ⊕ Z m−1 to Z m , and therefore has multiples of 1 2 in general, A −1 sends Z m to 2Z ⊕ Z m−1 , and so has only integer entries). Now for p ∈ Z[x] with odd constant term, we write p · G in place of G(C(A, p · e 1 )). That is to say, p · G has as its states Z m and as its odd residuations ∂ 0v = A(v − p ·ē 1 ), and ∂ 1v = A(v + p ·ē 1 ). Since this module is cyclic, everyv arises as pv ·ē 1 where pv =v 0 +v 1 x + . . . +v m−1 x m−1 . We will only discuss polynomials p with an odd constant term, as this ensures p ·ē 1 , our residuation vector, is odd.

We call p · G the Group Extension of G by p. To justify this nomenclature, we first notice G ֒→ p · G for all p by the homomorphismv → p ·v. Further, we recognize that if p is not a unit in End G ∼ = Z m /χ * , this homomorphism is not surjective. That is to say G is a proper subgroup of p·G. Here, End G is the ring of all group endomorphisms, not necessarily preserving the residuation structure, and χ * is the characteristic polynomial of A −1 . This observation is true in more generality, as shown below.
Theorem 2. If rp = q in Z[x]
, then p · G ֒→ q · G, with a canonical injection ϕ r :v → r ·v. In particular, if r is a unit, then p · G ∼ = q · G.

Proof. Let rp = q, f ∈ p · G located atv. Consider f ′ ∈ q · G located at r ·v.

First note f and f ′ have the same parity, since r has odd constant term, and sov and r ·v have the same parity. Now, consider the residuals of f and f ′ .

If f is even, then
∂ 0 f ′ = A(r ·v) = r · Av = r · ∂ 0 f
If f is odd, then
∂ 0 f ′ = A(r ·v − q ·ē 1 ) = r · A(v − p ·ē 1 ) = r · ∂ 0 f A similar argument shows ∂ 1 f ′ = r · ∂ 1 f
If r is a unit, then r −1 also has odd constant term (since r * r −1 = 1 has odd constant term) and so ϕ r is an isomorphism with inverse ϕ r −1 .


Fractional Elements

As the previous proof shows, p ·v ∈ p · G, computes exactly the same function asv ∈ G. However, most vectors cannot be written as p ·v. What do they do as functions? We call such vectors (and their corresponding functions) Fractional, due to the following observation and theorem: Considerē 1 ∈ 3 · G. By the above theorem, 3ē 1 = δ, and so we should expect e 1 to behave like " 1 3 δ", and in fact it does.

In general,v ∈ p · G behaves like p −1 ·v ∈ G, (where p −1 comes from Q[x] and so p −1 ·v ∈ Q m ) and so Group Extensions give us access to fractions of functions from our base group G.

We will consider p −1 · Z m = {p −1 ·v |v ∈ Z m } as a subgroup of Q m . Residuation in this setting is given by ∂ 0v = A(v −ē 1 ) and ∂ 1v = A(v +ē 1 ). Here, instead of scaling up our residuation vector, we scale down all of our other vectors. Then we have access to certain elements of Q m , which are exactly the factional elements as noted before. Now δ is always located atē 1 .

Morally, however, this is just a different way of looking at the group extension construction. We justify this with the following theorem:
Theorem 3. For p ∈ Z[x] with odd constant term, p −1 · Z m ∼ = p · G.
Proof. Consider ϕ : p −1 · Z m → p · G by ϕ(p −1 ·v) =v. ϕ is clearly bijective, and is a homomorphism since:
ϕ(p −1 ·v 1 + p −1 ·v 2 ) = ϕ(p −1 · (v 1 +v 2 )) =v 1 +v 2 = ϕ(p −1 ·v 1 ) + ϕ(p −1 ·v 2 )
Further, ifv is even, then:
ϕ(∂ 0 (p −1 ·v)) = ϕ(A(p −1 ·v)) = ϕ(p −1 · Av) = Av = ∂ 0 (ϕ(p −1 ·v))
Ifv is odd, then:
ϕ(∂ 0 (p −1 ·v)) = ϕ(A(p −1 ·v −ē 1 )) = ϕ(p −1 · A(v − p ·ē 1 )) = A(v − p ·ē 1 ) = ∂ 0 (ϕ(p −1 ·v))
The proof for ∂ 1 is similar.

Thus we can view functions in p · G as fractions of functions in G. It is a natural question to ask which fractions are attainable in this way.

Clearly, for any f ∈ G, we can attain 1 k f for any odd k. Simply takev ∈ k · G for f located atv. However, fractions with even denominator are, in general, unattainable. 2 1 2 δ = δ should be an odd function, but no function, when doubled, is odd.


Characterizing Automata

Since each automaton A is a subautomaton of some C(A,ē), equivalently some p · G, there should be a minimalē (up to multiplication by units) which still has A as a subautomaton.

Notice that if we locate A atē 1 ∈ p · G, then there can be no smaller polynomial q (in the division ordering) which also places A at an integral position. The following theorem shows this is always possible.

Theorem 4. Every nontrivial abelian automaton A can be located atē 1 in p · G for some p.

Proof. It is a theorem by Sutner [17] that every finite state abelian automaton residuates into a strongly connected component, and further that this component generates the same group as the entire machine. So we may, with no loss of generality, assume our machine is strongly connected (that is, every state except possibly I has a path to every other state).

Let f be an odd state in A. Then at least one of ∂ 0 f and ∂ 1 f is not equal to f . So there is some nontrivial cycle from f to itself, which we can represent by a matrix equation relatingv f , andē. (Herev f is where f will be located, andē will be the residuation vector). We can then rearrange this equation to obtain
p 1 (A)v f = p 2 (A)ē. p 1 , p 2 ∈ Z[x]
, and A has irreducible character over Z. It is well known that the eigenvalues of p(A) are precisely p(λ) where λ is an eigenvalue of A, so A's invertibility implies the invertibility of both p 1 (A) and p 2 (A). Thus
e = p 2 (A) −1 p 1 (A)v f
Choosingv f =ē 1 gives a value for the residuation vectorē, and (since G is cyclic as a Z[x] module) a valueē induces a polynomial pē such that pē ·ē 1 =ē. Then, by construction, A is a subautomaton of p e · G, and is anchored with f at e 1 . As desired.

For any automaton A, we can now completely characterize in which C(A,ē) it can be located, and at what vectors. Simply locate A atē 1 ∈ p · G, and then to locate it at any odd vectorv, scale both sides by pv to see A located at v ∈ pvp · G. In the above proof, the choice ofv f =ē 1 was arbitrary, and we can directly locate A at a different odd vectorv ′ by settingv f =v ′ . This will give the same result as locating it atē 1 and then multiplying by pv′, again, by cyclicity. The same observation shows that, given some polynomial q, A is located somewhere in q if and only if p | q. Further, it will be located at exactly p −1 q · e 1 .


An Example

Recall the abelian automaton A 3 2 from earlier in the paper:
f 1/0 0/1
Say we want to findv andē such that A 3 2 is located atv ∈ C(A,ē). Using the algorithm described by Becker [2] gives
A = −1 1 − 1 2 0 . Then notice ∂ 0 ∂ 0 f = f . So A 2 (v f −ē) =v f , and A 2v f −v f = A 2ē . Thus e = A −2 (A 2 − I)v f Choosingv f =ē 1 givesē = 3 2 . Then f = 1 0 ∈ (3 + 2x) · G

Limiting Object

Since each p · G can be viewed as p −1 · Z m ⊆ Q m with residuation vectorē 1 , it is reasonable to consider the subgroup of Q m G = p p −1 · Z m (Recall we only include polynomials with odd constant term in this union) Notice that this group is universal, in the sense that it contains as subgroups each p · G. Further, it concretely shows the relationships between the various automata. In this setting, we see exactly why automata show up in multiple group extensions, and why the division ordering of polynomials is the characterizing factor. p · G is an approximation of G, where we scale up by a factor of p and take only the integral vectors (residuation is necessarily scaled up to match). In this structure, then, there is no unnecessary duplication of the location of automata, and there is no extra parameterē.


Conclusion

We have shown that the residuation vectorē corresponds to how fine an approximation of G one wants. This is because each C(A,ē) corresponds to pē · G, with progressively largerē corresponding to progressively more complicated fractional elements, which approximate G. Thus, the parameter really provides a way of interacting with these elements living in Q m as though they were in Z m , and so by computing in G (or a suitably large approximation) directly, we can remove the need for this parameter.

Further, the existence of the universal object G sheds new light on the connection between affine tiles [9,10] and abelian automata noted by Sutner [17]. Indeed it is easy to see that in G every strongly connected component (and thus every subautomaton of interest) has each vector in the attractor of the iterated function system given by the residuation functions {v → Av,v → A(v ±ē 1 )}. Thus, in particular, the size of the principal machine is bounded by the number of integral points in this attractor. Even in Z 2 , however, there are examples where this bound is not tight.

The relation between automata and polynomials discussed in this paper also provides a new take on a proof technique for the longstanding Strongly Connected Component Conjecture. This conjecture asserts that principal machines A have only one strongly connected component (plus the self looping identity state) whenever their matrix has a characteristic polynomial that is not of the form x n + 1 2 . The new way of looking at residuation vectors allows us to rewrite the residual functions as ∂ iv = A(v − (−1) i δ) forv odd. It is easy to see, then, that the following polynomials correspond to paths ending in δ, since they undo residuation: P ǫ (x) = 1 P w0 (x) = xP w (x) + 0 P w1 (x) = xP w (x) + 1 P w1 (x) = xP w (x) − 1 Sutner made a similar observation, and described Path Polynomials [17] which allow us to reason about the existence of directed paths between states in an automaton by purely algebraic means. However, these polynomials were clunky and not always defined, since they correspond to paths which start at δ, and so P w0 · δ is only well defined if P w · δ is even. Since the above path polynomials move backwards along transitions instead of forwards, they are always well defined.

The existence of a path polynomial p which is congruent to −1 mod χ * then shows the existence of a path from −δ to δ. Then to prove the SCC conjecture, it suffices to prove that whenever A does not have characteristic x n + 1 2 there is a polynomial p ∈ {−1, 0, 1}[x] which is congruent to −1 mod χ * . Efforts are underway to use this method to actually prove the conjecture.


2 a 12 . . . a 1n . . . . . . . . . . . .
For historical reasons we use Z m instead of Z n because traditionally n is reserved for the size of the state set of an automaton.
AcknowledgementsThis paper would not exist without the advice of my advisor Klaus Sutner. There aren't enough thanks for the hours of conversation I enjoyed.
Automatic presentations of infinite structures. Vince Bárány, Vince Bárány. Automatic presentations of infinite structures. 2007.

Representations and complexity of abelian automaton groups. T Becker, Senior ThesisT. Becker. Representations and complexity of abelian automaton groups. Senior Thesis, CMU. http://tjbecker.me/files/thesis.pdf, may 2018.

Groups generated by 3-state automata over a 2-letter alphabet. ii. I Bondarenko, R Grigorchuk, R Kravchenko, Y Muntyan, V Nekrashevych, D Savchuk, Z Šunić, Journal of Mathematical Sciences. 1561I. Bondarenko, R. Grigorchuk, R. Kravchenko, Y. Muntyan, V. Nekrashevych, D. Savchuk, and Z.Šunić. Groups generated by 3-state automata over a 2-letter alphabet. ii. Journal of Mathematical Sciences, 156(1):187-208, Jan 2009.

Automata, dynamical systems and groups. R R Grigorchuk, V V Nekrashevich, V I Sushchanski, Proc. Steklov Institute of Math. 231R. R. Grigorchuk, V. V. Nekrashevich, and V. I. Sushchanski. Automata, dynam- ical systems and groups. Proc. Steklov Institute of Math., 231:128-203, 2000.

The lamplighter group as a group generated by a a 2-state automaton, and its spectrum. R R Grigorchuk, A Zuk, Geom. Dedicata. 87R. R. Grigorchuk and A. Zuk. The lamplighter group as a group generated by a a 2-state automaton, and its spectrum. Geom. Dedicata, 87:209-244, 2001.

Milnor's problem on the growth of groups and its consequences. Rostislav Grigorchuk, Rostislav Grigorchuk. Milnor's problem on the growth of groups and its conse- quences, 2011.

On the burnside problem for periodic groups. Narain Gupta, Said Sidki, 182Mathematische ZeitschriftNarain Gupta and Said Sidki. On the burnside problem for periodic groups. Math- ematische Zeitschrift, 182(3):385-388, Sep 1983.

Algebraic Automata Theory. W M L Holcombe, Cambridge University PressW. M. L. Holcombe. Algebraic Automata Theory. Cambridge University Press, 1982.

Self-affine tiles in R n. J C Lagarias, Y Wang, Adv. Math. 121J. C. Lagarias and Y. Wang. Self-affine tiles in R n . Adv. Math., 121:21-49, 1996.

Integral self-affine tiles in R n ii. lattice tilings. J C Lagarias, Y Wang, J. Fourier Anal. Appl. 31J. C. Lagarias and Y. Wang. Integral self-affine tiles in R n ii. lattice tilings. J. Fourier Anal. Appl., 3(1):83-102, 1997.

Self-Similar Groups. V Nekrashevych, Math. Surveys and Monographs. 117AMSV. Nekrashevych. Self-Similar Groups, volume 117 of Math. Surveys and Mono- graphs. AMS, 2005.

Automorphisms of the binary tree: state-closed subgroups and dynamics of 1/2-endomorphisms. V Nekrashevych, S Sidki, Cambridge University PressV. Nekrashevych and S. Sidki. Automorphisms of the binary tree: state-closed subgroups and dynamics of 1/2-endomorphisms. Cambridge University Press, 2004.

Invertible binary transducers and automorphisms of the binary tree. T Okano, CMUMS ThesisT. Okano. Invertible binary transducers and automorphisms of the binary tree. MS Thesis, CMU, may 2015.

Elements of Automata Theory. J Sakarovitch, Cambridge University PressJ. Sakarovitch. Elements of Automata Theory. Cambridge University Press, 2009.

Automorphisms of one-rooted trees: Growth, circuit structure, and acyclicity. S Sidki, J. Math. Sciences. 1001S. Sidki. Automorphisms of one-rooted trees: Growth, circuit structure, and acyclicity. J. Math. Sciences, 100(1):1925-1943, 2000.

Descriptive Set Theoretic Methods in Automata Theory. M Skrzypczak, Springer-VerlagBerlin HeidelbergM. Skrzypczak. Descriptive Set Theoretic Methods in Automata Theory. Springer- Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2016.

. K Sutner, Abelian Invertible AutomataK. Sutner. Abelian Invertible Automata.