Spiking Inception Module for Multi-layer Unsupervised Spiking Neural Networks


Mingyuan Meng 
The School of Electronics and Information Technology Sun Yat
The School of Electronics and Information Technology Sun Yat-sen University
The School of Electronics and Information Technology Sun Yat-sen University
The School of Electronics and Information Technology Sun Yat-sen University
sen University
510006, 510006, 510006, 510006Guangzhou, Guangzhou, Guangzhou, GuangzhouChina, China, China, China

Xingyu Yang 
The School of Electronics and Information Technology Sun Yat
The School of Electronics and Information Technology Sun Yat-sen University
The School of Electronics and Information Technology Sun Yat-sen University
The School of Electronics and Information Technology Sun Yat-sen University
sen University
510006, 510006, 510006, 510006Guangzhou, Guangzhou, Guangzhou, GuangzhouChina, China, China, China

Shanlin Xiao xiaoshlin@mail.sysu.edu.cn 
The School of Electronics and Information Technology Sun Yat
The School of Electronics and Information Technology Sun Yat-sen University
The School of Electronics and Information Technology Sun Yat-sen University
The School of Electronics and Information Technology Sun Yat-sen University
sen University
510006, 510006, 510006, 510006Guangzhou, Guangzhou, Guangzhou, GuangzhouChina, China, China, China

Zhiyi Yu yuzhiyi@mail.sysu.edu.cn 
The School of Electronics and Information Technology Sun Yat
The School of Electronics and Information Technology Sun Yat-sen University
The School of Electronics and Information Technology Sun Yat-sen University
The School of Electronics and Information Technology Sun Yat-sen University
sen University
510006, 510006, 510006, 510006Guangzhou, Guangzhou, Guangzhou, GuangzhouChina, China, China, China

Spiking Inception Module for Multi-layer Unsupervised Spiking Neural Networks
Spiking neural networksPattern recognitionUnsu- pervised learningImage classification
Spiking Neural Network (SNN), as a brain-inspired approach, is attracting attentions due to its potential to produce ultra-high-energy-efficient hardware. Competitive learning based on Spike-Timing-Dependent Plasticity (STDP) is a popular method to train unsupervised SNN. However, previous unsupervised SNNs trained through this method are limited to shallow networks with only one learnable layer and can't achieve satisfactory results when compared with multi-layer SNNs. In this paper, we ease this limitation by: 1)We propose Spiking Inception (Sp-Inception) module, inspired by the Inception module in Artificial Neural Network (ANN) literature. This module is trained through STDPbased competitive learning and outperforms baseline modules on learning capability, learning efficiency, and robustness; 2)We propose Pooling-Reshape-Activate (PRA) layer to make Sp-Inception module stackable; 3)We stack multiple Sp-Inception modules to construct multi-layer SNNs. Our method greatly exceeds baseline methods on image classification tasks and reaches state-of-the-art results on MNIST dataset among existing unsupervised SNNs.

I. INTRODUCTION

In recent years, artificial intelligence, especially neural network, has made good progress in machine perception and pattern recognition, reaching or even surpassing human in some application scenarios. Artificial Neural Network (ANN) has shown good performance in pattern recognition with deep learning, but ANN is highly computing-intensive and requires many global computations. Therefore, more and more scholars begin to focus on the researches of brain-inspired Spiking Neural Network (SNN) possessing more biological reality and less global computations [1]. The renewal of neural network is coming: neural network is evolving from the second generation, ANN, to the third generation, SNN [2].

In contrast to traditional ANN whose information is represented by numerical values, SNN uses spike trains to represent information. Although there is a gap existing between the performance of ANN and SNN on cognition tasks, SNN's power consumption and latency are greatly reduced as a consequence of SNN's data-driven, event-based style of computing [17]. Existing SNN algorithms could be classified into three types: Supervised [4][5], unsupervised [7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14] and conversion [17][18]. Supervised/unsupervised means SNN is trained with/without using label information, while conversion denotes algorithms of training an ANN first and then converting it into SNN to circumvent the difficulties in training SNN directly. Currently, supervised/conversion algorithms achieve superior performance. Despite all this, in this paper we focus on unsupervised SNN algorithms, because labeled data is expensive in many application scenarios and unsupervised methods are considered to be more biologically plausible and more similar to the real learning mechanism of human brain [3].

Competitive learning based on Spike-Timing-Dependent Plasticity (STDP) is a popular learning method to train unsupervised SNN. However, previous unsupervised SNNs trained through this method are limited to shallow networks with only one learnable layer [7][8][9][10][11][12] and can't achieve satisfactory results when compared with multi-layer SNNs. As is shown in Fig.1(a), baseline-FC module (proposed in [7]) and baseline-LC module (proposed in [8]) are two examples of SNN using STDPbased competitive learning. They are both 2-layer networks where input layer is connected to output layer in a Fully-Connected (FC) or Locally-Connected (LC) fashion and output neurons (i.e. neurons in output layer) compete with each other. The baseline modules are limited to 2-layer networks due to its low learning efficiency and low spiking intensity (The reasons for this limitation is thoroughly discussed in Section VI-B). To overcome this limitation and get stronger unsupervised SNN algorithms, our main contributions in this paper are: 1)Inspired by the Inception module [20] in ANN literature, we incorporate the Split-and-Merge strategy (detailed in Section II-A) to propose Spiking Inception (Sp-Inception) module ( Fig.1(b)/(c)) which outperforms baseline modules on learning capability, learning efficiency and robustness; 2)We propose Pooling-Reshape-Activate (PRA) layer to reduce output dimension and enhance output spiking intensity, thus making Sp-Inception module stackable; 3) With the help of PRA layer ,we stack multiple Sp-Inception modules and get multi-layer unsupervised SNNs which surpass baseline modules on image classification tasks and achieve state-of-the-art results on MNIST dataset when compared with existing unsupervised SNNs.


II. RELATED WORKS


A. Inception Module

Inception module was first proposed by [20] and then evolved to many variants [21][22] in the ANN literature. The family of Inception models has demonstrated that carefully designed topologies are able to achieve compelling results with low theoretical complexity. An important common property of Inception modules is a Split-and-Merge strategy: The input is split into a few individual pathways processed by a set of specialized filters (e.g. 3 × 3 , 5 × 5 , 7 × 7 convolutional kernels) and then merged by concatenation. Under this strategy, Inception modules can integrate multi-scale spatial information and reduce computing complexities. Moreover, multiple Inception modules could be stacked together to form a very deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [20].

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to incorporate the principle of Inception module into unsupervised SNNs. BiosNet [10] utilizes an Inception-like multi-pathway unsupervised SNN, but its network is not stackable and limited to a 3-layer network. Reference [18] builds spiking Inception architecture but trains it through conversion method.


B. Unsupervised Learning and Multi-layer SNNs

Reference [7] (baseline-FC module) is one of the earliest papers to use STDP-based competitive learning to train unsupervised SNN. It achieves state-of-the-art result on handwritten digits classification task in 2015 through a simple 2-layer FC SNN. Reference [8] (baseline-LC module) proposes to use LC connections to replace the FC connections in [7] and gets a LC SNN with higher learning efficiency and robustness. Reference [9] tries to incorporate 'ability to forget' into [7] and proposes Adaptive Synaptic Plasticity (ASP). In contrast to [9], BiosNet [10] designs Memory Reserved neurON (MRON) model inspired by 'recognition memory' of human brain and uses it to construct a multi-pathway unsupervised SNN. Among them, references [7][8] are chosen to be baseline modules, because they could be regarded as the basis of our Sp-Inception module, all of us focusing on network topologies.

Since the SNN algorithms mentioned above are all limited to 2/3-layer networks with only one learnable layer, they are gradually exceeded by some multi-layer SNNs trained through supervised/conversion methods. Therefore, some scholars try to discard competitive learning and rely on unsupervised multilayer convolutional SNNs [13][14]. These methods reach superior performance, but their SNNs are only used to extract image features and they require extra supervised classifier (e.g. SVM) to finish final classifications, which makes them regarded as semi-supervised rather than unsupervised algorithms in some literatures [8,10]. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to use STDP-based competitive learning to train multilayer unsupervised SNN and get significant performance improvements.


III. BACKGROUND

In this section, we introduce SNN background including computing unit model, spiking coding scheme, and competitive learning theory. The methods described below are utilized widely [7][8][9][10] and are the default choices for the baseline modules and Sp-Inception module in the experiments.


A. Neuron and Synapse Model

Spiking neuron model is used to describe the behaviors of SNN's basic computing unit. Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) model is one of the most popular spiking neuron models and is used in this paper. Moreover, there are many more complicated models like Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) model [23] and Izhikevich model [24]. We only use simple LIF model to build our SNN modules for emphasizing the effectiveness of our contributions. Following [7][8], the baseline-FC module uses a conductancebased LIF model, while the baseline-LC module, as well as our SP-Inception module, use a current-based LIF model. Specifically, the dynamics of the current-based LIF model is given by:  (2)

where -(.) is the voltage (membrane potential), -012) is the neuron's resting voltage, 4(.) denotes the total input current to the neuron, 3 is synaptic resistance, and % &/5 are the time constant of -(.)/4(.). In (2), A is the number of presynaptic neurons connected to the neuron, 8 9 is the synapse between the neuron and presynaptic neuron < 9 , and : 9 is the synaptic weight of 8 9 .The function 7 (8 9 ) is equal to 1/-1 when 8 9 is excitatory/inhibitory synapse. The Function ;(< 9 , .) is equal to 1 when < 9 fires a spike at time . , otherwise it's equal to 0. According to (1) and (2), -(.) and 4(.) decay exponentially to -012) and 0 respectively when no presynaptic neuron fires spikes. At the occurrence of a spike from an excitatory/ inhibitory synapse, the 4(.) increases/decreases by the weight of this synapse, thus leading to the change of membrane potential -(.). When -(.) reaches or exceeds a threshold B, the neuron fires a spike to downstream neurons and -(.) is reset to a voltage -0121) . After firing a spike, the neuron does not integrate input spikes for a refractory period C 01D . Moreover, a homoeostasis mechanism in [7] is used to ensure that no neuron can emit excessive spikes and dominate the firing activity. The homoeostasis is an adaptive threshold scheme as follows: We also use synapse model to describe the dynamics of synaptic weight. STDP model is widely used in unsupervised SNNs [7][8][9][10][11][12] and evolves to many variants like additive STDP [26], triplet STDP [15]. In this paper, we use a very basic STDP rule as follows: 
∆: = L M HN2) O H01 :ℎQ< RS8.8T<UR.VW 8RVXQ −M H01 O HN2) :ℎQ< RYQ8T<UR.VW 8RVXQ(4)

B. Spiking Encoding and Decoding

Information in SNN is represented by discrete spike trains, but each pixel value in the input image is an analog value. Therefore, we need spiking encoding to convert the analog pixel values into the discrete spike trains. In this paper, we adopt a popular rate-based spiking encoding scheme used in [7][8][9][10]. Input neuron (i.e. neurons in the input layer) is a generator of Poisson-distributed spike trains, and each input neuron corresponds to a pixel of the input image. Each pixel value is encoded as a Poisson-distributed spike train whose average frequency is equal to the pixel value multiplied by an encoding parameter [. Moreover, we adopt the adaptive encoding scheme used in [7], since the module might be insensitive to some images and larger [ is required sometimes.

Since the output of SNN module is also spike trains, we need to decode the output to attain the predicted results when applying trained SNN module to image classification tasks. In general, unsupervised SNNs with rate-based spiking encoding use votebased methods for spiking decoding [7][8][9][10]. Following [7][8], the baseline-FC module uses the classic vote-based decoding scheme, while the baseline-LC module utilizes n-gram method [19] (In detail, n = 2). In Sp-Inception module, we adopt VFA decoding layer proposed in [10], because we find this method outperforms other vote-based decoding schemes when implemented in our Sp-Inception module.


C. STDP-based Competitive Learning

STDP rule described in Section III-A adjusts the synaptic weight based on the relative timing of pre/postsynaptic spikes. Under the STDP model, if a presynaptic spike tends to occur immediately before a postsynaptic spike, the synaptic weight is made bigger; If a presynaptic spike tends to occur immediately after a postsynaptic spike, the synaptic weight is made smaller. Based on the former phenomenon, STDP-based competitive learning was proposed and widely used in many unsupervised SNNs [7][8][9][10][11][12]. That's also the reason why we set M HN2) >> M H01 to emphasize the former phenomenon.

The principle of STDP-based competitive learning is each neuron learns and represents a prototype (which is initialized randomly and gradually becomes similar to the real inputs through learning). Every time a training sample is input, the neurons compete with each other and only the one whose represented prototype is more similar to this input sample can fire spikes and increase its STDP-modifiable (i.e. modified based on STDP rule) synaptic weights to make its represented prototype even more similar to this input sample. Those winner neurons are finally used to predict the class of the testing sample because they respond so much to the samples similar to their represented prototypes. The baseline-FC/LC modules and our Sp-Inception module all are based on this learning principle. As is shown in Fig. 2, each neurons of competition layer is connected to the neurons sharing the same receptive field (RF) (i.e. sharing the same set of presynaptic neurons) with fixed inhibitory synapses, which means that each neuron competes for learning to represent a prototype appearing in real input samples.


IV. METHOD

In this section we illustrate our main contributions: in Section IV-A we detail the design of Sp-Inception module which could be used as an image classifier directly; in Section IV-B we explore the method of stacking multiple Sp-Inception modules to build multi-layer SNNs possessing superior performance. 


A. Spiking Inception (Sp-Inception) Module

Inspired by Inception module in ANN literature [19][20][21][22], we design naive version of our Sp-Inception model. As is shown in Fig. 1(b), the naive version is composed of several processing pathways connected to input layer in FC/LC fashion. Each pathway computes and performs competition independently. Then, they are reshaped to one-dimension and concatenated together. The input neurons are the generators of Poissondistributed spike trains, and the neurons in competition layer are LIF models. Following the principle of competitive learning described in Section III-C, the input layer and competition layers are connected with excitatory STDP-modified synapses, and the neurons in competition layer are interconnected with fixed inhibitory synapses. LC connection has the same topology with convolutional connection but without using shared weight. We use kernel size X, stride 8 to define RF (only square kernel is used in this paper) and use ; to denote feature map number. For FC connection, we also use ; to denote neuron number, because FC connection actually is a special case of LC connection whose kernel size is equal to input size. In this case, a neuron in FC connections could be regarded as a feature map.

In the naive version of Sp-Inception module, we make sure there is at least one FC pathway to cope with global feature. Then, other topology settings including pathway number, FC/LC choice, and parameters X/8/; are decided empirically. However, we find there is a problem on naive version that the learning speed of each pathway is unbalanced and the overall learning speed is hindered by its slowest pathway. Especially when a pathway's ; is set to be much larger than ones of other pathways, this pathway would learn much more slowly, but sometimes this situation is inevitable for achieving better module performance. Since the learning efficiency of a pathway mainly depends on its feature map number ; (shown in Section V-A(2)), to solve this problem we refine the naive version by: 1)We divide a pathway with lager ; into several pathways with smaller ;. e.g. A pathway with ; = 1600 could be divided into four pathways with ; = 400. By doing so, the learning speed of this pathway improves with negligible performance degradation. 2)We restrict each pathway's ; to be same. By doing so, the learning speed of each pathway becomes balanced. Finally we get balanced version of Sp-Inception module in Fig. 1(c).


B. Multi-module Architecture

To overcome the limitations of previous unsupervised SNN possessing only one learnable layer, we explore the possibility of building multi-layer SNN by stacking Sp-Inception modules. However, although Inception module has shown some amazing improvements (shown in Section V-A), there are still two problems existing when stacking modules: 1)Sp-Inception module's output dimension is much more than its input dimension, which means that data dimension will explode if we directly stack modules without dimension reduction; 2)Sp-Inception module's low output spiking intensity makes it unpractical to stimulate its downstream module (detailed in Section VI-B).

In order to solve these two problems, we propose Pooling-Reshape-Activate (PRA) layer to connect two Sp-Inception modules. Fig. 3 shows an example on how to stack Sp-Inception modules through PRA layer. As is shown in Fig. 3, PRA layer is inserted between two modules and also is used to be the input layer of latter module (in place of original input layer). What PRA layer does are: 1)Reduce output dimension of former module by pooling with size a ; 2)Reshape one-dimensional layer into three dimensions 28 × 28 × c (c is input channels of the latter module); 3)Activate the latter module through an adaptive pooling mechanism. The PRA layer is composed of LIF model, so its spiking intensity could increase if its pooling connections' weights are enlarged. In adaptive encoding scheme used in first module, encoding parameter [ is adjusted according to module's output spiking intensity. Similarly, in adaptive pooling mechanism, pooling connections of a PRA layer share the same weigh : H and this : H is adjusted according to module's output spiking intensity. When inputting an image, if any module's output spiking intensity is too low, this module's : H (or [ if this module is the first one) will increase by a constant and then this image is input again. With the help of PRA layer, we can make sure that each module's output spikes are enough for activating its downstream modules.

Theoretically, this architecture could be expanded to a very deep multi-layer SNN if computing resources are sufficient. But we also need to be careful to avoid overfitting. In the following experiments, we stack four Sp-Inception modules and get good results on it. More details about this four-module architecture including Sp-Inception module choices and PRA layer settings are shown in Section V-B.


V. EXPERIMENTS

In this section, we evaluate the proposed Sp-Inception module (a single module directly used as a classifier) and multilayer SNN consisting of multiple stacked Sp-Inception modules. All training and testing procedures are implemented on the MNIST dataset [16]. In MNIST dataset, there are 70,000 handwritten digital images labeled from 0 to 9 and each image is 28 × 28 in size. Among them, 60,000 images are in the training set and 10,000 images are in the testing set. More experimental details including hyperparameter settings, training procedures, experimental environment, and implementations of baseline modules are presented in the Appendix A.


A. Sp-Inception Module Evaluation 1) Learning Capability

We test modules on the whole testing set of MNIST (10,000 images) and report testing results in Table I. We use (X, 8) × ; to denote kernel size, stride, and feature map number of a LC topology and use only ; to denote neuron number of a FC topology (As is mentioned in Section IV-A, each neuron in FC Fig. 3. Illustration on how to stack Sp-Inception modules through PRA layer. PRA layer is insert between two modules and performs Pooling-Reshape-Activate. topology could be regarded as a feature map). As is shown in Table I, the modules with larger ; exhibit better testing results but utilize more neurons and synapses. From this perspective, Sp-Inception module is more efficient on using resources. Compared with baseline modules, Sp-Inception modules can achieve higher testing results with less neurons and synapses used (e.g. Sp-Inception I-III). If we allow Sp-Inception modules to utilize more resources (equal to or even more than ones used by baseline modules), they can get significantly improved testing results (e.g. Sp-Inception IV-VI). Note that we don't test Sp-Inception module with ; > 448 , because Sp-Inception modules with ; ≤ 448 have exhibited satisfactory results, and keeping increasing ; will make Sp-Inception module utilize excessive resources but gain negligible improvement.


2) Learning Efficiency

To evaluate the learning efficiency of Sp-Inception module, in Fig. 4 we report the testing results of the modules trained with varying number of training samples. In Fig. 4(a) Fig. 4(b).

Through Fig. 4, we find that: 1)The learning efficiency of a module mainly depends on its feature map number ;. e.g. In Fig.  4(b), baseline-FC I, baseline-LC II, and Sp-Inception V show  similar learning efficiency, and baseline-FC II, baseline-LC III also show close learning efficiency, even though their learning capabilities are totally different. 2)Compared with baseline modules, Sp-Inception modules achieve better testing results with less feature map number, thus making Sp-Inception III (; = 200) learn faster than baseline-FC IV ( ; = 6400) and baseline-LC III (; = 800 ). In Fig. 4(a), when modules are trained with 10000 samples, baseline-FC/LC only achieve about 45%/86% testing results, while Sp-Inception III has achieved more than 93% testing result. By the way, the first find above explains why we finally use balanced version of Sp-Inception module (Fig. 1(c)) instead of original naive version ( Fig. 1(b)).


3) Robustness

Robustness is network's resistance again external damage and interferences. To evaluate it, we follow the testing methods used in [8,10]. Concretely, we randomly delete some learnable synapses or output neurons of trained baseline-FC IV/baseline-LC III/Sp-Inception III with probability w '1I1)1 , then we report their testing results in Fig. 5. As can be seen in Fig. 5, the three modules without any neuron/synapse deletion maintain the results of about 94.8% on MNIST, while increasing w '1I1)1 leads to a smooth degradation in testing results. Fig. 5(a) shows the testing results after deleting neurons with probability w '1I1)1 and our Sp-Inception module exhibits the highest robustness. Sp-Inception III maintains nearly 90% and 80% results respectively with even 92% and 98% of neurons deleted, while baseline-FC IV and baseline-LC III maintain nearly 80% and 85% results with only 80% of neurons deleted. Similarly, Fig. 5(b) shows the testing results after deleting synapses with probability w '1I1)1 and our Sp-Inception module still exhibits the highest robustness. Sp-Inception III maintains nearly 90% and 80% results respectively with even 80% and 92% of synapses deleted, while baseline-FC IV and baseline-LC III just maintain nearly 70% and 64% results with only 80% of synapses deleted.


B. Multi-module Archiecture Evaluation

Due to the limitations of experimental time and computing resources, we only stack four Sp-Inception modules together and train them as a whole multi-layer SNN. In four-module architecture, we can use the outputs of any middle modules to perform testing and see the improvement got by stacking more modules. In Table II, we report testing results along with the number of neurons and synapses we've used after we stack each module. a denotes pooling size of PRA layer. As is shown in Table II, the testing result increases as more modules are stacked, which shows our multi-module architecture works.

We also compare our method with existing unsupervised SNN algorithms on MNIST dataset. The testing results of compared algorithms are found in corresponding references and then listed in Table III. Note that semi-supervised algorithms like [13][14] are excluded because the comparison becomes unfair when they use extra supervised classifier like SVM. As is shown in Table III, our methods reach state-of-the-art results on MNIST dataset. Admittedly, our method's result is not the best in Table III. But our contributions are mainly about architecture design and we use very basic neuron model, spiking coding, and learning rule. Therefore, our method absolutely could be in conjunction with other more advanced SNN components (e.g. ASP rule [9], MRON model [10], etc.) and assembled into a better recognition system.


VI. DISCUSSION


A. Why does Sp-Inception module outperform baseline modules?

Sp-Inception module, as well as Inception module [20][21][22], have some common properties with visual cortex of human brain. For instance, in the same area of visual cortex neurons possess different RF sizes and work efficiently in parallel [6]. It's well known that visual cortex performs amazing learning capability, learning efficiency, and robustness, which motivates us to answer this question from this perspective.

In Sp-Inception module, multiple processing pathways with different topologies (e.g. FC fashion, LC fashion with different RF sizes) enable the module to collect multi-scale spatial information, thus helping improve its learning capability. Moreover, this design enables each processing pathway to learn and compute in parallel, which significantly enhances the learning efficiency and robustness. Actually, reference [8] has proven that baseline-LC module exceeds baseline-FC module on learning efficiency and robustness. We take a further step to combine baseline-LC module and multiple processing pathways.


B. Why is Sp-Inception module, rather than baseline modules, stackable?

Baseline-FC module is not stackable partly because it learns too slow. Referring to [7] and our experiments, the baseline-FC module with 6400 neurons needs to be trained with 900,000 iteration, which is ten times slower than Sp-Inception module. If baseline-FC modules are stacked, learning efficiency is even lower. However, merely this answer is not enough because baseline-LC module learns much faster but is still unstackable. To fully answer this question, in Table IV we report average output spiking intensities of modules (baseline-FC IV, baseline-LC III, Sp-Inception IV) and average input spiking intensities when training them. It's well shown that, compared with input spiking intensity, the output spiking intensity of baseline module is too low to motivate another module. However, with the help of PRA layer, the output spiking intensity of Sp-inception module is high enough to motivate its downstream modules.


C. Why do stacked Sp-Inception Modules perform better than single module?

To answer this question, we look inside the network and see what each stacked module receives when processing an image. In Fig. 6, we visualize input spiking distribution of each stacked module tested in Section V-C. Fig. 6(a)/(b) show average input spiking distributions for four stacked modules when processing images of digit 0/1 and each dark spot denotes the possibility of module receiving input spikes in this position (the darker it's, the more likely the module receives input spikes). Fig. 6(c) shows the overlap of two input spiking distributions. As is shown in Fig. 6, we find that the overlap area becomes smaller with more modules stacked. This gives us a possible assumption: The input received by later module is more spatially distinctive because the input spikes corresponding to different classes tend to occur in different positions, which makes it easier for later module to classify these inputs.

To further validate this assumption, we calculate Mean Spatial Distribution Similarity (MSDS, detailed in Appendix B) of input spiking maps in different classes and visualize them in Fig.  7. In each iteration, we record input spike number in each position and use it as pixel value to draw input spiking map. In Fig.  7, if MSDS value is closer to 1, input spiking maps have more similar spatial distribution and vice versa. Moreover, we also report the average MSDS values alongside the figure. As is shown in Fig. 7, the MSDS of input spiking maps tends to decrease with more module stacked, which validates the above assumption.

VII. CONCLUSION In this paper, we propose Sp-Inception module to construct unsupervised SNNs to handle image classification tasks. Sp-Inception module not only could be used directly as an unsupervised classifier but also is stackable to build multi-layer unsupervised SNNs. In Section V, we comprehensively evaluate the proposed Sp-Inception module and the multi-layer SNN composed of stacked Sp-Inception modules. It's shown in experimental results that: 1)Sp-Inception module outperforms the baseline modules on learning capability, learning efficiency, and robustness; 2)Multi-module architecture exhibits better classification performance than single Sp-Inception module and reaches state-of-the-art results on MNIST dataset when compared with existing purely unsupervised (i.e. not using extra supervised classifier like SVM) SNN algorithms. In Section VI, we explore the reasons why we get these improvements: 1)Multiple kernels (i.e. RF sizes) and high parallelism of Sp-Inception module help explain its superior performance; 2)The spiking intensity is tested to answer why Sp-Inception module, rather than baseline modules, is stackable; 3)The input of each module in a multi-module architecture is visualized to show each module's effect on its downstream module.

The Sp-Inception module eases the limitations of previous shallow unsupervised SNN (the baseline modules). Its high learning efficiency and the proposed PRA layer make Sp-Inception module stackable to form multi-layer unsupervised SNNs. Note that the results in this paper are not the ceiling of our method. Better performance could be achieved if more Sp-Inception modules are stacked or better hyperparameters are found. Moreover, in order to emphasize the effectiveness of our contributions (mainly about architecture design), other SNN components (e.g. neuron model, synapse model, spiking coding scheme, etc.) are very simple. Our contributions could be in conjunction with other more sophisticated SNN components to get stronger SNN algorithms.


APPENDIX


A. Experimental Details

Our experiments run on Python2.7 on a 8-core system with 32-GB RAM in Ubuntu environment. All codes are based on an open-source simulators, Brian 2.2.3 [25]. For baseline modules, we strictly follow the network architecture, parameter settings, training procedures in [7][8] to realize baseline modules except   that: 1)Inhibitory layer in [7] is replaced by inter-connections of excitatory layer; 2)Input size in [8] is changed from 20 × 20 to 28 × 28. For our Sp-Inception module, all hyperparameters are empirical values (in Table V). We estimate parameter value scopes from related references [7][8][9][10][11][12] and then decide them through cross-validation in which we randomly choose 10,000 images from training set as validation set.

After hyperparameters are decided, we use all 60,000 images of training set to train our network. We adopt training procedures used in [10] and weight normalization used in [8,10]. Moreover, in order to speed up simulations of multi-module architecture, we forward spiking activities module by module (i.e. we record neuron activities of the former module and then use them to stimulate the latter module.) rather than simulate the whole multi-module network simultaneously. But this change won't cause any problem because each module computes locally and is not interfered by its later modules.


B. Mean Spatial Distribution Similarity (MSDS)

To measure the mean similarity between spatial distributions of images in two sets, we define Mean Spatial Distribution Similarity (MSDS). Assume that there are A x images in set c x and A y images in set c y . Then, each image is normalized so that its mean pixel value is equal to 1. The MSDS between c x and c y is defined as follows: 

where SDS is spatial distribution similarity between two images, { is the size of image 4 x /4 y , and 4 x (X)/4 y (X) denote the k th pixel value of image 4 x /4 y . 

Fig. 1 .
1SNN modules with STDP-based competitive learning. (a) Baseline-FC/LC module. (b) Sp-Inception module, naive version. (c) Sp-Inception module, balanced version.


= (-)F012 − B(.))(1 − ;(<, .)) + % E B HIJ2 ;(<, .) (3) where < denotes the neuron itself and % E is time constant of B(.) . Concretely, each time the neuron < fires a spike, the threshold B increases by a constant B HIJ2 , or it decays exponentially to a voltage -)F012 .


where M H01 /M HN2) are the pre/postsynaptic learning rates, and O H01 /O HN2) are pre/postsynaptic traces. The update of synaptic weight : occurs when pre/postsynaptic neuron fires a spike (named pre/postsynaptic spike). The synaptic traces are used to record the timing of the previous spikes. O H01 /O HN2) is set to 1 when pre/postsynaptic spike is fired, or they decay exponentially to 0 with % H01 /% HN2) as their time constant. Note that we set M HN2) >> M H01 to emphasize the effects of pre-synaptic neurons on post-synaptic neurons (further explained in Section III-C).

Fig. 2 .
2Illustration for competitive learning: neurons of competition layer are interconnected by fixed inhibitory synapse and compete with other neurons sharing the same RF (i.e. having the same set of presynaptic neurons).


, we compare the modules with similar learning capability: baseline-FC IV, baseline-LC III, and Sp-Inception III all exhibit close learning capabilities of about 94.8% results when fully trained. Then, we compare the modules with similar feature map number ; in Fig. 4(b): baseline-FC I, baseline-LC II, and Sp-Inception V all have 400 feature maps; baseline-FC II and baseline-LC III both have 800 feature maps. Since Sp-Inception module with ; = 800 is impractical for implementation, it's not tested in

Fig. 5 .Fig. 4 .
54Testing results of modules whose neurons/synpses are ramdonly deleted with varying probability w '1I1)1 . (a) Neuron deletion. (b)Synapse deletion Testing results of modules trained with varying number of training samples. (a) Comparison of modules with similar learning capability. (b) Comparison of modules with similar feature map number ;.

Fig. 7 .
7MSDS matrixs over input spiking maps of 10 classes from 0 to 9.

Fig. 6 .
6Input spiking distributions of each stacked modules. (a) Input images of digit 0. (b) Input images of digit 1. (c) Overlap.

TABLE I .
ICOMPARISON ON LEARNING CAPABILITY AMONG BASELINE MODULES AND SP-INCEPTION MODULEModule Id 
Topology 
e efghie e jkelmjf Result 

Baseline-FC 

I 
FC, ; = 400 
400 
473K 87.80% 
II 
FC, ; = 800 
800 
1267K 90.12% 
III 
FC, ; = 1600 
1600 
3814K 91.94% 
IV 
FC, ; = 6400 
6400 45977K 94.88% 

Baseline-LC 

I 
LC, (16,6) × 100 
900 
320K 91.36% 
II 
LC, (16,6) × 400 
3600 
2361K 93.97% 
III 
LC, (16,6) × 800 
7200 
7603K 94.83% 
IV 
LC, (16,6) × 1000 
9000 11304K 95.12% 

Sp-Inception 

I 
n 

FC, ; = 112 
LC, (24,4) × 112 
LC, (16,6) × 112 

r 
1568 
778K 93.22% 

II 
n 

FC, ; = 224 
LC, (24,4) × 224 
LC, (16,6) × 224 

r 
3136 
1909K 94.59% 

III s 

(FC, ; = 200) × 4 
(LC, (24,4) × 200) × 
LC, (16,6) × 200 

2t 4200 
2849K 94.73% 

IV 
n 

FC, ; = 448 
LC, (24,4) × 448 
LC, (16,6) × 448 

r 
6272 
5224K 95.57% 

V s 

(FC, ; = 400) × 4 
(LC, (24,4) × 400) × 
LC, (16,6) × 400 

2t 8400 
7379K 95.64% 

VI 
u 

FC, ; = 448 
LC, (24,4) × 448 
LC, (16,6) × 448 
LC, (10,6) × 448 

v 
13440 9153K 95.85% 



TABLE III .
IIICOMPARISON OF TESTING RESULTS ON MNIST DATASET AMONG EXISTING UNSUPERVISED SNN ALGORITHMS Sp-Inception IV, a = 2 10976 11533K 96.03% +4 th module + Sp-Inception VI, a = 2 24416 23818K 96.48%Paper 
Description 
Result 
Diehl et al. 
2015 [7] 
2-layer FC SNN (Baseline-FC module) 
95.00% 

Saunders et al. 
2019 [8] 
2-layer LC SNN (Baseline-LC module) 
95.07% 

Panda et al. 
2017 [9] 

2-layer FC SNN with Adaptive Synaptic 
Plasticity (ASP) 
96.80% 

Meng et al. 
2019 [10] 

Multi-pathway 3-layer SNN with Memory 
Reserved neurON model (MRON) 
95.74% 

Allred et al. 
2016 [11] 

2-layer FC SNN using forced firing of 
dormant or idle neurons 
85.90% 

Lammie et al. 
2018 [12] 

2-layer FC SNN (FPGA neuromorphic 
system) 
94.00% 

Ours 
Single Sp-Inception module 
95.85% 

Ours 
Multi-layer SNN consisting of four Sp-In-
ception modules 
96.48% 

TABLE II. 
TESTING RESULTS OF FOUR-MODULE ARCHITECTURE 

Network 
First/stacked Module 
e efghie e jkelmjf Result 
1 st module 
Sp-Inception I 
1568 
778K 
93.22% 
+2 nd module + Sp-Inception II, a = 1 
4707 
3894K 95.17% 
+3 rd module + 

TABLE IV .
IVAVERAGE SPIKING INTENSITY OF BASELINE MODULES AND SP-INCEPTION MODULEModule 
Baseline-FC Baseline-LC Sp-Inception 
Sp-Inception 
+PRA layer 
Output Intensity 
(spikes / iteration) 
7.84 
58.26 
142.83 
2294.87 

Input Intensity 
(spikes / iteration) 
3451.26 
3284.85 
2936.65 



TABLE V .
VHYPERPARAMETERS STTINGS IN THE EXPERIMENTSHyperparameter 
Description 
Value 
M HN2) 
Postsynaptic learning rate 
0.01 

M H01 
Presynaptic learning rate 
0.0001 

% H01 /% HN2) 
Time constant of O H01 O HN2) 
20ms 

-)F012 
Threshold voltage 
-52mv 
-012) 
Resting voltage 
-65mv 

-0121) 
Resetting voltage 
-65mv 

3 
Synaptic resistance 
60mΩ 

B HIJ2 
Increment for adaptive threshold 
0.05mv 

C 01D 
Time length of refractory period 
5ms 

% &/5 
Time constant of á(.)/4(.) 
100ms/1ms 

% E 
Time constant of adaptive B 
10 7 ms 


Deep learning in spiking neural networks. Amirhossein Tavanaei, Neural Networks. 111Tavanaei, Amirhossein, et al. "Deep learning in spiking neural networks." Neural Networks 111 (2019): 47-63.

Networks of spiking neurons: the third generation of neural network models. Wolfgang Maass, Neural networks. 10Maass, Wolfgang. "Networks of spiking neurons: the third generation of neural network models." Neural networks 10.9 (1997): 1659-1671.

Combining supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning in a network of spiking neurons. Sebastian Handrich, Advances in Cognitive Neurodynamics (II). DordrechtSpringerHandrich, Sebastian, et al. "Combining supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning in a network of spiking neurons." Advances in Cognitive Neurodynamics (II). Springer, Dordrecht, 2011. 163-176.

SWAT: a spiking neural network training algorithm for classification problems. John J Wade, IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks. 21Wade, John J., et al. "SWAT: a spiking neural network training algorithm for classification problems." IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 21.11 (2010): 1817-1830.

Supervised learning in spiking neu-ral networks with ReSuMe: sequence learning, classification, and spike shifting. Filip Ponulak, Andrzej Kasiński, Neural computation. 22Ponulak, Filip, and Andrzej Kasiński. "Supervised learning in spiking neu-ral networks with ReSuMe: sequence learning, classification, and spike shifting." Neural computation 22.2 (2010): 467-510.

Human Brain Function. R Hari, Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 22Hari, R. . "Human Brain Function." Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2.2(1998):75-76.

Unsupervised learning of digit recognition using spike-timing-dependent plasticity. Peter U Diehl, Matthew Cook, Frontiers in computational neuroscience. 999Diehl, Peter U., and Matthew Cook. "Unsupervised learning of digit recognition using spike-timing-dependent plasticity." Frontiers in computational neuroscience 9 (2015): 99.

Locally connected spiking neural networks for unsupervised feature learning. Daniel J Saunders, Neural Networks. 119Saunders, Daniel J., et al. "Locally connected spiking neural networks for unsupervised feature learning." Neural Networks 119 (2019): 332-340.

Asp: Learning to forget with adaptive synaptic plasticity in spiking neural networks. Priyadarshini Panda, IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems. 8Panda, Priyadarshini, et al. "Asp: Learning to forget with adaptive synaptic plasticity in spiking neural networks." IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems 8.1 (2017): 51-64.

BioSNet: A Fast-Learning and High-Robustness Unsupervised Biomimetic Spiking Neural Network. Mingyuan Meng, arXiv:2001.01680arXiv preprintMeng, Mingyuan, et al. "BioSNet: A Fast-Learning and High-Robustness Unsupervised Biomimetic Spiking Neural Network." arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.01680 (2019).

Unsupervised incremental stdp learning using forced firing of dormant or idle neurons. Jason M Allred, Kaushik Roy, 2016 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). IEEEAllred, Jason M., and Kaushik Roy. "Unsupervised incremental stdp learning using forced firing of dormant or idle neurons." 2016 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). IEEE, 2016.

Unsupervised character recognition with a simplified fpga neuromorphic system. Corey Lammie, Tara Hamilton, Mostafa Rahimi Azghadi, IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS). IEEELammie, Corey, Tara Hamilton, and Mostafa Rahimi Azghadi. "Unsupervised character recognition with a simplified fpga neuromorphic system." 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS). IEEE, 2018.

STDP-based spiking deep convolutional neural networks for object recognition. Saeed Kheradpisheh, Reza, Neural Networks. 99Kheradpisheh, Saeed Reza, et al. "STDP-based spiking deep convolutional neural networks for object recognition." Neural Networks 99 (2018): 56-67.

Multilayered Spiking Neural Network with Target Timestamp Threshold Adaptation and STDP. P Falez, P Tirilly, I Marius Bilasco, P Devienne, P Boulet, 2019 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). Budapest, HungaryP. Falez, P. Tirilly, I. Marius Bilasco, P. Devienne and P. Boulet, "Multi- layered Spiking Neural Network with Target Timestamp Threshold Adaptation and STDP," 2019 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), Budapest, Hungary, 2019, pp. 1-8.

Triplets of spikes in a model of spike timing-dependent plasticity. Jean-Pascal Pfister, Wulfram Gerstner, Journal of Neuroscience. 26Pfister, Jean-Pascal, and Wulfram Gerstner. "Triplets of spikes in a model of spike timing-dependent plasticity." Journal of Neuroscience 26.38 (2006): 9673-9682.

The MNIST database of handwritten digits. Yann Lecun, Corinna Cortes, J C Christopher, Burges, 34LeCun, Yann, Corinna Cortes, and Christopher JC Burges. "The MNIST database of handwritten digits, 1998." URL http://yann. lecun. com/exdb/mnist 10 (1998): 34.

Learning to be efficient: Algorithms for training low-latency, low-compute deep spiking neural networks. Daniel Neil, Michael Pfeiffer, Shih-Chii Liu, Proceedings of the 31st annual ACM symposium on applied computing. the 31st annual ACM symposium on applied computingNeil, Daniel, Michael Pfeiffer, and Shih-Chii Liu. "Learning to be efficient: Algorithms for training low-latency, low-compute deep spiking neural networks." Proceedings of the 31st annual ACM symposium on applied computing. 2016.

Homeostasis-Based CNN-to-SNN Conversion of Inception and Residual Architectures. Xing, Fu, International Conference on Neural Information Processing. ChamSpringerXing, Fu, et al. "Homeostasis-Based CNN-to-SNN Conversion of Inception and Residual Architectures." International Conference on Neural Information Processing. Springer, Cham, 2019.

Unsupervised learning with self-organizing spiking neural networks. Hananel Hazan, International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). IEEEHazan, Hananel, et al. "Unsupervised learning with self-organizing spiking neural networks." 2018 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). IEEE, 2018.

Going deeper with convolutions. Christian Szegedy, Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognitionSzegedy, Christian, et al. "Going deeper with convolutions." Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2015.

Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision. Christian Szegedy, Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognitionSzegedy, Christian, et al. "Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision." Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016.

Inception-v4, inception-resnet and the impact of residual connections on learning. Christian Szegedy, Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Szegedy, Christian, et al. "Inception-v4, inception-resnet and the impact of residual connections on learning." Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 2017.

A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve. Alan L Hodgkin, Andrew F Huxley, The Journal of physiology. 117Hodgkin, Alan L., and Andrew F. Huxley. "A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve." The Journal of physiology 117.4 (1952): 500-544.

Simple model of spiking neurons. Eugene M Izhikevich, IEEE Transactions on neural networks. 14Izhikevich, Eugene M. "Simple model of spiking neurons." IEEE Transactions on neural networks 14.6 (2003): 1569-1572.

The brian simulator. Dan Fm Goodman, Romain Brette, Frontiers in neuroscience. 326Goodman, Dan FM, and Romain Brette. "The brian simulator." Frontiers in neuroscience 3 (2009): 26.

Unsupervised features extraction from asynchronous silicon retina through spike-timing-dependent plasticity. Olivier Bichler, The 2011 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks. IEEEBichler, Olivier, et al. "Unsupervised features extraction from asynchronous silicon retina through spike-timing-dependent plasticity." The 2011 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks. IEEE, 2011.