Predicting Fine-grained Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia Based on Machine Learning and Smart Wearable Devices


Wei-Yun Hsu 
Department of Neurology
Kaohsiung Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital
KaohsiungTaiwan, R.O.C

Yu-Ming Chen 
Department of Neurology
Kaohsiung Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital
KaohsiungTaiwan, R.O.C

Yuan-Han Yang 
Department of Neurology
Kaohsiung Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital
KaohsiungTaiwan, R.O.C

Vincent S Tseng vtseng@cs.nycu.edu.tw 
Department of Neurology
Kaohsiung Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital
KaohsiungTaiwan, R.O.C

Department of Neurology
Kaohsiung Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital
KaohsiungTaiwan, R.O.C

Predicting Fine-grained Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia Based on Machine Learning and Smart Wearable Devices
88229866D41C89CA387B537C5F0257F5Behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementiawearable devicesmachine learningpredictive models
Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia (BPSD) impact dementia care substantially, affecting both patients and caregivers.Effective management and early detection of BPSD are crucial to reduce the stress and burden on caregivers and healthcare systems.Despite the advancements in machine learning for dementia prediction, there is a considerable gap in utilizing these methods for BPSD prediction.This study aims to fill this gap by presenting a novel personalized framework for BPSD prediction, utilizing physiological signals from smart wearable devices.Our personalized fine-grained BPSD prediction method accurately predicts BPSD occurrences by extracting individual behavioral patterns, while the generalized models identify diverse patterns and differentiate between various BPSD symptoms.Detailed comparisons between the proposed personalized method and conventional generalized methods reveals substantial improvements across all performance metrics, including a 16.0% increase in AUC.These results demonstrate the potential of our proposed method in advancing dementia care by enabling proactive interventions and improving patient outcomes in real-world scenarios.To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that leverages physiological signals from smart wearable devices to predict BPSD, marking a significant stride in dementia care research.

I. INTRODUCTION

EHAVIORAL and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia (BPSD) represent a diverse range of non-cognitive symptoms commonly manifest in individuals with dementia.These symptoms include disinhibition, anxiety, elation/euphoria, agitation/aggression, hallucinations, delusions, apathy/indifference, irritability, appetite and eating abnormalities, aberrant motor behavior,

Benny Wei-Yun Hsu is with the Institute of Computer Science and Engineering, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu City 300093, Taiwan R.O.C. (email: bennyhsu520@gmail.com).

Yu-Ming Chen is with the Department of Computer Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 300093, Taiwan, R.O.C. (email: tim310579.cs06@nctu.edu.tw)Ting-Yi Lin is with the Neuroscience Research Center, Kaohsiung Medical, University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, and also with the Department of Neurology, Kaohsiung Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, R.O.C. (email: tilin201909@gmail.com).

Yuan-Han Yang is with the Neuroscience Research Center, Kaohsiung Medical, University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, and also with the depression/dysphoria, and sleep and night-time behavior disturbances occurring at any stage of the disease that constitutes a vital clinical aspect of dementia [1] [2].The management of BPSD poses significant challenges for clinical applications and caregivers, as it not only impacts the well-being and quality of patients' lives but also leads B Fig. 1.Overview of the proposed workflow.The dementia patient's physiological signals captured from smart wearable devices were fed into the machine learning model to predict the occurrences and type of BPSD.

to elder abuse, caregiver stress, and accelerated functional decline in individuals with dementia [3][4] [5] [6].Additionally, the presence of BPSD is associated with several adverse outcomes, including increased hospitalization risks, impaired daily functioning, diminished quality of life, and a higher likelihood of progressing to severe dementia at a faster rate [7][8][9].Consequently, the early detection and effective management of BPSD assume critical importance in providing timely interventions, support, and care that can positively influence patient outcomes and alleviate the burden on caregivers and healthcare resources.Nevertheless, there is a limited number of studies related to BPSD prediction based on machine learning methods.Cho et al. [12] presented a machine learning-based approach for the next-day BPSD prediction.However, with such a large time frame for predicting whether BPSD will occur the next day, it is not effectively aiding caregivers in early intervention for real-world applications.

To address the aforementioned problems, this study proposed a BPSD prediction framework involving personalized and generalized models based on temporal data from smart wearable devices.Personalized models utilize the patient's unique information to extract individual behavioral patterns from wearable devices for predicting the occurrence of BPSD.On the contrary, generalized modeling methods were designed to capture patterns and trends across a diverse population, aiming to develop a predictive framework that applies broadly to different individuals.Fig. 2. The proposed framework.In the training phase, the data consists of basic information (age, sex, and education level) and physiological signals from the wearable device, which are aligned with the time points of BPSD records.After data preprocessing, it proceeds to the modeling phase to generate general and personalized models, for fine-grained BPSD prediction and BPSD occurrence prediction, respectively.In the inference phase, the data is passed to the personalized model to find whether the abnormal symptoms will occur in the future.If labeled as abnormal, the data will go through the generalized model to determine the fine-grained BPSD type.Passive measurement while wearing.


2.

Measurement during activity.


3.

Measurement during sleeping.

If the personalized model predicted a patient abnormality, the generalized model would be used to classify BPSD symptoms, including hyperactivity, psychosis, and physical behavior [1].Additionally, the proposed framework predicts BPSD occurrences and symptoms in intervals of fifteen minutes over a four-hour period, enabling caregivers to intervene proactively for dementia patients.

An overview of the workflow is depicted in Fig. 1.This study has contributed to advancing dementia care practices for improving patient outcomes in geriatric medicine by proposing the BPSD prediction framework.The prominent contributions are summarized as follows:


II. RELATED WORKS

In recent years, the application of advanced machine learning and data analytics techniques in the medical domain has gained significant attention [10].Dementia research, as a critical area within the medical field, has seen a surge in studies employing machine learning methods [11].These studies aim to predict the onset of dementia using a diverse range of input data types, including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [12][13], positron emission tomography (PET) scans [14], cognitive test data [15], genetic information [16], and medical records [17].In Alzheimer's disease (AD) research, neuroimaging data from MRI and PET scans have proven effective in AD classification.Cognitive test results, such as cognitive function scales, have also been widely utilized to forecast dementia onset.Moreover, genetic data has been explored extensively to understand its associations with dementia.However, when addressing the prediction of BPSD, the need arises for easily accessible data that can substantially support clinical caregiving.

There are limited studies regarding BPSD prediction with machine learning approaches.Cho et al. [12] presented the first study using demographic, cognitive, and functional status, actigraphy, personality type, and symptom diary data for BPSD prediction.It is also the only study to consider adopting an accelerometer for BPSD prediction research.However, their study focused on the next-day prediction, a wide range of predictive time windows, making it hard to target the particular period for early intervention.It also needed several types of data that require more cost for each patient.Therefore, although their study proposed BPSD prediction models, a gap still existed for real-world applications.


III. PROPOSED METHODS


A. Data Description

The initial study cohort comprised 250 cases.Subsequently, cases with records spanning less than two weeks were excluded.This selection process yielded a dataset of 183 confirmed dementia patients, consisting of 101 females and 82 males.The average age is 77.9 ± 10.2 (female: 77.7 ± 8.8; male: 78.2 ± 11.7), the average education level (year) is 6.6 ± 4.5years (female: 5.0 ± 4.2; male: 8.6 ± 4.1).In addition, caregivers observe the daily behaviors of the patients and record the abnormal behaviors or symptoms related to dementia that occur in their daily lives.These records are used as labels for subsequent prediction.The symptom records are first aligned with the values measured by the wearable device in time, and the physiological values measured every 15 minutes were used to predict the type of BPSD symptoms that will occur in the next four hours.Each participant had physiological signal data collected over two to four weeks.The patients wore the wearable smart watches approximately between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., and this was conducted around 3-5 days weekly.The data composition is presented in


B. Fine-grained BPSD Prediction

Our proposed framework is illustrated in Fig. 2. The data used in this study consists of physiological signals measured when dementia patients wear smart wearable devices, as well as patients' basic information, i.e., age, sex, and education level.The first step is data preprocessing, containing feature extraction, feature selection, normalization, and imbalance processing.The modeling process consists of personalized and generalized modeling phases.The personalized focused on individual differences, where each patient's data was used to build a unique model, and it was employed to predict the occurrence of BPSD.In contrast, the generalized model was employed to predict the specific type of BPSD.We adopted a two-stage architecture because not all patients exhibit the same type of BPSD, making it impractical to build an individual multiclass BPSD model for each patient.Moreover, the personalized model can accurately capture patients' unique representations, and the generalized model was dedicated to differentiating between different fine-grained BPSD types, leveraging the collective data from all patients.For the personalized model, we employ a separate model for each patient, where we adopted Extremely Randomized Trees (ERT) [19] to construct each personalized model.ERT evolved from Decision Tree [20] and Random Forest [21] algorithms.The main idea behind tree-based methods is to build a hierarchical structure of decision rules based on input features.A decision tree (DT) consists of nodes and branches, where each internal node represents a feature and a decision rule, and each leaf node represents a prediction or class label.Random forest (RF) combines multiple decision trees for prediction.Each tree is trained on a random subset of the training data, and the final prediction is obtained by aggregating the prediction results of all trees, which can handle high-dimensional data and reduce overfitting.ERT is similar to random forests.However, they make more random selections for feature splitting points when constructing each decision tree, thereby increasing model diversity and generalization capability.

The main objective of the personalized models is to predict whether symptoms will occur in the next four hours, which can be represented as follows:
L=M (F) (1)
where F is the patient information and features measured by the wearable devices in the past hour.The M represents the model used for predicting the symptoms.L is the label that the patient will experience BPSD, or nothing happened in the next four hours.The generalized model consists of three components as depicted in Fig. 3. First, we aggregated all the patients' records to train a generalized model, which is named Raw-Data-based Generalized model (RDG).We used three machine learning algorithms, including Extremely Randomized Trees (ERT), Random Forest (RF), and Logistic Regression (LR), to assess the performance of the backbone models.Second, we employed a Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN), a widely used and effective method for handling time series data [22], to build a generalized model for temporal feature extraction from the raw data.Subsequently, the latent representation with a 256-dimensional vector in the training phase was extracted, which serves as the input to train a classifier.Third, we adopted an Individual Representation-based Generalized model (IRG), which considers each patient's distinctive feature in the training phase, emphasizing the refined information from personalized models.After training the three generalized models, we employed an ensemble approach that can concurrently consider different aspects for predicting BPSD and enhancing performance.The main objective of the generalized model is to predict the category of symptoms that will occur in the next four hours for each data after the personalized model prediction, which can be represented as follows:
C = E (G1 (F), G2 (F), G3 (F)) (2)

IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION


A. Experimental Settings

The training data from each patient with BPSD records were aggregated to form a generalized dataset.This dataset, comprising data from all patients, was used to train a generalized model.We employed 5-fold crossvalidation and fine-tuned hyperparameters to optimize the performance of this generalized model, which was based on Extra Randomized Trees (ERT).Personalized data for each patient was split into a training set (70%) and a testing set (30%).It is important to note that personalized models were only constructed for patients with records of BPSD occurrences during the measurement period.Patients without such records were excluded from the personalized model building process.

During the testing phase, the split personalized test data was initially processed by the personalized model to detect the occurrence of BPSD.If the personalized model predicted BPSD occurrence, the data was subsequently passed through the generalized model to classify the specific type of BPSD.The entire assessment process was executed independently for each patient.As a result, the framework's performance was evaluated for each patient separately.To provide an overall assessment of the framework's effectiveness in predicting BPSD occurrences and types, we calculated the average performance across all patients.Performance evaluation of the models includes the area under the ROC curve (AUC), sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, precision, and F1-score.


B. Performance Comparison of Personalized and

Generalized Frameworks To investigate the distinction between the proposed personalized and conventional generalized frameworks, we conducted an experiment utilizing Extra Randomized     [12] with our preprocessing approaches.These results are aggregated across all personalized models, representing the average performance.The experimental results reveal that the conventional approaches cannot achieve good performance without our proposed framework.To explore the expandability and flexibility of our proposed framework, we alternated different backbone models (classifiers) to validate the performance.TABLE IV displays the results of our proposed framework with various backbones, including RF and LR.Our framework can obviously benefit the performance of different backbone models on every metric.For example, the sensitivity of the baseline model LR has increased from 61.5% to 69.0%, relatively growing 12.2%, while the specificity keeps the same performance; for the RF model, the AUC has relatively increased 5.5%.

Notably, predicting BPSD within a short and specific timeframe (e.g., the next four hours) presents a challenge for conventional frameworks.Furthermore, the evaluation criteria of the personalized framework are more rigorous than traditional generalized frameworks.While the traditional approach primarily focuses on finetuning a single model, the personalized framework needs particular attention to numerous individual models.Consequently, our proposed framework is expertly tailored for fine-grained personalized BPSD prediction, making it a practical solution for real-world use.


D. Ablation Study


V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

In this pioneering study, we have presented a personalized fine-grained BPSD prediction framework that utilizes physiological signals captured from smart wearable devices, marking a monumental advancement in dementia care and geriatric medicine.This study demonstrates the integration of raw data-based modeling, temporal contextual information, and tailored representations to accurately predict BPSD occurrences and categorize the fine-grained types of BPSD, including Hyperactivity, Psychosis, and Physical Behavioral symptoms.

A detailed comparative analysis between our personalized and conventional generalized methods unveils the significant breakthroughs and substantial advancements in this study.The personalized method has showcased improvements across all crucial performance metrics, emphasizing the efficacy of our approach in enhancing BPSD predictions.Our personalized model achieved a 16.0% in AUC, delineating a stark enhancement compared to the generalized model.The sensitivity and specificity improved significantly by 57% and 32.6%, respectively.The precision rate and F1-score also increased, demonstrating the impact of our method in this field.These experimental results revealed the potential for proactive interventions in dementia patients within a four-hour window, leading to improved outcomes and quality of life.

The future research will focus on expanding and diversifying datasets as well as optimizing models to achieve unprecedented levels of predictive accuracy.The ultimate goal is to ensure our models can be applied to a wide range of real-world scenarios.The innovative insights we gain from this research will revolutionize dementia care, leading to the development of personalized healthcare in geriatric medicine, and opening up new avenues for exploration in this field.



To timely predict BPSD occurrences, we used current physiological values and past records comprising the values of the previous 15, 30, 45, and 60 minutes.In other words, there are 11 physiological signals during measurement at five continuous time points, with a total of 55 physiological values for BPSD prediction.For each patient, their records were segmented into multiple periodic entries after removing the cases without BPSD labels, and each entry was categorized as one of the following categories: Normal (n = 20,529), Hyperactivity (n = 274), Psychosis (n = 2,564), or Physical Behavior (n = 1,394) symptoms.


Fig. 3 .
3
Fig. 3. Workflow of generalized model training.There are three types of generalized models adopted, which are Raw Data-based (RDG), TCN, and Individual Representation-based (IRG) generalized model.First, RDG is used for learning the raw information of the data.Second, TCN is used to capture the temporal dependency in the raw time series data.Third, IRG extract features generated from the personalized model include the specialized individual information of each patient.These generalized models will be incorporated to classify the BPSD.












TABLE I DESCRIPTION
I
OF THE VARIABLES USED FOR THIS STUDY.
VariableDescriptionMeasurementoccasionAgePatient age-SexPatient sex-EducationEducation level (year) of-LevelpatientHRHeart rateContinuous 1HRVHeart rate variabilityContinuousSYSSystolic blood pressureContinuousDIADiastolic blood pressureContinuousStressStress indexContinuousTempBody temperatureContinuousOxygenBlood oxygenContinuousStepsStepsActivity 2CaloriesCalories burnedActivityToss & turnNumber of tosses & turns Sleep 3SleepingSleeping qualitySleepquality1.

TABLE I .
I

TABLE II PERFORMANCE
II
COMPARISON WITH THE PROPOSED PERSONALIZED AND THE CONVENTIONAL GENERALIZED METHODS.
MethodAUCSensitivitySpecificityAccuracyPrecisionF1-ScoreConventional Generalized Method0.7010.4720.6470.7440.4840.441Personalized Method (Ours)0.813 ± 0.1290.741 ± 0.1520.858 ± 0.0850.771 ± 0.14380.685 ± 0.1500.661 ± 0.153TABLE IIIPERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF CONVENTIONAL CLASSIFIERS WITH OUR PREPROCESSING APPROACHES.ModelAUCSensitivitySpecificityAccuracyPrecisionF1-scoreLR0.740 ± 0.1450.615 ± 0.1740.852 ± 0.0970.706 ± 0.1760.582 ± 0.1480.549 ± 0.155RF0.775 ± 0.1410.706 ± 0.1590.833 ± 0.0890.741 ± 0.1500.627 ± 0.1410.607 ± 0.147

TABLE IV PERFORMANCE
IV
COMPARISON OF BACKBONE CLASSIFIERS WITH OUR PROPOSED FRAMEWORK.
Trees (ERT) as the underlying algorithm. In theconventional generalized model, the personalizedmodeling stage was omitted, and it was directly trained onthe four-class dataset, containing labels for normal,hyperactivity, psychosis, and physical behavior. Thetraining and testing distributions followed theconfiguration illustrated in Fig. 2, with the individualsubsets of training and testing sets merged separately (i.e.,Backbone combining the original training sets of each individual AUC Sensitivity SpecificityAccuracyPrecisionF1-scoreLR into one training set, and similarly for the testing set). 0.793 ± 0.130 0.690 ± 0.145 0.857 ± 0.0920.733 ± 0.1590.655 ± 0.1410.620 ± 0.142RF Hence, the conventional generalized model in this 0.818 ± 0.120 0.739 ± 0.149 0.855 ± 0.092 experiment generated a single model for evaluation to0.764 ± 0.1490.675 ± 0.1370.654 ± 0.146ensure a fair comparison.

TABLE II
IIpresents thecomparative results. As per the findings, the proposedpersonalized model consistently outperformed theconventional generalized model across all evaluationmetrics. The personalized model exhibited a remarkable16.0% increase in AUC compared to the generalizedmodel, while sensitivity and specificity significantlyimproved 57% and 32.6%, respectively. The precisionrate and F1-score also exhibited considerableenhancements.The limitations of the conventional generalized modelin accurately predicting fine-grained BPSD based onwearable device data become prominent. The reason liesin the substantial variation in normal behaviors amongdementia patients. The conventional framework wasdeveloped to fetch common patterns to distinguish normaland abnormal behaviors, but the behavioral baselinevaries significantly among dementia patients.Consequently, the proposed personalized framework setsa new standard for research in smart wearable device-based BPSD prediction.C. Analysis of Personalized Framework withVarious Backbone Models

TABLE V
Villustrates ablation studies assessing theeffectiveness of different components of the proposedframework. The foundational model, the Raw-Data-basedGeneralized model (RDG), utilized the ERT algorithm fortraining. Various combinations of these components areinvestigated to distinguish the contributions of theTemporal Convolutional Network (TCN) and theIndividual Representation-based Generalized (IRG)models. The RDG + TCN model exhibits a detectableperformance degradation compared to the fundamentalRDG model, yielding it less optimal. In contrast, the RDG+ IRG model significantly enhances several metrics,underlining the value of incorporating individualrepresentations in the generalized model. Remarkably, theamalgamation of RDG + IRG + TCN outperforms theother models and combinations, achieving superiorresults in metrics, including AUC, Sensitivity, Specificity,Accuracy, Precision, and F1-Score, highlighting theeffect of integrating temporal contextual information and

TABLE V OVERALL
V
PERFORMANCE WITH ABLATION STUDIES ON GENERALIZED MODELS.The final combination generated a robust model that balances various classification metrics, thus providing a promising avenue for advancing state-of-theart methodologies in the BPSD prediction research.
individualized representations with raw data-basedCombination modeling.AUCSensitivitySpecificityAccuracyPrecisionF1-ScoreRDG0.795 ± 0.1290.734 ± 0.1560.842 ± 0.0900.760 ± 0.1490.643 ± 0.1410.626 ± 0.153RDG + TCN0.779 ± 0.1430.559 ± 0.1400.850 ± 0.1010.544 ± 0.1990.645 ± 0.2130.484 ± 0.157RDG + IRG0.808 ± 0.1290.733 ± 0.1640.846 ± 0.0900.762 ± 0.1470.642 ± 0.1400.629 ± 0.150RDG + IRG + TCN0.813 ± 0.1290.741 ± 0.1520.858 ± 0.0850.771 ± 0.1440.685 ± 0.1500.661 ± 0.153
ACKNOWLEDGMENTThis study was supported by National Health Research Institutes under grant no.NHRI-11A1-CG-CO-06-2225-1 and NHRI-12A1-CG-CO-06-2225-1.
Behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia in patients with Alzheimer's disease and family caregiver burden: a path analysis. B Kim, G O Noh, K Kim, BMC geriatrics. 212021

Light interventions and sleep, circadian, behavioral, and psychological disturbances in dementia: A systematic review of methods and outcomes. G J Hjetland, Sleep Med Rev. 521013102020

Mukaetova-Ladinska, Behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia. J Cerejeira, L Lagarto, E , Front Neurol. 3732012

Management of Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia. L J Bessey, A Walaszek, Curr Psychiatry Rep. 218662019

Behavioral and psychological symptoms in Alzheimer's dementia and vascular dementia. W J Deardorff, G T Grossberg, Handb Clin Neurol. 1652019

A systematic review of the relationship between behavioral and psychological symptoms (BPSD) and caregiver well-being. A Feast, Int Psychogeriatr. 28112016

The associations between behavioral-psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) and coping strategy, burden of care and personality style among low-income caregivers of patients with dementia. A D Baharudin, 2019BMC Public Health447Suppl

Assessment and management of behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia. H C Kales, L N Gitlin, C G Lyketsos, BMJ. 3503692015

S T Cheng, Dementia Caregiver Burden: a Research Update and Critical Analysis. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 20171964

Machine learning in medical applications: A review of state-of-the-art methods. M Shehab, L Abualigah, Q Shambour, M A Abu-Hashem, M K Y Shambour, A I Alsalibi, A H Gandomi, Computers in Biology and Medicine. 1451054582022

Machine Learning for Dementia Prediction: A Systematic Review and Future Research Directions. A Javeed, A L Dallora, J S Berglund, A Ali, L Ali, P Anderberg, Journal of medical systems. 471172023

Automated detection of Alzheimer's disease using brain MRI images-a study with various feature extraction techniques. U R Acharya, S L Fernandes, J E Weikoh, E J Ciaccio, M K M Fabell, U J Tanik, . . Yeong, C H , Journal of Medical Systems. 432019

Cross-cohort generalizability of deep and conventional machine learning for MRI-based diagnosis and prediction of Alzheimer's disease. E E Bron, S Klein, J M Papma, L C Jiskoot, V Venkatraghavan, J Linders, NeuroImage: Clinical. 1027122021& Parelsnoer Neurodegenerative Diseases study group

A deep learning model to predict a diagnosis of Alzheimer disease by using 18F-FDG PET of the brain. Y Ding, J H Sohn, M G Kawczynski, H Trivedi, R Harnish, N W Jenkins, . . Franc, B L , Radiology. 29022019

Machine learning of neuroimaging for assisted diagnosis of cognitive impairment and dementia: a systematic review. E Pellegrini, L Ballerini, M D C V Hernandez, F M Chappell, V González-Castro, D Anblagan, . . Wardlaw, J M , Alzheimer's & Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment & Disease Monitoring. 102018

Machine learning based multimodal neuroimaging genomics dementia score for predicting future conversion to alzheimer's disease. G Mirabnahrazam, D Ma, S Lee, K Popuri, H Lee, J Cao, Journal of Alzheimer's Disease. 8732022& Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative

Identifying the presence and severity of dementia by applying interpretable machine learning techniques on structured clinical records. BMC medical and decision making. A Vyas, F Aisopos, M E Vidal, P Garrard, G Paliouras, 202222

Machine learningbased predictive models for the occurrence of behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia: model development and validation. E Cho, S Kim, S J Heo, J Shin, S Hwang, E Kwon, . . Kang, B , Scientific Reports. 13180732023

Extremely randomized trees. P Geurts, D Ernst, L Wehenkel, Machine learning. 6312006

B Li, J Friedman, R Olshen, C Stone, Classification and regression trees (CART). 1984

. Biometrics. 403

Random decision forests. T K Ho, Proceedings of 3rd international conference on document analysis and recognition. 3rd international conference on document analysis and recognition19951

An empirical evaluation of generic convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling. S Bai, J Z Kolter, V Koltun, arXiv:1803.012712018arXiv preprint