Digital Contact Tracing Using IP Colocation


Ma Hew Malloy mahew.malloy@wisc.edu 
University of Wisconsin


Aaron Cahn Comscore 
University of Wisconsin


Jon Koller Comscore 
University of Wisconsin


Digital Contact Tracing Using IP Colocation
Internet measurementdevice graphsonline advertisingepidemi- ologygraphsnetworksCOVID-19SARS-CoV-2
e spread of an infectious disease through a population can be modeled using a network or a graph. In digital advertising, internet device graphs are graph data sets that organize identi ers produced by mobile phones, PCs, TVs, and tablets as they access media on the internet. Characterized by immense scale, they have become ubiquitous as they enable targeted advertising, content customization and tracking. is paper posits that internet device graphs, in particular those based on IP colocation, can provide signi cant utility in predicting and modeling the spread of infectious disease. Starting the week of March 16th, 2020, in the United States, many individuals began to 'shelter-in-place' as schools and workplaces across the nation closed because of the COVID-19 pandemic. is paper quanti es the e ect of the shelter-in-place orders on a large scale internet device graph with more than a billion nodes by studying the graph before and a er orders went into e ect. e e ects are clearly visible. e structure of the graph suggests behavior least conducive to transmission of infection occurred in the US between April 12th and 19th, 2020. is paper also discusses the utility of device graphs for i) contact tracing, ii) prediction of 'hot spots', iii) simulation of infectious disease spread, and iv) delivery of advertisement-based warnings to potentially exposed individuals. e paper also posits an overarching question: can systems and datasets amassed by entities in the digital ad ecosystem aid in the ght against COVID-19?

INTRODUCTION

Epidemiologists o en study the spread of infectious disease using a contact process on a network (i.e, a graph) [5,[8][9][10]18]. In a contact process, an infection spreads along the edges of the graph, infecting neighboring nodes. While the individual edges de ne who becomes infected, the underlying structure of the graph controls the characteristics of the spread of the infectious disease through the population. Knowledge of the edges in the network is paramount to contact tracing.

In digital advertising, device graphs are datasets that relate digital identi ers produced by smartphones, PCs and tablets as they access resources on the internet. Device graphs, characterized by immense scale with billions of nodes and tens of billions of edges [22], have become ubiquitous in the digital advertising ecosystem as they facilitate targeted advertising. While device graphs are constructed using information gathered online, the associations they capture correspond to o ine relationships.

While the exact mechanisms for assembling device graphs vary, the principles of their construction follow a similar paradigm. Websites, apps and advertising networks log information about smarphones and PCs as they access media on the internet. e information they collect includes a unique, anonymized identi er (either a cookie-ID or an advertising ID), an IP address, a timestamp, and information about the device and the content accessed.

One technique for generating device graphs is IP colocation. IP colocation is the co-occurrence of identi ers on a single IP address at approximately the same time. e e cacy of IP colocation techniques comes from the observation that IP space is intimate: IP addresses are shared by family members, friends and co-workers when they connect to the internet via the same WiFi access point. Generally speaking, devices that connect to a WiFi router have the same public-facing IPv4 address. Capturing these relationships is valuable for marketing and targeted advertising, and many entities in digital advertising have assembled device graphs [2, 4,32]. ese datasets cover the majority of internet-connected devices in the United States and elsewhere in the world [21].

While internet device graphs are ubiquitous in digital advertising, they also have potential utility for epidemiological study and combating the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic. As WiFi access points have limited range, IP colocation is a proxy for physical colocation. As physical colocation supposes epidemiological contact, device graphs are a natural t to study the spread of infectious disease over a network. is paper posits that device graphs could be used to: i) supplement contact tracing by enabling public health ocials to identify users that connected to the same WiFi access points at internet scale, ii) enable prediction of outbreak 'hot spots', and iii) facilitate delivery of advertisement-based warnings to potentially exposed individuals. While the datasets have great potential, there are also limitations. Unlike digital contact tracing approaches based on mobile apps and technology such as GPS and Bluetooth Low Energy [13,16], IP colocation is more susceptible to false positives.

is potential shortcoming is arguably overcome by scale. is paper studies the e ects of shelter-in-place on an internet scale IP colocation device graph provided by a large internet analytics company, Comscore. e COVID-19 pandemic caused a signi cant change in day-to-day behavior in the US and across the globe. In the US, starting approximately the week of Monday March 16th, many individuals began to work from home and shelter-inplace either voluntarily or through mandate, as schools across the nation closed. We study the e ects of this change in behavior by examining the community structure of the device graph * . e e ects of sheltering in place are clearly visible in the device graph, validating a simple hypothesis: when individuals stay home, they do not connect to WiFi outside-the-home, reducing the number of outside the home edges in the graph. We study two statistics of the graph and the inferred community structure: i) the modularity, and ii) the ratio of edges that cross communities to the total number of edges in the graph. Both metrics indicate that behavior least conducive to the spread of infectious disease occurred on the week beginning April 12th, 2020. Past this week, both graph metrics suggest behavior becomes more conducive to the spread of infectious disease. We also compare the metrics to the estimated percent of the US population that is placed under stay at home orders. e use of internet device graphs for contact tracing, prediction of transmission, and epidemiological studies, to the best of our knowledge, is a new idea. Compared to other technology for digital contact tracing using mobile devices [13], there are both signi cant advantages and limitations. One main advantage of device graphs is that they already exist and do not require custom apps or websites as are o en suggested for digital contact tracing in the media [1]. Required data collection only consists of server logs containing an IP address, an ID (a cookie or advertising ID), and a timestamp. is data is recorded any time a user accesses content on a webpage or app, and these datasets are already produced and sold by a number of tracking and measurement entities in the digital advertising ecosystem. e identi ers used in device graphing conform to established privacy guidelines, and are also precisely the identi ers that facilitate targeted advertisements, which could be used for public service announcements or warnings of potential exposure to infectious diseases. ere are limitations to using device graphs based on IP colocation for contact tracing. Most importantly, they do not reveal detailed location traces that are available using techniques based on precise geolocation services (i.e, GPS). Instead they provide reliable estimation of habitual behavior.

To the best of our knowledge, the use of device graphs to simulate the spread of infectious disease is a new idea. e baseline graph under normal conditions would likely be of interest to epidemiologists for use in a contact process model. Moreover, the change in characteristics of the graph pre and post shelter-in-place orders is also likely of interest to epidemiologists and policy makers in understanding the e ectiveness of such orders. e data structure provides a unique opportunity for simulation and exposition to answer the following question: do the shelter-in-place orders have material impact on the rate of spread of infectious disease as modeled as a contact process on a device graph? A number of related modeling questions ensue. We also pose the overarching question: can the processes and datasets developed by the advertising ecosystem writ large aid in the ght against COVID-19?


BACKGROUND AND METHODOLOGY

is section reviews background and methodology for generation of an IP colocation device. More details can be found in [14,21,22]. IP colocation device graphing o en follows three steps: i) data collection, ii) generation of the graph, which establishes pair-wise relationships between devices by observing them on the same IP address at approximately the same time, and iii) community detection, which partitions the graph into smaller clusters that identify household, person-level, or larger internet communities depending on tuning of the algorithms.

Before proceeding, we de ne notation required in graph analysis. An undirected, weighted graph G is a set of nodes V and a set of edges E, G = (V , E). An edge e ∈ E consists of two elements from V and a weight: e = (i, j, w) ∈ V × V × R. In a device graph, a node i ∈ V is a digital identi er (e.g., a web cookie or advertising ID). An edge e ∈ E represents a relationship between two identi ers. Many of the applications of device graphs require determining groups of devices that have strong relationships in the graph. We refer to these groups as communities. When a community is aligned to a residential household, we refer to it as a household. A community is a set of one or more nodes, C = {i, . . . } ⊂ V , and the set of
communities is denoted C = {C 1 , C 2 . . . }. C is a partitioning of V , i.e, C i ∩ C j = {} for any i j, and i C i = V .
In IP colocation device graphs, communities are small groups of IDs o en observed together on the same IP address. ese groups are are well aligned with residential households and small business places.

e data used to build the IP colocation device graphs comes from Comscore's digital network, one of the largest in the world. is data is collected over a 42 day period (six weeks) via the local execution of either a JavaScript/HTML or SDK (so ware development kit) tag on a client machine. ese tags can be found accompanying a wide variety of internet resources, including web pages, video requests, mobile applications, advertisement deliveries, and other distributed content. When local execution occurs a unique record is directly reported to Comscore's infrastructure. e record is run through an ETL (extract-transform-load) process before being utilized in the construction of the IP colocation device graph.

Construction of the IP colocation device graph starts with a dataset consisting of tuples of (device ID, IP address, time). For each IP address in the dataset, an edge is established between every pair of device IDs that share that IP address on epoch t = 1. e weight of the edge is inversely proportional to the number of digital identi ers observed on that IP at that epoch. is is repeated for epoch t = 2, 3, . . . . A er each epoch is considered, a nal weight is assigned to each pair of devices by summing over all epochs and all IP addresses. e algorithm is detailed in Algorithm 1. Algorithm 1 requires two parameters: N max , which is set to exclude high volume IP addresses, and the edge cuto parameter γ , which results in the exclusion of edges below a speci ed weight. Algorithm 1 is implemented in practice utilizing the Apache Pig platform on an Apache Hadoop environment consisting of 500+ worker nodes.

Algorithm 1 IP Colocation Device Graph [21] 1: parameters: N max , γ 2: input: tuples (device ID, IP address, time) 3: V = set of unique device IDs 4: for each time step t, each IP k 5:

N t,k = number of distinct device IDs on IP k at time t 6: if N t,k ≤ N max 7: for all pairs of device IDs (i, j) on IP k at t 8:
w i, j (t, k) = 1 N t, k 9: w i, j = t,k w i, j (t, k) for all (i, j) 10: E = {(i, j, w i, j ) : w i, j > γ } 11: return G γ = (V , E)
A er construction of the graph, community detection algorithms can be applied to cluster devices into small communities of closely related nodes. e clusters, which partition V , correspond to individuals, residential households, and larger work and social communities. As the basis for the graph is IP colocation, the communities correspond to individuals that share WiFi access points. To study clustering properties of the graph, we applied community detection algorithms, adjusting the parameter γ as one mechanism to control the size of the communities. e goal of community detection is to nd a partitioning of the nodes so that the edges between nodes in a group are dense and edges between nodes from di erent groups are sparse. Community detection is well studied with many available methods. e Louvain method [6] is a popular technique due to its success on large scale graphs, and we employ the approach to cluster the nodes of the IP colocation graph. e Louvain approach consists of two repeated stepsi) minimizing a cost function by moving nodes to neighboring communities and ii) creating a new graph with the communities from the rst step as nodes. e technique creates a hierarchy of communities, each corresponding to a di erent partitioning of the node set. In this paper we focus only on communities created a er the rst iteration, i.e, step i) above.

While the resulting communities are based on relationships in IP space, their interpretation translates into o ine relations between devices. e parameter γ is a cuto for the minimum edge weight in the graph. Tuning γ also has an e ect on community size. For small γ , the communities correspond to multiple identi ers that belong to the same person. As γ is decreased, larger communities are produced that align with groups of devices that share a residential household. Further decreasing γ generates internet communities that connect extended families, friends and co-workers. In this paper we focus on parameter se ings that result in communities that corresponding to residential households.


RESULTS

We study the characteristics of the graph and the communities, focusing on two metrics: graph modularity, and the ratio of edges that cross communities to the total number of edges. Modularity, denoted Q, can be expressed as [
7] Q = s s L − d s 2L 2
where s enumerates the communities, s is the number of edges inside the community, d s is the total degree of the nodes in community s, N = |V |, and L = |E|. e ratio of edges inside communities to those outside is expressed as:
R = E − s s E .
Both metrics quantify how well the graph conforms to the community structure. Graph modularity can be interpreted as the ratio of the number of edges inside a community, minus the expected number of edges if connections were de ned at random, to the total number of edges. Graphs with fully connected communities and no cross community edges have a modularity Q = 1, and graphs with no community structure and uniformly random edges over the nodes have a modularity of Q = 0.  Table 1: Edge count and node count of the graph before 'shelter-in-place'. Data collected over six weeks from January 20th, 2020 to March 1st, 2020. G γ corresponds to the graph, restricted to edge weights above γ .

To analyze the e ect of stay-at-home orders across the United States on both graph modularity and the ratio of edges that cross communities to the total number of edges, we looked at a series of graphs produced using Comscore data collected over several months. All data examined originated from the US between the dates of UTC January 20, 2020 and UTC June 7, 2020 -a 140 day period (20 weeks). Each graph consists of 6 weeks of data. e date associated with the graph is the center date of the time frame; e.g., a device graph on April 1st consists of data collected the three weeks immediately preceding and following April 1st. In the hierarchy of partitions produced by Louvain Modularity, only results from the nest scale communities are presented. All results are presented for G 0.8 .

As the United States began to stay-at-home, the frequency with which the population shared IP space with co-workers, friends, and others outside of their home decreased. e main hypothesis is that such orders lead to a decrease in cross community edges and an increase in graph modularity. Figures 1 and 2 con rm this hypothesis. Both metrics indicate the graph is most modular on the week beginning April 12th. is suggests the US in aggregate was most observant of the stay-at-home orders at approximately that date.

Figures 1 and 2 also suggest there is utility in simulating infectious disease spread on device graph datasets. e datasets provide weekly snapshots of contacts (connections) at country wide scale. e ability to simulate infectious disease spread on week over week snapshots allows closer to 'real time' estimations on the e cacy of stay-at-home orders; both at large and in speci c areas of the US. In addition, being able to observe the resurgence of cross community edges week over week has forward looking utility. It may be used to predict areas susceptible to an outbreak or resurgence of cases if the in ux of cross community edges are observed in geographic areas still experiencing a steady rate of new infections. is data can allow policy makers to make be er informed decisions on when it is safe to resume certain public functions and business.

Results of community detection were validated using a ground truthdataset provided by Comscore. e datasets involves recruitment of panelists for installation of customized wireless routers. e wireless router captures an anonymized version of the media access control (MAC) address, and the cookies ID/advertising IDs of with the devices that connects to the router.     [26]). e graph is constructed with six weeks of data (three weeks before and three a er the listed date). e cookie IDs and advertising IDs recorded by a custom wireless router de ne a ground truth community (which correspond to residential households). e dataset includes more than 5,000 ground truth communities. Only cookie IDs/advertising IDs that correspond to MAC addresses observed for more than 2 days are included, eliminating 'guest' devices that do not have a long term association with the small community. e time frame of data collection used to de ne the ground truth communities is the same 6 weeks as the time frame used for graph data collection.

Precision and recall of communities produced by Louvain Modularity were calculated. In particular, let C be the set of communities produced by the community detection algorithm. For a ground truth community C (i.e., a physical household), the best corresponding graph community C * is determined by nding the community with the largest intersection of IDs: C * := arg max C ∈C |C ∩ C |. e precision and recall of C * are given by
precision = |C ∩ C * | |C * | recall = |C ∩ C * | |C | .
e the precision and recall are plo ed for Louvain Modularity applied to G 0.8 in Figure 3. Notice that community structure is best aligned with a ground truth partitioning of the nodes between April 12th and April 19th, 2020. Figures 4 and 5 visualize a small portion of the graph, and represent an illustrative and hand-curated example of communities before and a er shelter-in-place. Notice that many connections across communities are not present a er stay-at-home orders. e example gures also highlight the utility of the graph with respect to contact tracing. 


RELATED WORK

e study of networks (i.e, graphs) in epidemiology has a rich history dating back to at least the 1980's [19]. ere are a number of review articles on the topic of graphs and infectious disease, and while we aim to extract the relevant themes herein, we refer the reader to [9] for a more thorough discussion.

A number of studies have looked at how (o ine) social networks predict, model and relate to the spread of infectious disease [19,20,27]. is includes studies of realized encounter networks, in which a graph is constructed from documented physical encounters, and the LG Nexus 5 D820 16GB

LG Nexus 5 D820 16GB

LG Nexus 5 D820 16GB

LG Nexus 5 D820 16GB

XBox One LG Nexus 4 16GB

LG LG Nexus 5 D820 16GB

LG Nexus 5 D820 16GB

LG Nexus 5 D820 16GB

LG Nexus 5 D820 16GB XBox One iPhone 6 16GB

Galaxy Note 4 SM-N910V iPhone 11 Pro HTC One M8 Figure 5: Illustrative example of a small portion of the graph a er stay-at-home orders. e color of node indicates the assigned community. Notice that many of the edges outside the communities are no longer present.

spread of a transmi ed disease is studied on the resulting graph. A major limitation of such approaches is the construction of the graph itself, which requires participation from subjects and recollection of encounters. Such studies have in general been limited to graphs with fewer than a thousand nodes. One di erence between our discussions and much work in epidemiology is that we do not have information about nodes are infected with a disease. We acknowledge signi cant challenge in relating that information to the graph at scale. Relating o ine information (i.e, a name/address) to an advertising ID or cookie is o en termed 'digital onboarding', and a number of companies o er such datasets [3].

In addition to the broader study of infectious disease on networks with social and encounter networks, there is work that studies the e ects of graph modularity on the spread of infectious disease [17,29,30]. While conventional wisdom would suggest that modular organization of a network would prevent the spread of infectious disease, there is work on animal social networks that in certain se ings supposes otherwise [30].

ere has been a surge in work related to digital contact tracing (see, for example [13] and related articles). In general these techniques require a signi cant portion of the population install a mobile app for data collection, which is a signi cant challenge. e technology involved is both based on global positioning (GPS), Bluetooth Low Energy [12,16].

Related work in device graphing is broadly divided into academic work, including the prequels to this paper [14,21,22], and commercial literature. [21,23] provides a introduction to device graphing using IP co-location, and is the rst academic paper to study the datasets. [14] assumes that IP colocation associations have been made, and focuses on re ning the graph to create custom user and device level groupings using an extension of Naive Bayes termed Naive Bayes Similarity Scoring. Lastly, [22] proposes an approach to extend the scale of the graph towards 10 billion nodes. Beyond these publications, li le academic literature exists with the taxonomy 'device graph'. Some literature on 'cross device tracking' [31] aims to provide a method to detect when cross device tracking (such as device graphing) occurs. A review of privacy in cross device tracking is found in [33].

Commercial and industry publications with the 'device graph' taxonomy are more prevalent, as device graph o erings are ubiquitous and widely available e.g., [3,4,32] in the adverting ecosystem.

is includes a number of patents on systems for generation of device graphs based on colocation [15,24,25]. e academic work can be viewed as a formalization of many of the ideas encapsulated in the commercial device graph patents and literature. Much of the work that studies identi cation of users on the internet absent login information can be broadly categorized as ngerprinting [11,28]. e goal of ngerprinting, as the name suggests, is to identify a user/browser in a persistent manner, absent login information and without cookies or advertising IDs.


SUMMARY

is paper proposes the utility of internet device graphs in epidemiology. Device graphs are characterized by immense scale and ubiquitous use in digital advertising. More precisely, this paper posits the utility of device graphs for four applications i) contact tracing, ii) prediction of 'hot spots', iii) simulation of infectious disease spread, and iv) delivery of advertisement based warnings to potentially exposed individuals. e utility follows two natural observations i) in epidemiology, the spread of infectious disease through a population can be modeled using a network or graph, and ii) in digital advertising internet device graphs are graph data sets that organize digital identi ers produced by mobile phones, PCs, TVs, and tablets as they access media on the internet. is paper also studies the e ects of the shelter-in-place orders on a large scale internet device graph constructed using IP co-location with more than a billion nodes. As individuals stay at home, fewer graph edges are created with co-workers and other individuals outside the home. We study the impact on the community structure in the graph, and show that the graph modularity (a measure of how well a graph conforms to community structure) increases as the stay at home order went into place. e modularity of the graph is closely related to the number of edges that cross communities, in relation to the total edges. e number of cross community edges decreases as the stay at home order went into place. Both metrics indicate that the graph is most modular (best adheres to community structure) the week beginning April 12th.

is implies that the US, in aggregate, best followed the stay at home orders that same week.

While device graphs o er utility for the study of infectious disease, they may also supplement the more material and a immediate needs of public health departments that are actively ghting the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic. e digital advertising ecosystem writ large has successfully built tools, infrastructure, and datasets to track users as they access services on the internet. e question remains: can the processes and datasets amassed by the digital advertising industry help in the ght against COVID-19, and do so in a privacy safe manner?

Figure 1 :
1Graph modularity (right axis), a measure of how well a graph matches community structure. Percentage of US population under state-issued 'stay-at-home' order (le axis, adapted from

Figure 2 :
2Percent of total edges that are inter-community (across community) edges (right axis). Percentage of US population under state-issued 'stay-at-home' ordered (le axis, adapted from[26]).

Figure 3 :
3Precision and recall of communities derived from a ground truth dataset on more than 5000 communities.

Figure 4 :
4Illustrative example of a small portion of the graph prior to stay-at-home orders. e color of node indicates the assigned community. Note the large number of connections between the device labeled 'LG Nexus 5 D820 16GB' and devices outside its community.

Table 2 :
2Edge count and node count of the graph a er 
'shelter-in-place'. Data collected over six weeks from March 
30th, 2020 to May 10th, 2020. G γ corresponds to the graph, 
restricted to edge weights above γ . 



Contact Tracing With Your Phone: It s Easier but ere Are Tradeo s. Contact Tracing With Your Phone: It s Easier but ere Are Tradeo s. h ps://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/03/health/ coronavirus-contact-tracing-apps.html. Accessed: 2020-06-03.

Lotame Cross Device. 2020. Lotame Cross Device. h p://www.lotame.com.

Infectious diseases of humans: dynamics and control. M Roy, Robert M Anderson, Oxford university pressRoy M Anderson and Robert M May. 1992. Infectious diseases of humans: dynamics and control. Oxford university press.

Fast Unfolding of Communities in Large Networks. D Vincent, Jean-Loup Blondel, Renaud Guillaume, Etienne Lambio E, Lefebvre, Journal of Statistical Mechanics: eory and Experiment. 1010008Vincent D Blondel, Jean-Loup Guillaume, Renaud Lambio e, and Etienne Lefeb- vre. 2008. Fast Unfolding of Communities in Large Networks. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: eory and Experiment 2008, 10 (2008), P10008.

On nding graph clusterings with maximum modularity. Ulrik Brandes, Daniel Delling, Marco Gaertler, Robert Görke, Martin Hoefer, Zoran Nikoloski, Dorothea Wagner, International Workshop on Graph-eoretic Concepts in Computer Science. SpringerUlrik Brandes, Daniel Delling, Marco Gaertler, Robert Görke, Martin Hoefer, Zoran Nikoloski, and Dorothea Wagner. 2007. On nding graph clusterings with maximum modularity. In International Workshop on Graph-eoretic Concepts in Computer Science. Springer, 121-132.

e spread of obesity in a large social network over 32 years. A Nicholas, James H Christakis, Fowler, New England journal of medicine. 357Nicholas A Christakis and James H Fowler. 2007. e spread of obesity in a large social network over 32 years. New England journal of medicine 357, 4 (2007), 370-379.

Networks and the epidemiology of infectious disease. Interdisciplinary perspectives on infectious diseases. Leon Danon, P Ashley, Ford, Chris P House, Jewell, J Ma, Keeling, O Gareth, Joshua V Roberts, Ma Ross, Vernon, Leon Danon, Ashley P Ford, omas House, Chris P Jewell, Ma J Keeling, Gareth O Roberts, Joshua V Ross, and Ma hew C Vernon. 2011. Networks and the epidemiology of infectious disease. Interdisciplinary perspectives on infectious diseases 2011 (2011).

Graph-coupled hmms for modeling the spread of infection. Wen Dong, Alex Pentland, Katherine A Heller, arXiv:1210.4864arXiv preprintWen Dong, Alex Pentland, and Katherine A Heller. 2012. Graph-coupled hmms for modeling the spread of infection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1210.4864 (2012).

How Unique is Your Web Browser?. P Eckersley, Proceedings of the International Symposium on Privacy Enhancing Technologies. the International Symposium on Privacy Enhancing TechnologiesBerlin, GermanyP. Eckersley. 2010. How Unique is Your Web Browser?. In In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Privacy Enhancing Technologies. Berlin, Germany.

Epidemic contact tracing via communication traces. Katayoun Farrahi, Remi Emonet, Manuel Cebrian, PloS one. 95Katayoun Farrahi, Remi Emonet, and Manuel Cebrian. 2014. Epidemic contact tracing via communication traces. PloS one 9, 5 (2014).

2020. antifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital contact tracing. Chris Luca Ferre I, Michelle Wymant, Lele Kendall, Anel Zhao, Lucie Nurtay, Michael Abeler-Dörner, David Parker, Christophe Bonsall, Fraser, Science. 3686491Luca Ferre i, Chris Wymant, Michelle Kendall, Lele Zhao, Anel Nurtay, Lucie Abeler-Dörner, Michael Parker, David Bonsall, and Christophe Fraser. 2020. antifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital contact tracing. Science 368, 6491 (2020).

Device Graphing by Example. Keith Funkhouser, Ma Hew Malloy, Philip Enis Ceyhun Alp, Paul Poon, Barford, Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningACMKeith Funkhouser, Ma hew Malloy, Enis Ceyhun Alp, Philip Poon, and Paul Barford. 2018. Device Graphing by Example. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, 1913-1921.

Reporting of media consumption metrics. Keith Funkhouser, Ma Malloy, Benjamin Itzkowitz, Paul Deitrick, E Frank, Paul Pecjak, Barford, App. 16/103679US PatentKeith Funkhouser, Ma hew L Malloy, Benjamin Itzkowitz, Paul Deitrick, Frank E Pecjak, and Paul Barford. 2020. Reporting of media consumption metrics. US Patent App. 16/103,679.

STeCC: Smart Testing with Contact Counting Enhances Covid-19 Mitigation by. Hossein Gorji, Markus Arnoldini, F David, Wolf-Dietrich Jenny, Patrick Hardt, Jenny, Bluetooth App Based Contact Tracing. medRxiv. Hossein Gorji, Markus Arnoldini, David F Jenny, Wolf-Dietrich Hardt, and Patrick Jenny. 2020. STeCC: Smart Testing with Contact Counting Enhances Covid-19 Mitigation by Bluetooth App Based Contact Tracing. medRxiv (2020).

Community structure and the spread of infectious disease in primate social networks. Charles L Randi H Gri N, Nunn, Evolutionary Ecology. 26Randi H Gri n and Charles L Nunn. 2012. Community structure and the spread of infectious disease in primate social networks. Evolutionary Ecology 26, 4 (2012), 779-800.

A theory of maximum likelihood for weighted infection graphs. Justin Khim, Po-Ling Loh, arXiv:math.ST/1806.05273Justin Khim and Po-Ling Loh. 2018. A theory of maximum likelihood for weighted infection graphs. arXiv:math.ST/1806.05273

Social networks and the spread of infectious diseases: the AIDS example. Alden S Klovdahl, Social science & medicine. 21Alden S Klovdahl. 1985. Social networks and the spread of infectious diseases: the AIDS example. Social science & medicine 21, 11 (1985), 1203-1216.

Alden S Klovdahl, John J Po, Donald E Woodhouse, John B Muth, Q Stephen, William W Muth, Darrow, Social networks and infectious disease: e Colorado Springs study. Social science & medicine. 38Alden S Klovdahl, John J Po erat, Donald E Woodhouse, John B Muth, Stephen Q Muth, and William W Darrow. 1994. Social networks and infectious disease: e Colorado Springs study. Social science & medicine 38, 1 (1994), 79-88.

Internet Device Graphs. Paul Ma Hew Malloy, Barford, Jonathan Enis Ceyhun Alp, Adria Koller, Jewell, Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the 23rd ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningACMMa hew Malloy, Paul Barford, Enis Ceyhun Alp, Jonathan Koller, and Adria Jewell. 2017. Internet Device Graphs. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, 1913-1921.

Graphing Crumbling Cookies. Jon Ma Hew Malloy, Aaron Koller, Cahn, Proceedings of 2019 AdKDD. 2019 AdKDDACMMa hew Malloy, Jon Koller, and Aaron Cahn. 2019. Graphing Crumbling Cookies. In Proceedings of 2019 AdKDD. ACM.

Ad blockers: Global prevalence and impact. Mark Ma Hew Malloy, Aaron Mcnamara, Paul Cahn, Barford, Proceedings of the 2016 Internet Measurement Conference. the 2016 Internet Measurement ConferenceMa hew Malloy, Mark McNamara, Aaron Cahn, and Paul Barford. 2016. Ad blockers: Global prevalence and impact. In Proceedings of the 2016 Internet Mea- surement Conference. 119-125.

Systems and methods for transmi ing content based on co-location. L Ma Hew, Paul Malloy, Barford, App. 15/369512US PatentMa hew L Malloy and Paul Barford. 2018. Systems and methods for transmi ing content based on co-location. US Patent App. 15/369,512.

Systems and methods for generating and transmi ing content based on association of a common device. Ma, Paul Malloy, Ceyhun Barford, Alp, App. 15/726777US PatentMa hew L Malloy, Paul Barford, and Ceyhun Alp. 2019. Systems and methods for generating and transmi ing content based on association of a common device. US Patent App. 15/726,777.

See Which States and Cities Have Told Residents to Stay at Home. Sarah Mervosh, Denise Lu, Vanessa Swales, Sarah Mervosh, Denise Lu, and Vanessa Swales. 2020. See Which States and Cities Have Told Residents to Stay at Home. h ps://www.nytimes.com/interactive/ 2020/us/coronavirus-stay-at-home-order.html. Accessed: 2020-05-20.

Contact network epidemiology: Bond percolation applied to infectious disease prediction and control. Lauren Meyers, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 44Lauren Meyers. 2007. Contact network epidemiology: Bond percolation applied to infectious disease prediction and control. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 44, 1 (2007), 63-86.

Fingerprinting Information in JavaScript implementations. K Mowery, D Bogenreif, S Yilek, H Shacham, Proceedings of Web 2.0 Security and Privacy Workshop (W2SP). Web 2.0 Security and Privacy Workshop (W2SP)Oakland, CAK. Mowery, D. Bogenreif, S. Yilek, and H. Shacham. 2011. Fingerprinting Infor- mation in JavaScript implementations. In Proceedings of Web 2.0 Security and Privacy Workshop (W2SP). Oakland, CA.

Infectious disease and group size: more than just a numbers game. Ferenc Charles L Nunn, Collin M Jordán, Jennifer L Mccabe, Jennifer H Verdolin, Fewell, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 3701669Charles L Nunn, Ferenc Jordán, Collin M McCabe, Jennifer L Verdolin, and Jennifer H Fewell. 2015. Infectious disease and group size: more than just a numbers game. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 370, 1669 (2015), 20140111.

Unraveling the disease consequences and mechanisms of modular structure in animal social networks. Pratha Sah, T Stephan, Leu, C Paul, Cross, J Peter, Shweta Hudson, Bansal, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 114Pratha Sah, Stephan T Leu, Paul C Cross, Peter J Hudson, and Shweta Bansal. 2017. Unraveling the disease consequences and mechanisms of modular structure in animal social networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114, 16 (2017), 4165-4170.

Cross-Device Tracking: Systematic Method to Detect and Measure CDT. Konstantinos Solomos, Panagiotis Ilia, arXiv:1812.11393arXiv preprintSotiris Ioannidis, and Nicolas KourtellisKonstantinos Solomos, Panagiotis Ilia, Sotiris Ioannidis, and Nicolas Kourtellis. 2018. Cross-Device Tracking: Systematic Method to Detect and Measure CDT. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.11393 (2018).

TAPAD Device Graph. TAPAD. 2017. e TAPAD Device Graph. h ps://www.tapad.com/device-graph/

A privacy analysis of cross-device tracking. Sebastian Zimmeck, S Jie, Hyungtae Li, Kim, M Steven, Tony Bellovin, Jebara, 26th {USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 17. Sebastian Zimmeck, Jie S Li, Hyungtae Kim, Steven M Bellovin, and Tony Jebara. 2017. A privacy analysis of cross-device tracking. In 26th {USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 17). 1391-1408.