ZnO@C/PVDF Electrospun Membrane as Piezoelectric Nanogenerator for Wearable Applications


Anshika Bagla 
Department of Physical Sciences
304022Banasthali Vidyapith, RajasthanIndia

Kaliyan Hembram 
Center for Nanomaterials
International Advanced Research Center for Powder Metallurgy & New Materials (ARCI)
500005HyderabadIndia

François Rault 
Univ. Lille
ENSAIT
GEMTEX -Génie et Matériaux Textiles
2461, F-59000LilleULRFrance

Fabien Salaün fabien.salaun@ensait.fr 
Univ. Lille
ENSAIT
GEMTEX -Génie et Matériaux Textiles
2461, F-59000LilleULRFrance

Subramanian Sundarrajan 
Center for Nanofibers & Nanotechnology
Department of Mechanical Engineering
National University of Singapore
117574Singapore, Singapore

Department of Prosthodontics
Saveetha Dental College and Hospitals
Saveetha Institute of Medical & Technical Sciences
Saveetha University
600077ChennaiIndia

Seeram Ramakrishna seeram@nus.edu.sg 
Center for Nanofibers & Nanotechnology
Department of Mechanical Engineering
National University of Singapore
117574Singapore, Singapore

Supratim Mitra supratimmitra@banasthali.in 
Department of Physical Sciences
304022Banasthali Vidyapith, RajasthanIndia

ZnO@C/PVDF Electrospun Membrane as Piezoelectric Nanogenerator for Wearable Applications
06F165675BFC6294C443FF877E6DB050PiezoelectricsPVDFElectrospinningNanocompositeWearables
The rapid growth of wearable technology demands sustainable, flexible, and lightweight energy sources for various applications ranging from health monitoring to electronic textiles.Although wearable devices based on the piezoelectric effect are widespread, achieving simultaneous breathability, waterproof, and enhanced piezoelectric performance remains challenging.Herein, this study aims to develop a piezoelectric nanogenerator (PENG) using ZnO nanofillers in two morphologies (nanoparticles and nanorods), with a carbon coating (ZnO@C) core-cell structure to enhance piezoelectric performance.Electrospinning technique was employed to fabricate a lightweight, breathable, and water-resistant ZnO@C/PVDF membrane, enabling in situ electrical poling and mechanical stretching to enhance electroactive β-phase formation and thus improve piezoelectric performance.A maximum power density of 384.83 µW/cm 3 was obtained at RL = 10 4 kΩ, with a maximum Vout = 19.9V for ZnO@C nanorod-incorporated PVDF samples.The results demonstrate that ZnO@C nanorods exhibit superior voltage output due to their larger surface-to-volume ratio, leading to enhanced interaction with PVDF chains compared to nanoparticles.The fabricated membrane showed promising results with a water vapor transmission rate (WVTR) of ~0.5 kg/m²/day, indicating excellent breathability, and a water contact angle of ~116°, demonstrating significant waterproofness.These findings highlight the potential of the ZnO@C/PVDF electrospun membrane as an effective piezoelectric nanogenerator and energy harvester for wearable applications.

Introduction

The development of wearable technology has increased many folds in recent years due to substantial demand for smart, portable, and flexible devices.These devices cater to a wide range of applications, including health monitoring, human-machine interfaces, consumer electronics, and defence communication, particularly in the form of electronic textiles [1][2][3][4][5].

However, a major hurdle in the widespread commercialization of wearable devices lies in powering them with sustainable, flexible, and lightweight energy sources.Conventional batteries, with their limited capacity, lifetime, and bulkiness, do not meet the requirements.

Consequently, there is a growing interest in energy harvesting technologies that can harness energies form their surrounding environment, such as human motion, mechanical vibrations, converting it into electric energy to provide a sustainable power source [6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14].Ideally, such energy harvesting solution should be polymer-based to ensure flexibility and lightweight properties.

Among various energy harvesting technologies, piezoelectric energy harvesters are more appealing and have been widely explored due to its excellent capacity to convert ambient mechanical energy to electrical energy and vise versa, making them ideal for self-powered wearable sensors and energy harvesters [15,16].Piezoelectric polymers, such as poly (vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) and its co-polymers, are excellent candidates for energy harvesters owing to their flexibility, lightweight nature, high piezoelectric coefficient, and physical and chemical stability [17][18][19].During synthesis, PVDF predominantly crystallizes into the non-electroactive α-phase, which must be converted into electroactive β-phase, along with a minor fraction of γ-phase, to exhibit piezoelectric properties.Additionally, high electric field poling and mechanical stretching are commonly employed [20].Enhancing piezoelectric properties often involves the use of various piezoceramic fillers such as BaTiO3 (BT), NaNbO3, lead zirconate titanate (PZT), and ZnO [20][21][22][23].

Among these, ZnO is particularly promising for wearable application due to its biocompatibility, chemical stability, skin friendliness, antibacterial properties, and large polymer-filler interaction area in composite [24][25][26][27][28]. Mansuri et al. utilized ZnO-nanoparticles within a PVDF matrix for energy harvesting, achieving a maximum output power of 32 nW/cm 2 [29].Similarly, Kim et al. employed ZnO nanorods in PVDF for wearable applications, obtaining an output voltage of 6.36 V [30].Alam et al. introduced ZnO nanoparticles into PVDF for energy harvesting applications [31] and reported an output voltage of 4.8 V, while Islam et al. used ZnO-PVDF composite to fabricate PENGs, yielding an output voltage of 4.2 V [32].Despite these advancements, the piezoelectric performance of ZnOpolymer composite-based PENGs have been restricted by microstructural variability of the ZnO ceramics.

To improve performance of PENGs, researchers have extensively explored conductive fillers, including carbon-based materials such as graphene, and carbon nanotube (CNT), often combined with ceramic fillers as binary additives.This strategy aims to achieve a synergistic improvement by enhancing the electroactive phase content, providing an excellent electrical conductivity to facilitate more charge transfer between piezo-filler and electrodes, and augmenting the dielectric properties of the composite.For instance, Bhaduri et al. demonstrated the incorporation on Mn-doped BaTiO3 (BT) and CNT to develop a self-powered fluoride ion detector, emphasizing the advantage of hybrid fillers in enhancing the piezoelectric output and functionality [33].Bouhamed et al. successfully employed a collaborative network using MWCNT into BaTiO3/PDMS composite to achieve enhanced performance through enhanced conductivity that promotes charge transfer [34].Similarly, Sun et al. highlighted the role of CNTs in enhancing charge transfer and device performance in a flexible ZnO nanoparticlebased nanogenerator [35], while Park et al. demonstrated enhanced piezoelectric output using BaTiO3 nanoparticles combined with graphitic carbon [36].Li et al. also demonstrated the superior piezoelectric output of hierarchical ZnO@CF/PVDF composites for self-powered meteorological sensors, attributing the enhancement to the conductive carbon fiber [37].Among these strategies, core shell carbon coating on ceramic nanofillers have demonstrated exceptional effectiveness in addressing performance bottlenecks in PENGs.Such coating offers superior electrical properties by reducing internal resistance and enhancing interfacial polarization of the ceramic particles by providing a nano-dimensional bridges between piezofiller and electrodes.For example, Li et al. reported that carbon coated BaTiO3-based coreshell BaTiO3/P(VDF-TrFE) composites significantly improved performance in flexible piezoelectric nanogenerators due to better charge transfer, enhancing interfacial polarizations and filler dispersion [38].Furthermore, Zhou et al. emphasized the role of interface-modulated ceramic nanoparticles (BT@C, PZT@C, KNN@C) in PDMS-based composites for efficient energy harvesting [39].Advanced hybrid designs, such as MXene-based fillers embedded in polymer matrices [40] underscore the versatility and efficacy of core-shell designs.

Based on these advancements, this study introduces a novel ZnO@C core-cell structure that significantly improves piezoelectric nanogenerator performances.By synergistically combining ZnO nanofillers with a conductive carbon shell, this design addresses key limitations of traditional ZnO-based PENGs, offering superior charge transfer efficiency, stronger interfacial polarization, and enhanced filler dispersion within PVDF matrix.The carbon coating enhances piezoelectric performance by reducing surface energy, ensuring uniform dispersion, and restricting filler agglomeration.Moreover, the conductive coating facilitates robust interfacial polarization and efficient charge transfer, leading to superior piezoelectric output compared to conventional ZnO-based designs.The high surface-to-volume ratio of ZnO nanorods, combined with the conductive carbon shell, further boosts the electroactive phase content and dielectric properties of the PVDF matrix.These advancements address key challenges in wearable energy-harvesting applications by providing a lightweight, breathable, and water-resistant nanogenerator with improved mechanical integrity and longterm durability.This novel design represents a significant step forward in developing highperformance PENGs for modern energy-harvesting applications.

Thus, this study aims to develop a PENG using ZnO nanofillers in two distinctive morphologies (nanoparticles and nanorods), with a core cell structure coated with carbon (ZnO@C) to enhance piezoelectric performance.The polymeric membrane is fabricated using electrospinning technique to achieve a lightweight, breathable and water-resistant material compared to conventional spin coat or solvent cast method [41,42].Additionally, the electrospinning technique enables in situ electrical poling and mechanical stretching, resulting in increased electroactive β-phase formation in PVDF, further enhancing device performance.


Experimental


Synthesis of Core-cell ZnO@C Nanorods and Nanoparticles

ZnO nanostructures, including both nanorods and nanoparticles, were synthesized using flame spray pyrolysis (FSP) and obtained from the International Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy and New Materials, Hyderabad, India.Notably, the experiments revealed contrasting results when methanol was substituted for ethanol in the precursor solution, while other process parameters kept constant.In particular, the utilization of methanol as the precursor led to the formation of ZnO nanoparticles, whereas the substitution with ethanol resulted in the production of ZnO nanorods.Detailed findings of this experiment can be found in the work of co-author K. Hembram et al. [43,44].The next step involved preparing a core-cell structure of the ZnO nanorods and nanoparticles coated with a carbon layer using polydopamine (PDA).The process began with dispersing 1 g of ZnO nano powders in a solution comprising of 68 ml ethanol and 192 ml deionized water, resulting in a total volume of 260 ml.The solution, labeled as Solution A, was ultrasonicated for 30 min to achieve proper dispersion.Subsequently, a separate solution referred as Solution B was prepared by dissolving dopamine hydrochloride in a mixture of 12 ml ethanol and 12 ml deionized water.The two solutions (Solution A and B) were then mixed together and stirred for 14 h using a magnetic stirrer.As a result, dopamine is coated over ZnO nano powders uniformly as depicted in Figure 1.The dopamine-coated ZnO nano powders were washed five times repeatedly with deionized water and subsequently dried in a vacuum oven at 60°C.Finally, to obtain a core-cell structure of the ZnO@C nanorods and nanoparticles, the powders underwent a heat treatment at 550°C for 2 h in a Nitrogen atmosphere, successfully forming the core-cell ZnO@C nanorods and nanoparticles (carbon coated nanoparticle referred as ZnP, nanorod as ZnR).The inset displays a field emission transmission electron microscope (JEOL, 2100F), FE-TEM image of carbon-coated particle, revealing a carbon layer approximately 7.9 nm thick.


Figure 1:

A schematic illustrates the formation of core-shell ZnO@C nanostructures using dopamine, with the inset displaying a TEM image of carbon-coated ZnO nanofillers.


Preparation and Characterizations of ZnO@C/PVDF Nanofibers

The ZnO@C/PVDF nanofiber membranes were prepared using a custom-made electrospinning setup (Figure S6), with detailed specifications provided in the Supplementary Data File.For this, ZnO@C nanorods and nanoparticles were used separately in varying weight percentages (0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 wt%,).Initially, PVDF (Sigma Aldrich, with weight-average molecular weight, Mw =1,80,000) was dissolved in a solution of N, N-Dimethylformamide (DMF; Sigma Aldrich) and acetone (Sigma Aldrich) mixed in a 1:1 ratio.Other solution parameters (viscosity, conductivity etc.) were optimized and remain unchanged in this work.This mixture was stirred for 2 h at 60°C to achieve a 20 wt% concentration.ZnO@C nanofillers were then slowly added to the solution as a filler, followed by continuous stirring for 10 h at room temperature to ensure thorough dispersion.The resulting solution was then loaded into a 10 ml syringe for use in the electrospinning process, as illustrated in the schematic of Figure 2. The electrospinning parameters were kept consistent across all samples: a needle-to-collector distance of 12 cm, an 18 kV DC voltage supply, a 22-gauge needle of out diameter of 0.70 mm, and a flow rate of 1 ml/h.A novel spinneret movement design was employed, enabling the needle to move in a to-and-fro motion perpendicular to the plane of the metallic plate collector.This design ensured the large area and uniform thickness deposition of fibres onto aluminium foil [45].The collected nanofiber membrane/mat dried at 60°C overnight and subsequently utilized in device fabrication.The as prepared membrane was characterized for phase formation using an X-ray diffractometer (Bruker D8 Advance, Germany) with a Cu-Kα wavelength of λ=1.5404Å, scanned over a range of 10° to 60° at a rate of 0.02°/min, and a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscope (PerkinElmer, USA).Morphological analysis was performed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Tescan MIRA 3 MUG FEG, Czech Republic) was used.The distribution of particle size and fiber diameter was determined from SEM/TEM images using ImageJ 1.44p (National Institutes of Health, USA), a freely available software.


Fabrication of ZnO@C/PVDF Energy Harvesting Device

For the fabrication of the energy harvesting device, we have used aluminium foil (0.025 mm thickness, 99.45% purity, OttoKemi) as electrodes on both sides of the electrospun nanofiber membrane as shown in the Figure 2. To prevent a short circuit between the two opposite electrodes, different dimensions were used, with bottom electrode measuring 2×2 cm 2 and top electrode of 1.5×1.5 cm 2 .The entire device was laminated using a Kapton (polyimide) tape, and copper wires were attached via conductive copper tape (3M, 2245 Conductive Tape, RS India) to ensure proper connectivity, as illustrated in Figure 2. A photo of the fabricated device is also shown in Figure 2. Subsequently, the output voltages from the fabricated device were recorded using a Digital Storage Oscilloscope (DSO) (SDS 1052DL, Siglent Technologies, Netherlands) under varying load resistances (10 kΩ to10 4 kΩ) through a rectifier energy harvesting circuit, as illustrated in Figure 2.


Results and Discussion


ZnO Nanofiller Characterizations

The phase and morphology of ZnO and carbon-coated ZnO nanofillers (ZnO@C) were analysed using X-ray diffractometer (XRD) patterns, scanning electron microscope (SEM) micrographs, and field emission transmission electron microscope (FE-TEM) images, as depicted in Figure 3(a-g).The XRD patterns in Figure 3(g) reveal a hexagonal wurtzite (ZnO) phase for both the fillers, without presence of any secondary phases.All diffraction peaks are indexed to JCPDS 01-079-2205, indicating a highly crystalline structure.The SEM and TEM images, presented in Figure 3(a), (b), (d), and (e), confirm the nanoparticle and nanorod morphologies.The size distribution in Figure 3(h) indicates an average nanoparticles size of 21.9 nm, while Figure 3(i) shows that nanorod of lengths vary from 20 to 80 nm (average nanorod length = 49.9 nm) with diameters ranging from 10 to 20 nm.A uniform thin carbon layer of thickness about 7.9 nm is observed on each ZnO nanofillers, as shown in Figure 3(c) and (f) for nanoparticles and nanorods, respectively.


Phase Identification and Quantification

The influence of varying contents of ZnO@C nanofillers (carbon-coated nanoparticles referred to as ZnP, and nanorod as ZnR) on the formation of different phases of PVDF (α, β, γ) was investigated and quantified using X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy.As shown in Figure 4  To quantify the individual β and γ phases, which is critical for understanding piezoelectric properties, peak deconvolution was performed.Figure 5 presents the deconvoluted peak profiles in the 2θ range of 10-30 o for all the samples.The dominant β-phase peak (110)/(200) at 2θ = 20.26°(in blue) increases with nanofiller content from 0.5% to 2% in both ZnP and ZnR.The α-phase peak (020) at 2θ = 18.3° (in red) is absent in most samples, while appears with very weak intensity in ZnP_1%, ZnP_2%, and ZnR_2%.Another α-phase peak (110) (in light green) is observed in all nanorod samples but is absent in ZnP_1% and ZnP_2% samples.

The γ-phase peak (110) is present in all samples except for nanorods with 2% nanofiller (ZnR_2%).

After identification of individual phases (associated α, β, γ-phase peaks), the crystallinity was calculated from equation (1) using data presented in Figure 5.The degree of crystallinity (χc) was calculated from,
𝜒 𝑐 = ∑ 𝐴 𝑐𝑟 ∑ 𝐴 𝑐𝑟 +∑ 𝐴 𝑎𝑚𝑟 × 100% Equation (1)
where, ∑   and ∑   are the sum of integral area of crystalline peaks and amorphous halo respectively [46].It is observed that the incorporation of ZnR significantly improves the crystallinity compared to ZnP.The percentage crystallinity (χc %) increases from 41.9 % in pure PVDF to 76.1 % in ZnR_2%, whereas a slight decrease in crystallinity is observed with increasing ZnP filler content, as presented in Table 1 and illustrated in Figure 6(a).A comprehensive analysis across a broader spectral range confirms that the 841 cm⁻¹ peak predominantly attributable to the β-phase.Figure 4(b) highlights the dominance of the β-phase peak at 841 cm⁻¹, with ZnR_2% exhibiting the most intense β peak, indicating its enhanced electroactive properties.The electroactive phase was quantified utilizing Equation ( 2), which incorporates the absorbance values corresponding to the dominant alpha (α) peak at 763 cm⁻¹ and the beta (β) peak at 841 cm⁻¹ for all the samples [20].The respective electroactive β-phase percentages are tabulated and summarized in Table 1 using the equation,
F(β) = A(β) {K(β)⁄(K(α)}A(α)+A(β) × 100% Equation (2)
where, the electroactive phase content is represented by F(β), and the absorbance at 763 cm -1 and 840 cm -1 are denoted by A(α)and A(β) respectively.For these wavenumbers, the respective absorption coefficients are K(α) and K(β) with values 6.1 × 10 4 and 7.7 × 10 4 cm 2 mol −1 , respectively.The results presented in Table 1 and illustrated in Figure 6 indicate that the electroactive βphase content increases from 83.0% for pure PVDF to a maximum of 95.0% for ZnP_2% sample, containing 2% ZnO@C nanoparticles.Although the variation in the β-phase content between ZnR and ZnP is insignificant, both morphologies are expected to enhance piezoelectric properties due to their relatively high β-phase proportion (ranging from 91.0 % to 95.0%).

However, piezoelectric performance depends on the overall electroactive (EA) phase content, which is determined by the β-phase proportion within the total crystalline phase.In this context, the overall EA-phase is calculated using the respective (χc × Fβ) % values [46,47] and is presented in Figure 6(b) and Table 1.It is evident that all the nanorod-incorporated PVDF (ZnR) samples exhibit a higher overall EA-phase content compared to its nanoparticle counterpart (ZnP).

Thus, these results can be attributed to the surface charges and dipole interaction for β-phase crystallization, as well as nanofiller alignment along the fiber axis, as schematically presented in Figure 6(c).Specifically, the carbon layer on the ZnO fillers contains a high density of sp 2hybridized carbon atoms with negative charges [48], which induce an ion-dipole interactions with CH2 dipoles in PVDF.As a result, the interfacial attractive interaction between CH2 (δ + ) groups and the negatively charged carbon surface promotes a folded arrangement of PVDF chains into a lamellar arrangement, favouring β-phase crystallization, as illustrated in Figure 6(c).In pure PVDF, the polar β-phase typically forms due to the elongation and simultaneous orientation of the polymer chains under the electric field during the electrospinning.

Furthermore, the addition of ZnO@C nanofillers into PVDF not only acts as nucleating agent but also significantly enhances β-phase crystallization, particularly in case of nanorods.

Because ZnR nanofillers possess a higher surface-to-volume ratio than ZnP (as reported in earlier study by our coauthor Hembram et al. [43]), they provide a greater number of nucleating sites, resulting in an increased crystalline phase fraction in ZnR.Additionally, during the electrospinning, ZnR aligns along the fiber axis, inducing lamellae alignment along the fiber axis, thereby further enhancing β-phase formation, as illustrated in Figure 6(c).In contrast, symmetric and isotropic shape of ZnP lacks the anisotropy, resulting in reduced β-phase formation.Similar phenomena have been observed in CNT/PAN nanofibers by Hou et al. [49] and theoretically explained by Dror et al. for MWCNT-embedded PEO electrospun nanofiber [50].Overall, these findings highlight the critical role of ZnO@C fillers, particularly nanorods, in enhancing piezoelectric properties through mechanism beyond just the relative electroactive β-phase content.


Morphology Study

The SEM micrographs of ZnO@C/PVDF nanofibers and the corresponding fiber diameter distribution of the membranes are illustrated in Figure 7, demonstrating the structural stability of the incorporated nanoparticles and nanorods within PVDF fibers.The adjacent magnified images reveal that incorporating these fillers into the PVDF nanofibers enhances the alignment and distribution of the nanoparticles and nanorods within the fibers, leading to increased stiffness and overall structural reinforcement.The diameters of the nanofiber were found to range from 161 nm to 314 nm.An increase in the concentration of ZnR and ZnP in PVDF during electrospinning not only results in larger nanofiber diameters but also influences the electroactive phases of PVDF.The addition of ZnO filler alters the flow behaviour of the solution, which impedes the stretching and elongation of the polymer jet, resulting in the formation of thicker fibers.Therefore, the incorporation of ZnO not only influences the fiber diameter through viscosity changes but also significantly affects the electroactive phase content, enhancing the functional properties of PVDF nanofibers.


Breathability and Waterproof Performance

The nanofiber membranes utilized for energy harvesting in wearable applications are highly sought after for their breathability, which ensures comfortable skin contact, and their  A schematic of the experimental setup is shown in Figure 8(a).A beaker containing water was fully covered by the nanofiber membrane on its upper surface and placed on a hotplate set to a temperature of 70°C.As the water began to boil, vapour passed through the nanofiber membrane at the top of the beaker.Another beaker, positioned above the first beaker, revealed visible condensation of water droplets on the upper side of the nanofiber, and the presence of vapours was noticeable on the beaker placed above, as illustrated in Figure 8(a).This observation clearly demonstrates substantial water droplet condensation on the upper side of fibre, providing convincing evidence for the notable water vapour permeability, confirming the breathability of the PVDF/ZnO nanofiber membrane.However, the breathability was quantitively evaluated using WVTR by measuring the mass loss of water over a specific time duration, as shown in Figure 8(b).The WVTR values range from 0.4 to 0.6 kg.m -2 .d - for all samples, confirming water vapor permeability comparable to other fiber-based nanogenerators, including cotton woven fabric [51].

The waterproof characteristics of the membrane were assessed through water contact angle (WCA) measurements utilizing the sessile drop method.A water droplet was carefully positioned above each fiber membrane, and subsequent WCA measurements were conducted employing a contact angle measuring microscope [34].All fiber membranes exhibited notable hydrophobicity, However, as representative compositions, the WCA of samples with ZnO@C nanorods (ZnR_2%) and nanoparticles (ZnP_2%), which showed contact angles of 116.56° and 116.81°, respectively, is illustrated in Figure 8(c-d).These results affirm the inherent waterproof nature of the nanofibers.


Dielectric and Piezoelectric Measurements

The frequency-dependent dielectric properties reflect different polarization mechanism within a dielectric material under an alternating electric field, as well as charge transfer effects that contribute to improved piezoelectric performance.Figure 9 illustrates the frequency-dependent dielectric constant and loss, along with the variation of dielectric constant for different filler compositions of ZnO@C/PVDF samples.As seen in Figure 9(a), the dielectric constant remains nearly constant up to ~ 10 4 Hz for all samples and then rapidly decreases with increasing frequency.This is due to accumulation of charges at the heterogeneous dielectric interfaces between carbon-coated ZnO and PVDF, which eventually fail to follow the applied field at higher frequencies (> 10 4 Hz).This higher value of the dielectric constant is attributed to strong interfacial polarization (Maxwell-Wagner-Sillars, MWS), which enhances dipole alignment within the PVDF matrix.At low frequencies, dielectric loss primarily arises from interfacial polarization and space charge accumulation, whereas at high frequencies, it is attributed to charge mobility within the conductive carbon shell, which increases leakage currents.However, the frequency-independent and moderate dielectric loss value ranging from 0.4 to 0.5 across all ZnO@C/PVDF nanofiber membranes suggests efficient charge accumulation with minimal leakage.

Furthermore, the overall dielectric constant increases consistently with increasing ZnR filler content.In contrast, for ZnP samples, the dielectric constant initially increases up to 0.5% filler concentration but then declines.This trend can be explained by the high surface-to-volume ratio of ZnR, which offers larger interfacial area for interaction with PVDF, thereby enhancing dipole alignment and interfacial polarization.At higher ZnP content, excessive filler aggregation leads the system to a higher percolation threshold, disrupting the insulating PVDF matrix and reducing the dielectric constant.The energy harvesting data were acquired using a digital storage oscilloscope (DSO) through continuous human finger tapping on the device surface.Under a periodic finger imparted force (~ 25 N, frequency = 4 Hz, refer to Supplementary Data File for detailed calculations), the piezoelectric effect facilitated the accumulation of electric charges, converting mechanical energy into electrical energy.Typically, the piezoelectric output is recorded as open-circuit voltage (Voc) and short-circuit current (Isc), with their corresponding power density calculated as, Voc × Isc.However, from the practical aspect, a nanogenerator must be connected to a load resistance (RL) rather than operating under open-or short-circuit conditions to avoid overestimating power density [52].Therefore, the rectified output voltage (Vout), obtained using a rectifier circuit (Figure 2), was carefully measured under varying load resistance (RL) for each sample, as illustrated in Figure 10(a).The corresponding power density of the device across an externally connected variable load resistance (RL) ranging from 10 kΩ to 10 5 kΩ was measured, as shown in Figure 10(b).The instantaneous power was calculated using the equation, P = Vout 2 /RL, and power density was determined by using P/ (area × thickness) and is listed in Table 2.   Despite minimal variation in the EA-phase between ZnP and ZnR, the piezoelectric output differs significantly due to differences in charge mobility and interfacial polarization.This confirms that the carbon shell is the key for obtaining superior performance of ZnO@C-based PENGs, regardless of their morphology or filler content.The piezoelectric potential generated within the nanofillers under mechanical force induces the movement and accumulation of mobile charges on the carbon-layer, amplifying the voltage and enhancing the piezoelectric output.Additionally, carbon-layer facilitates strong interfacial polarization between nanofillers and polymer matrix, as confirmed from dielectric measurements.

Furthermore, Table 3


Conclusions

In conclusion, carbon-coated core cell ZnO nanostructured fillers (ZnO@C) with nanoparticle (ZnPs) and nanorod (ZnRs) morphologies were successfully incorporated into PVDF nanocomposites, significantly enhancing their piezoelectric performances.Electrospinning not only facilitated the formation of the electroactive β-phase in PVDF but also imparted breathability and waterproof properties.The enhanced piezoelectric response is primarily attributed to the carbon coating on ZnO, which effectively enhances the ion-dipole interaction between the negatively charged carbon and the CH2 groups of the PVDF chain.These interactions promote a well-ordered arrangement of PVDF chain into an electroactive β-phase.

Notably, while both ZnPs and ZnRs exhibited minimal variation in the electroactive phase, ZnRs demonstrated superior voltage output.This highlights the pivotal role of conductive carbon layer in achieving enhanced performance in ZnO@C based PENGs, irrespective of their morphology or filler content.Under mechanical stress, the nanofillers undergo self-polarization through the migration and accumulation of mobile charges on carbon layer, essentially amplifying the overall voltage output.Furthermore, the superior piezoelectric performances of nanorods can be attributed to their high anisotropy and larger surface-to-volume ratio compared to nanoparticles.The conductive carbon layer on the nanofillers enhances interfacial polarization, further improving piezoelectric performance, while the reduced surface energy of ZnO@C ensures better dispersibility within the PVDF matrix.

A breathability test, measured using the water vapour transmission rate (WVTR), yielded a value of ~ 0.5 kg/m 2 /day, indicating excellent breathability.Additionally, the waterproofness, calculated through water contact angle measurements, showed a value of ~116 o , confirming strong waterproof properties.The innovative idea of introducing a thin conducting layer between nanofillers and polymer matrix offers an active area for mobile charge to accumulate and polarize the nanofillers, significantly boosting the piezoelectric output.These findings establish the ZnO@C/PVDF membrane as an efficient wearable piezoelectric nanogenerator, paving the way for self-powered electronics, biomedical sensor, and flexible energy harvesting systems.

Figure 2 :
2
Figure 2: Schematic of electrospun nanofiber preparation, flexible energy harvesting device and AC-DC Energy harvesting circuit used to measure piezoelectric output.


Figure 3 :
3
Figure 3: ZnO nanofiller characterizations showing (a) SEM, (b) TEM, and (c) TEM of carbon coated nanoparticle; (d) SEM, (e) TEM, and (f) TEM of carbon coated nanorod; (g) XRD patterns of ZnO nanorod and nanoparticle; (h)-(f) particle size distribution of ZnO nanoparticle and rod respectively.




(a), the XRD patterns reveal prominent peaks corresponding to the α-phase (020) at 2θ =18.3°, the β-phase (110)/(200) at 2θ = 20.26°, and a mixed phase of β and γ (110) at 2θ = 20.5°.Additionally, two relatively weak characteristic peaks of the β-phase are observed at 2θ = 36.2o and around 57.0 o , corresponding to the (101) and (221) planes, respectively.


Figure 4 :
4
Figure 4: (a) XRD patterns and (b) FTIR spectrum of ZnO@C/PVDF nanofibers.


Figure 5 :
5
Figure 5: Quantification of different phases of XRD for ZnO@C/PVDF nanocomposite film with varying filler content (0.5, 1.0, 2.0 wt%)


Figure 6
6
Figure 6 (a) Crystallinity (%), and (b) overall electroactive phase (%) with varying filler content, (c) schematic illustration of interaction between nanofillers and PVDF polymer chain.


Figure 7 :
7
Figure 7: SEM micrographs and distribution of fiber diameter of all ZnO@C/PVDF nanofibers.




waterproof nature.The breathability of the membrane was evaluated by measuring the water vapour transmission rate (WVTR) using Fickian diffusion relation, following ASTM E 96-97, is the weight loss of water (in kg), A is the test surface area (in m 2 ), t is the time duration (days, with 1 day = 24 h).


Figure 8 :
8
Figure 8: (a) Schematic and process of mass loss from beaker through nanofiber membrane (b) mass-loss per hour in nanofiber membrane (c-d) water contact angle measurement of nanofiber membrane for measuring its hydrophobicity.


Figure 9 :
9
Figure 9: Variation of dielectric constant with (a) frequency, (b) different filler content, and (c) of dielectric loss with frequency for all the ZnO@C/PVDF samples.


Figure 10 :
10
Figure 10: (a) Piezoelectric output voltage vs load resistance (b) power density vs load resistance (c) Open-circuit voltage (Voc) vs time (d) cyclic stability test for all the ZnO@C/PVDF devices.


Furthermore, to evaluate

a more realistic output performance of the piezoelectric membrane, open-circuit voltage (Voc) vs. time was recorded at load resistance, RL =10 4 Ω, that corresponds to the value at maximum power density (Figure 10(b)).The results are presented in Figure 10(c).The time-resolved peak of Voc shown in the inset during a pressing and releasing confirms the output is due to piezoelectric effect.The long-term electromechanical stability was evaluated through a custom-made mechanical stimulation setup (Supplementary Data File, S7) recorded over 1000 seconds for each sample.The results, shown in Figure 10(d), indicate consistent output from the developed PENG, confirming its suitability for practical applications.












Table 1 :
1
Quantification of overall electroactive (EA) phase (%) for ZnO@C/PVDF nanocomposite film with varying filler content (0.5, 1.0, 2.0 wt%)
Fillerχc (%)Fβ (%)Overall EA PhaseContent(%)(wt%)= (χc × Fβ)(NR)(NP)(NR)(NP)(NR)(NP)041.941.983.083.034.834.80.568.868.193.091.064.061.9172.164.992.092.066.359.7276.165.092.095.069.961.8

Table 2 :
2
Piezoelectric output voltage and power density of ZnO@C/PVDF devices.
Sample IdVOUTMaximum PowerLoad(Max)DensityResistance(Volt)(µW/cm 3 )(RL) (MΩ)@PmaxZnO_0%4.649.261ZnP_0.5%7 7.864ZnP_1%7.86 6.4543.402ZnP_2%3.98133.173ZnR_0.5%6.19 6.1958.333ZnR_1%13.83279.444ZnR_2%19.9384.836A maximum power density of 384.83 µW/cm 3 was obtained at RL = 10 4 kΩ, with acorresponding maximum Vout = 19.9 V for the ZnR_2% samples. In the study involvingnanoparticles (ZnP), the highest output voltage of 4.24 V was recorded at a filler concentrationof 0.5%, resulting in a maximum power density of 124.98 µW/cm³ for ZnP_0.5%. Fornanorods, an output voltage 19.9 V and maximum power density 384.83µW/cm 3 were observedat 2% filler concentration (ZnR_2%).



[32,37,[53][54][55][56][57]different synthesis methods and their corresponding output with the finding of this study.Compared to previous investigations on PVDF/ZnO nanocomposite films, the current study has achieved a substantially higher open circuit voltage (Voc ~ 19.9V)[32,37,[53][54][55][56][57].


Table 3 :
3
Comparative study of different method and their corresponding piezoelectric output with present study.
Materials UsedSynthesisPowerOutputMode ofRefMethodDensityVoltageTesting(mW/cm²)(Volts)PVDF/ZnOSpin coating0.225.3Bending motion[32]nanocompositeCNT/ZnO/PVDFSolution Casting0.661.32Mechanical[58]DeformationZnOSupersonic12.515.2Tappingmicrorods/PVDFspraying[59]BreathableElectrospinning0.5212.6Wearable[30].ZnO@PVDF fibrousapplicationsnanogeneratorZnO/PVDF compositeSpin Coating-4.2Hand-Pressing[60]Paper ash-Electrospinning1.18.3Wind energy[31]ZnO/PVDFharvestingnanofibersPVDF/ZnO@C nanocomposite fibersElectrospinning45.9219.9Hand TappingThis Study
Acknowledgement: Not ApplicableConflict of interest: All authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.Author Contribution (CRediT): Anshika Bagla: Performed experiment, Writing-original draft, Data curation, Formal Analysis, Investigation Kaliyan Hembram: Provided ZnO powders, Validation, Investigation François Rault: Writing-review & editing, Validation Fabien Salaün: Writing-review & editing, Supervision Subramanian Sundarrajan: Writing-review & editing Seeram Ramakrishna: Writing-review & editing, Supervision Supratim Mitra: Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision, Writing-original draft, ValidationData Availability: Not ApplicableSupplementary Data File: AvailableEthical approval: Not Applicable
Recent progress in piezoelectric nanogenerators as a sustainable power source in self-powered systems and active sensors. Y Hu, Z L Wang, Nano Energy. 142015

Ultralight Cut-Paper-Based Self-Charging Power Unit for Self-Powered Portable Electronic and Medical Systems. H Guo, ACS Nano. 1152017

The Triboelectric Nanogenerator as an Innovative Technology toward Intelligent Sports. J Luo, W Gao, Z L Wang, Advanced Materials. 33172021. 2004178

A review on polymer nanofibers by electrospinning and their applications in nanocomposites. Z.-M Huang, Composites Science and Technology. 63152003

Electrospun nanomembranes at the liquid-liquid and solid-liquid interface -a review. S Osali, Materials Today. 672023

Monitoring of Vital Signs with Flexible and Wearable Medical Devices. Y Khan, Advanced Materials. 28222016

Wearable and Implantable Mechanical Energy Harvesters for Self-Powered Biomedical Systems. R Hinchet, S.-W Kim, ACS Nano. 982015

Fiber/Fabric-Based Piezoelectric and Triboelectric Nanogenerators for Flexible/Stretchable and Wearable Electronics and Artificial Intelligence. K Dong, X Peng, Z L Wang, Advanced Materials. 32519025492020

Review-The Development of Wearable Polymer-Based Sensors. C Harito, Perspectives. Journal of The Electrochemical Society. 1673375662020

Electrospun transparent nanofibers as a next generation face filtration media: A review. Z Zhang, Biomater Adv. 1492133902023

Stretchable, flexible and breathable polylactic acid/polyvinyl pyrrolidone bandage based on Kirigami for wounds monitoring and treatment. L Xu, Int J Biol Macromol. 2371242042023

Electrospinning of nano/micro scale poly(L-lactic acid) aligned fibers and their potential in neural tissue engineering. F Yang, Biomaterials. 26152005

Electrospun nanofibers: solving global issues. S Ramakrishna, Materials Today. 932006

Electrospun nanofibers in energy and environmental applications. V Thavasi, G Singh, S Ramakrishna, Energy & Environmental Science. 122052008

A review of piezoelectric energy harvesting based on vibration. H S Kim, J.-H Kim, J Kim, International Journal of Precision Engineering and Manufacturing. 1262011

High-Performance Piezoelectric Energy Harvesters and Their Applications. Z Yang, Joule. 242018

Enhancing the current density of a piezoelectric nanogenerator using a three-dimensional intercalation electrode. L Gu, Nature Communications. 11110302020

Self-powered flexible pressure sensors with vertically well-aligned piezoelectric nanowire arrays for monitoring vital signs. X Chen, Journal of Materials Chemistry C. 32015

Efficient Energy Harvesting Using Processed Poly(vinylidene fluoride) Nanogenerator. A Gaur, ACS Applied Energy Materials. 12018

Electroactive phases of poly(vinylidene fluoride): Determination, processing and applications. P Martins, A C Lopes, S Lanceros-Mendez, Progress in Polymer Science. 201439

High output piezoelectric nanocomposite generators composed of oriented BaTiO3 NPs@PVDF. Y Zhao, Nano Energy. 112015

Large d33 and enhanced ferroelectric/dielectric properties of poly(vinylidene fluoride)-based composites filled with Pb(Zr0.52Ti0.48)O3 nanofibers. J Chang, 2015RSC Advances5

Fabrication and piezoelectric-pyroelectric properties of electrospun PVDF/ZnO composite fibers. G.-Y Li, Materials Research Express. 79955022020

Human safety review of "nano" titanium dioxide and zinc oxide. K Schilling, Photochemical & Photobiological Sciences. 942010

Safety Evaluation of Sunscreen Formulations Containing Titanium Dioxide and Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles in UVB Sunburned Skin: An In Vitro and In Vivo Study. N A Monteiro-Riviere, Toxicological Sciences. 12312011

Enhancing dielectric and piezoelectric properties of micro-ZnO/PDMS composite-based dielectrophoresis. X Zhang, Materials & Design. 1921087832020

Visible-light-responsive photocatalyst based on ZnO/CdS nanocomposite for photodegradation of reactive red azo dye and ofloxacin antibiotic. T Senasu, Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing. 1231055582021

Insight into Biological Effects of Zinc Oxide Nanoflowers on Bacteria: Why Morphology Matters. Q Cai, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces. 8162016

Investigation on the electrospun PVDF/NP-ZnO nanofibers for application in environmental energy harvesting. S Mansouri, T F Sheikholeslami, A Behzadmehr, Journal of Materials Research and Technology. 822019

Breathable and Flexible Piezoelectric ZnO@PVDF Fibrous Nanogenerator for Wearable Applications. M Kim, Polymers (Basel). 7102018

An Effective Wind Energy Harvester of Paper Ash-Mediated Rapidly Synthesized ZnO Nanoparticle-Interfaced Electrospun PVDF Fiber. M M Alam, ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering. 20176

M J Islam, Piezoelectric Nanogenerators Fabricated Using Spin Coating of Poly(vinylidene fluoride) and ZnO Composite. Nanomaterials (Basel). 202313

Self-Powered Fluoride Ion Detectors Based on Piezoelectric Nanogenerators with Filler Materials Comprising Mn-Doped BaTiO3 Nanostructures and Carbon Nanotubes. A Bhaduri, S Singh, M K Gupta, ACS Applied Nano Materials. 62023

Collaborative Filler Network for Enhancing the Performance of BaTiO3/PDMS Flexible Piezoelectric Polymer Composite Nanogenerators. A Bouhamed, 10.3390/s22114181Sensors. 222022

A novel flexible nanogenerator made of ZnO nanoparticles and multiwall carbon nanotube. H Sun, Nanoscale. 52013

Flexible Nanocomposite Generator Made of BaTiO3 Nanoparticles and Graphitic Carbons. K.-I Park, Advanced Materials. 24222012

High-performance piezoelectric nanogenerators based on hierarchical ZnO@CF/PVDF composite film for self-powered meteorological sensor. Y Li, Journal of Materials Chemistry A. 11252023

The construction of BaTiO3-based core-shell composites for highperformance and flexible piezoelectric nanogenerators. L Li, Sensors and Actuators A: Physical. 3631145532023

Interface modulated 0-D piezoceramic nanoparticles/PDMS based piezoelectric composites for highly efficient energy harvesting application. Z Zhou, Nano Energy. 821057092021

Piezo-triboelectric hybridized nanogenerator embedding MXene based bifunctional conductive filler in polymer matrix for boosting electrical power. J Yun, Nano Energy. 

Flexible piezoelectric nanogenerators using metal-doped ZnO-PVDF films. C Jin, Sensors and Actuators A: Physical. 3051119122020

Superior performances of in situ synthesized ZnO/PVDF thin film based self-poled piezoelectric nanogenerator and self-charged photo-power bank with high durability. P Thakur, Nano Energy. 442018

Large-scale manufacture of ZnO nanorods by flame spray pyrolysis. K Hembram, Journal of Nanoparticle Research. 152013

Efficient ZnO-based visible-light-driven photocatalyst for antibacterial applications. R Kumar, ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 62014

An Electrospun Fiber Producing Method and Thereof. S Mitra, 2024Banasthali Vidyapith: India

The in situ formation of platinum nanoparticles and their catalytic role in electroactive phase formation in poly(vinylidene fluoride): a simple preparation of multifunctional poly(vinylidene fluoride) films doped with platinum nanoparticles. S K Ghosh, M M Alam, D Mandal, 2014RSC Advances4

An Approach to Design Highly Durable Piezoelectric Nanogenerator Based on Self-Poled PVDF/AlO-rGO Flexible Nanocomposite with High Power Density and Energy Conversion Efficiency. S K Karan, Advanced Energy Materials. 616010162016. 20

Synergistic effect of graphene nanosheet and BaTiO3 nanoparticles on performance enhancement of electrospun PVDF nanofiber mat for flexible piezoelectric nanogenerators. K Shi, Nano Energy. 522018

Electrospun Polyacrylonitrile Nanofibers Containing a High Concentration of Well-Aligned Multiwall Carbon Nanotubes. H Hou, Chemistry of Materials. 1752005

. Y Dror, Carbon Nanotubes Embedded in Oriented Polymer Nanofibers by Electrospinning. Langmuir. 19172003

Breathable and Flexible Piezoelectric ZnO@PVDF Fibrous Nanogenerator for Wearable Applications. M Kim, 10.3390/polym10070745Polymers. 102018

Performance of dopamine modified 0.5(Ba0.7Ca0.3)TiO3-0.5Ba(Zr0.2Ti0.8)O3 filler in PVDF nanocomposite as flexible energy storage and harvester. C Mitharwal, Journal of Alloys and Compounds. 8761601412021

Flexible Piezoelectric Nanogenerators Using Metal-doped ZnO-PVDF Films. C Jin, Sens Actuators A Phys. 3052020

Flexible ZnO:PVDF based free standing piezoelectric nanogenerator for vibrational energy harvesting and wearable shoe insole pedometer sensor. A Mahapatra, Journal of Alloys and Compounds. 9601708982023

Effect of ZnO particle size on piezoelectric nanogenerators and mechanical energy harvesting. K G Motora, Express Polymer Letters. 16112022

Supersonically Sprayed Flexible ZnO/PVDF Composite Films with Enhanced Piezoelectricity for Energy Harvesting and Storage. D P Ojha, International Journal of Energy Research. 2023. 2023

Enhanced piezoelectric performance of PVDF/BiCl3/ZnO nanofiberbased piezoelectric nanogenerator. D Zhang, European Polymer Journal. 1661109562022

Molybdenum sulphide incorporated flexible poly(vinylidene fluoride) nanocomposites for energy harvesting and water remediation by dye degradation via piezocatalysis. A Aishwarya, Polymer Composites. 2025

Supersonically Sprayed Flexible ZnO/PVDF Composite Films with Enhanced Piezoelectricity for Energy Harvesting and Storage. D P Ojha, International Journal of Energy Research. 2023130747822023

Piezoelectric Nanogenerators Fabricated Using Spin Coating of Poly(vinylidene fluoride) and ZnO Composite. M J Islam, 10.3390/nano13071289Nanomaterials. 132023