Why Temporal Locality Matters: Evaluating Cache Performance for Content-on-Demand Distribution
31 May 2013

Stefano Traverso Politecnico 
NEC Labs Europe
NEC Labs Europe


Di Torino 
NEC Labs Europe
NEC Labs Europe


Mohamed Ahmed 
NEC Labs Europe
NEC Labs Europe


Michele Garetto 
NEC Labs Europe
NEC Labs Europe


Unversit 
NEC Labs Europe
NEC Labs Europe


Torino Paolo 
NEC Labs Europe
NEC Labs Europe


Giaccone Politecnico 
NEC Labs Europe
NEC Labs Europe


Di Torino 
NEC Labs Europe
NEC Labs Europe


Emilio Leonardi Politecnico 
NEC Labs Europe
NEC Labs Europe


Di Torino 
NEC Labs Europe
NEC Labs Europe


Saverio Niccolini 
NEC Labs Europe
NEC Labs Europe


Why Temporal Locality Matters: Evaluating Cache Performance for Content-on-Demand Distribution
31 May 2013Categories and Subject Descriptors C21 [ Network Architecture and Design] General Terms: Theory, Measurement and modeling Keywords: Caching
The dimensioning of caching systems represents a difficult task in the design of infrastructures for content distribution in the current Internet. Any performance evaluation study, either analytical or simulative, requires, in the first place, to incorporate a realistic arrival process of contents' requests generated by users. The goal of this paper is two-fold: first, with the help of Youtube traces collected inside operational residential networks, we identify which characteristics of real traffic need to be taken into account for an accurate prediction of cache performance, and which, instead, can be neglected; second, we propose a new, parsimonious traffic model, named Shot Noise Model (SNM), which natively captures the dynamics of contents' popularity, providing a much better solution to account for the temporal locality in the traffic than existing approaches. Our SNM is sufficiently simple to be effectively employed in both analytical and scalable simulative studies of caching systems.

INTRODUCTION

Content caching plays a critical role in network operation by reducing the distance packets travel in the network. This results in lowered costs for operators and improved quality of service for end users. It is therefore no surprise that content caching plays a central role in many recent approaches to improve network performance and utilisation, including Information Centric Networking (ICN) [1,2], resource management in cellular networks [3,4], energy efficient networking [5], massively geographically distributed CDNs [6] and ISP-assisted CDNs [7].

However, when evaluating the benefits of their methodology, researchers are faced with the familiar question of what to evaluate their proposals on. This is particularly poignant for network researchers looking to understand the impact of millions of users accessing millions of content objects on a network. The usual methodology here is to perform trace-driven analysis, collecting traces of the phenomena in question and using them to drive simulations and emulations [3,4,6,7,8].

There are however two issues here. First, trace-driven analysis is effective only when large data sets are available, which for most researchers is not the case: too often we are limited by the size and/or the availability of data sets, their diversity, or legal and privacy concerns. Second, this kind of analysis does not allow us to test potential changes in the traffic profile, such as changes in the content popularity profiles before they actually take place. In short, in order to evaluate caching systems, we must build models that allow us to evaluate effects that are too large to test in the wild, for which there are no data traces available, or that correspond to scenarios which do not yet exist in operational systems.

In this work we focus on the problem of defining a model that accurately approximates content request rates, in particular for Videoon-Demand (VoD) systems. This problem is at the heart of determining the accuracy of the many simulation and model-based results that aim to understand the performance of caching systems. This is important: given the preponderance of multimedia traffic in today's networks [8], it is reasonable to assume that the performance of the network as a whole is largely dominated by the effects of content delivery, and will become more so in the future.

Our contributions in this space are two-fold. First, using real traffic traces we present the first quantification of the cache system performance errors introduced by the the classical Independent Reference Model (IRM) [9], the de-facto standard synthetic traffic model [10,11]. We show that the IRM leads to considerable errors, rendering its use in this context misguided at best; we believe this to be an important results given the model's wide application [5,6,12,13]. As our second contribution we propose a novel replacement to the IRM called the Shot-Noise Model (SNM). SNM overcomes IRM's shortcomings by explicitly accounting for the temporal locality of content requests, while still maintaining the IRM's desirable properties of simplicity and scalability. Further, we validate SNM's accuracy against our traffic traces.

The temporal locality of requests and its potential effects on caching systems has already been studied in [14,15,16,17]. However, these works mainly consider early WWW traffic whose profile significantly differs from today's Video-on-Demand traffic; this explains why some of the claims in these papers contradict our findings. Moreover, previous work has primarily focused on the distribution of inter-requests times for a given object [15,17], or on the distribution of object requests that fall between two consecutive requests for a given object [14], providing only a partial characterisation of temporal locality. In sum, none of these papers have proposed a phenomenological model that captures the fundamental origins of temporal locality, as we do in our work.


THE STANDARD APPROACH

The most common approach to evaluating the performance of caching systems is to assume that content requests are generated under the IRM, with the request distribution following a generalised Zipf law [6,10,11,12,18]. The IRM considers a fixed population of N contents, such that the sequence of content requests arriving at the cache is characterised by the following set of fundamental properties: the probability of a request for a given content n, for 1 ≤ n ≤ N , is constant (i.e. the content's popularity does not vary over time) and independent of all past requests, and, finally, the set of available contents does not change over time. While in its simplest form, Zipf's law states that the probability of requesting the nth most popular item is proportional to 1/n α , where the exponent α depends on the considered system (especially on the type of contents) [2]. IRM is widely adopted because of its simplicity and effectiveness in facilitating the development of tractable analytic models for various caching policies [19,20,21]. Although clearly the assumptions made by the IRM are too rigid and unrealistic for real traffic, IRM has been advocated as an acceptable approximation when the popularity variations of contents over time are relatively slow when compared to the time-scale of the content churn in the cache [10]. Some extensions of the IRM, aimed at capturing temporal correlations in the request process, have been proposed in the literature for applications other than video-on-demand [22,23,24]. All of them, differently from our SNM model, assume that requests for each content are drawn from a fixed catalogue, and follow a stationary process (either a renewal process or a Markov or Semi-Markov Modulated Poisson process); therefore they ignore the temporal evolution of content popularity, which plays a crucial role in our context.

In the rest of this section, we question the applicability of the arguments for the IRM by critically discussing the common assumptions made when utilising it. Using real data traces, we show that the IRM assumption leads to significant errors when applied to the task of cache performance analysis.


Data Set

Our work relies on passive measurements to characterise the popularity profiles of YouTube videos in operational networks. We employed Tstat, an open-source traffic monitoring tool developed at Politecnico di Torino, to analyse packets exchanged by actual end-users inside monitored vantage points [25]. Tstat was installed in three PoPs (located in different large cities) of a large Italian ISP, connecting residential customers through ADSL and FTTH access technologies. Measurements were collected on incoming and outgoing traffic carrying YouTube videos for a period of three months, from mid March 2012 to late May 2012. During this period, we observed the activity of more than 60,000 end-users accessing the Internet normally. The traces consider only TCP flows corresponding to YouTube downloads. In total, we recorded almost 10 million transactions, accounting for approximately 227 TB of delivered content. Table 2 provides more details on the traces considered in our analysis; note that here, each IP is associated to one household. We verified that findings from TRACES 1-4 are general and not biased, since the results of their analysis are all almost identical.


Mistakes and Limitations of the IRM

The main difficulty that is encountered when adopting an IRM approach is the specification of the content popularity distribution, subject to a given content catalogue of size N . This distribution must be chosen with extreme care, since the cache performance depends heavily on the relative popularity of different contents [2,15]. While the choice of a Zipf distribution (and its generalisations) The cache size required to achieve a desired hit probability, when an LRU cache is fed by the requests contained in TRACE 1, subject to different degrees of trace reshuffling. Note that K = 1 corresponds to the basic IRM.

is supported by experimental evidence, including measurements of web pages, file sharing, video-on-demand and user generated content access profiles, its parameterisation is not obvious.

Indeed, given the availability of a long data trace, it is easy for practitioners to fall into the trap of directly plugging a popularity distribution estimated from long-term measurements into the cache model. Even when it is reasonable to assume that cache dynamics are much faster than popularity variations (so that we can apply a time-scale separation), the instantaneous popularity distribution can differ significantly from the distribution derived from long-term measurement campaigns.

We use TRACE 1 to illustrate the impact of directly applying popularity distributions estimated from long-term measurements. Here, we derive different empirical popularity distributions for the contents in the trace by first dividing it into K slices, such that each slice contains exactly the same number of requests. We then compute the relative popularity of the contents in each slice (normalised to one), with respect to the total number of requests observed in the slice. The results of this experiment are reported in Fig.1, which plots, for each rank position of the 100 most popular videos, the average and the 5 − 95 percentiles for the relative frequency of requests (evaluated across the K slices).

We observe that the steepness of the empirical distribution of content popularity increases significantly with respect to the number of slices considered (K). In practice, increasing K corresponds to having larger estimates of α for the Zipf distribution, and fitting the value of α for the tail of the distributions, we find that α ranges from 0.70 (K = 1) to 0.85 (K = 120). Moreover, we observe that, as shown by the widening of the error bars, increasing values of K result in a higher variance in the relative popularity. The practical side effect of this observation is that estimations of the popularity distribution become more noisy as we decrease the time scale we look at (increase K). It therefore becomes increasingly more difficult to derive from a trace a reliable estimate of the popularity distribution at smaller and smaller time scales. The error arising from the use of the long-term popularity distribution to predict cache performance (following the IRM approach) can be significant for a cache implementing the Least Recently Used (LRU) eviction policy (as we will see when discussing Fig. 2). The reason for this can be easily understood when we consider that the above error is equivalent to that introduced by completely neglecting all temporal correlations (the so-called "temporal locality") in the arrival process of requests. Indeed, suppose that we shuffle at random a trace of requests: the long-term popularity distribution resulting from the shuffled sequence remains exactly the same as before, while we totally break all temporal correlations.

We could still pursue the IRM approach and correct for the loss in temporal correlation, however, this is not a straightforward task. To do so, we would first need to determine an "evaluation interval" for the popularity, comparable with the time-scale of cache dynamics. Assuming that popularity variations over this evaluation interval are negligible, we would then need to compute a modified popularity distribution for the contents requested in the interval. Notice that in doing so, we would need to compute it on a reduced catalogue of size much less than N , which is necessary in order to properly normalise the request probabilities relative to the interval.

Finally, to show the impact the loss in temporal locality has when evaluating the performance of a cache, in Fig. 2 we compare the cache size required to achieve a given cache hit rate when using the original trace (TRACE 1) and synthetic traces (derived from TRACE 1) in which we control the degree of temporal locality in the trace. To construct the synthetic traces, we again partition the original trace into K slices, but now randomly permute the requests within each slice in order to remove their temporal locality so that consecutive requests become independent.

It is worth noting that, due to the limited duration of our traces, we were constrained to considering cache sizes such that the eviction time (i.e., the time since the last request after which a content is evicted from the cache) is significantly shorter than the whole trace duration. Under the request rate observed in our traces, the average eviction time is 2-3 days for cache size in the order of 50, 000 objects, which is the maximum considered in our experiments. This explains why in Fig. 2 we could only report hit probabilities in the range [0, 0.25].

From Fig. 2, the case K = 1 corresponds to breaking all temporal correlations (i.e., the result of a naive application of the IRM approach). By increasing K, we reduce the average size of the time window considered by each slice and obtain artificial traces that are increasingly more similar to the original trace, i.e., temporal correlations are broken only within slices of diminishing length. We show two important findings. First, the IRM assumption leads to a significant over-estimation (by a factor between 2 and 10) of the required cache size, specially when the hit probability is low. Second, the impact of increasing K (i.e., decreasing the temporal duration of slices) is that the required cache size approaches the result for the unmodified trace, especially as the slice duration approaches Interestingly, Fig. 2 also suggests that, in this particular scenario, the IRM approach would produce accurate predictions of cache performance, provided that we are able to estimate the relative popularity of contents requested within intervals of duration around one day. However, this approach has several problems: • As shown by Fig. 1 it is very hard in practice to obtain, from measurements, a content popularity distribution for short time-scales, due to random fluctuations and possible long-range effects in the trace. • It is even harder to check that popularity variations are negligible over the chosen interval, especially for the least popular contents, for which we have fewer samples. • In practice, the evaluation interval should be adapted to the timescale of cache dynamics. This inevitably depends on several factors (aggregate requests arrival rate, cache size, caching policy, etc.), and forces us to recompute a different popularity distribution for each scenario. • The time-scale of cache dynamics itself depends on the popularity distribution that we are trying to characterise, leading to a chicken-and-egg problem. • It is even possible (although only for very large caches and/or small request rates) that popularity variations cannot be considered negligible with respect to cache dynamics, rendering the IRM approach inaccurate. For all the above reasons, in contrast to the common opinion, we believe that the IRM approach has severe limitations, especially in scenarios characterised by dynamic contents with evolving popularity profiles. A normal consequence of this result is a need for alternative approaches capable of recapturing the temporal locality of contents. Before presenting our solution, we first take a closer look at the behaviour of content requests in our real-world traffic traces.


TOWARDS A NEW MODEL

In this section we study the properties of our data traces with the goal of identifying the main factors that should be considered in our new model in order to describe the content request process.

There are two main culprits for the non-stationarity observed in real traffic: the typical diurnal variation that the aggregate arrival rate of requests follows (Fig. 3); and the the fact that the arrival rate of requests for individual contents is highly non-stationary (Fig. 4, which plots the cumulative number of requests generated for some Regarding the former we find that, contrary to common belief [26], the diurnal variation has little impact on the main performance metrics for caches (e.g., hit probability), as we will see in Sec. 4.2. To understand why this is the case, consider that the hit probability of almost all proposed caching policies depends only on the sequence of content IDs arriving at the cache, and not on the time-stamps associated with the requests; in other words, if we were to arbitrarily densify or dilute the sequence of content IDs over time, we would obtain the same hit probability.

With respect to the second culprit (i.e., non-stationary popularity), Fig. 4 shows that YouTube videos are extremely heterogeneous in their request distributions and exhibit strong time-localities. For instance, we observe that the popularity of some videos vanishes after only a few days. These videos may consist, for example, of sport news which are no longer interesting a short time after they are posted. Other contents, which could correspond to music and entertainment videos, attract requests for almost the entire duration of the trace.

As a result, to capture the evolution of content popularity over time we focus just on the second cause, and characterise each individual content object m with the following two parameters:

• The total number of requests (Vm) generated by the content.

• The effective life-span (lm) of the content, which is defined as the duration of the interval in which we see the bulk of its requests 1 . 1 More precisely, the effective life-span (lm) of an object is defined However, because in practice we only see the requests arriving within a finite time window (i.e., the length of the trace), both of these quantities cannot be evaluated exactly from on-the-fly observations. We will therefore denote byVm andlm the estimated values of Vm and lm, respectively, obtained by considering only the requests appearing in the trace. We note that both variables tend to be underestimated with respect to their actual values, especially for contents whose true life-span is comparable to or greater than the trace length.

The density map in Fig. 5 reveals that, as expected, contents exhibit wide heterogeneity in terms of estimated life-spanslm and estimated volumesVm. The map also shows that there exist peculiar correlations betweenlm andVm which suggest that a traffic model should consider the joint distribution of these metrics. In fact, from the results, we observe that a non-marginal share of videos (7 − 10%) exhibit a very small life-span (lm ≤ 5 days), while 2% of videos haveVm ≥ 10, but account for a share of requests that is greater than 27% (these results hold for all the traces in our data set). These two observations show that a precise traffic generator should accurately model videos with short life-span, while accounting for the largest share in requests generated.

At this point, it is worth emphasising that the two parameters Vm and lm alone do not completely characterise the temporal evolution of content popularity, which as shown in Fig. 4, can exhibit complex growth patterns. In fact, recent studies [27,28,29] conducted on much larger data sets reveal that the popularity of different contents, including videos, follow a limited number of "archetypal" temporal profiles, which essentially depend on the nature of the content and on the way it becomes popular. However, as we will see in Sec. 4.2, cache performance is essentially driven by the parameters Vm and lm, while the shape of the popularity profile has only a second-order effect. Therefore, a more accurate representation of popularity evolution, in terms of detailed temporal profiles, is not strictly necessary in order to accurately predict cache performance. The practical side effect of this observation is that we can design a simple, accurate and robust model to reason about the temporal evolution of content popularity.


SHOT NOISE TRAFFIC MODEL

Given the observations in the previous section, we now turn to proposing a novel approach for describing the arrival process of content requests generated by a large population of users. The goal here is to maintain the generality and flexibility of the IRM approach, but improve on its accuracy without significantly increasing the model's complexity. In greater detail, the model must: (1) be general and flexible; (2) provide a native explanation for the temporal locality of the request process; (3) explicitly represent content popularity dynamics; (4) capture the phenomena that have a major impact on cache performance while ignoring those with no or limited impact; (5) be as simple as possible while maintaining accuracy; (6) enable us to analytically investigate the performance of popular caching policies.

Our proposed solution is to represent the overall request process as the superposition of many independent processes, each referring to an individual content. In particular, each content m is characterised by three physical parameters (τm, Vm, λm(t)): τm as the time elapsing between the two requests corresponding to 0.1Vm and to 0.9Vm, respectively. The effective life-span permits us to filter out the impact of outliers on the average lifetime of an object (e.g., one more request arriving a long time after the previous requests).  Figure 6: Example of requests (denoted by arrows) generated by two contents with different catalogue insertion time (τ1, τ2), average number of requests (V1, V2) and profiles (λ1(t),λ2(t)).
τ 1 τ 2 t V 1 < V 2 l 1 > l 2 V 2 λ 2 (t − τ 2 ) V 1 λ 1 (t − τ 1 )
represents the time instant at which the content enters the system (i.e., when it can be requested by the users); Vm denotes the (average) number of requests generated by the content; and λm(t) is the "popularity profile", describing how the request rate for a given object m evolves over time. In general, λm(t) is defined to be a function satisfying the following conditions: (positiveness) λm(t) ≥ 0, ∀t; (causality) λm(t) = 0, ∀t < 0; (integrability and normalisation) ∞ 0 λm(t) dt = 1. Given the above parameters, our model assumes that the request process for a given content m is described by a timeinhomogeneous Poisson process whose instantaneous rate at time t is given by:
Vmλm(t − τm)
For the sake of simplicity, we assume that new contents become available in the system according to a homogeneous Poisson process of rate γ, i.e., time instants {τm}m form a standard Poisson process. We refer to this model as Shot Noise Model (SNM), since the overall process of requests arrival is known as a Poisson shotnoise process [30]. Fig. 6 illustrates an example of the request pattern generated by the superposition of two "shots" corresponding to two contents having quite different parameters.

We emphasise that the above Poisson assumptions on the instantaneous generation process of requests for each content, and on the arrival process of new contents, are essentially introduced for the sake of analytical tractability. However, they are very well justified by the experience gained from our traces. In fact, the results in Fig. 2 suggest that we need not be very concerned with temporal correlations on very short time-scales (in the order of a few hours, say less than 6): removing all correlations at very short time scales (as given in Fig. 2) has no significant impact on the resulting cache performance. The practical consequence of this is that we do not need to take into account possibly complex correlations in the arrival process of requests such as might be induced by popularity cascades [28,31,32]. While cascades in popularity are indeed observed in large catalogues with a geographically distributed user base, this is not very evident in our traces, which are much more local. Given that short time-scale correlations (up to a few hours) are not important (in contrast to the scenarios considered in [28,31]), the adoption of a Poisson model for the arrival process of requests is well justified, and enables us to build simple analytic models for cache performance analysis such as those developed in [33].

For each given content, the SNM requires us to specify its entire popularity profile in the form of the function λm(t), which, given the difficulty in estimating popularity profiles from a trace, could be considered as a limitation. However, we have found that it is not necessary to precisely identify the shape of λm(t). In fact, a simple first-order approximation, according to which we just specify the content life-span lm, is enough to obtain accurate predictions of cache performance. In other words, we can arbitrarily choose any reasonable function λm(t) with an assigned life-span lm, and obtain almost the same results in terms of cache performance (see Fig. 7). Finally, content heterogeneity is taken into account by associating a life-span lm with every content, jointly with the (typically correlated) total number of requests Vm. This means that, upon arrival of each new content m, we randomly choose, independently for each content, the pair of parameters (Vm, lm) from a given assigned joint distribution.


Parameter Fitting

There are many ways to derive the parameters of the SNM from a trace. In this section, we present the simple approach which we have employed to fit our data traces. We first partition the contents into 6 classes (0, . . . , 5), on the basis of the measured request volumeVm and content life-spanlm. Content class 0 is defined to contain objects withVm < 10, representing contents for which we cannot derive a reliable estimate of the life-span because they gather very few requests. Due to this, we treat contents in this class using the IRM approach, and assume that their requests fall uniformly at random within the synthesised trace. It is worth acknowledging that, in doing this, we lose an opportunity to characterise the time locality of a significant fraction of contents (85% of the contents haveVm < 10). However, even with this restriction, as we will see, we can still obtain a reasonable conservative prediction on the resulting cache performance, (i.e., we slightly overestimate the cache size needed to achieve a desired hit ratio).

Classes 1 to 5 contain contents withVm ≥ 10 and, as shown in Table 2, are partitioned based on their estimated life-spans (lm). For each content class, Table 2 reports the percentage of total requests attracted by the class, the percentage of contents belonging to it, and their average estimated valuesVm andlm. Notice from Table 2 that contents in Class 1, whose life-span is smaller than 2 days, represent less than 4% of the total number of contents but attract approximately 10% of all requests. As such, because these contents exhibit a large degree of temporal locality, they can be expected to have significant impact on cache performance.

Observe also from Table 2 that the values related to each class are quite similar (within a factor of 2) across the four traces. This is significant, because it suggests that our broad classification captures some invariant properties of the considered traffic. Therefore, we have the opportunity of building a synthetic traffic model that is fairly general and flexible, by fitting the parameters that appear to be invariant (or almost invariant) from one single trace, and properly scaling those parameters that clearly depends on the particular context (such as the number of end-users). However, because our traces cover a period of approximately one month each, they are not long enough to extract very general laws, especially for long-lived contents. This is particularly evident for contents in class 5 (lm > 13 days), whose life-span is comparable with the trace length and for which, therefore, the estimated value oflm is expected to be strongly affected (i.e., underestimated) by border effects due to the trace being finite. For this reason, to obtain a conservative prediction, we again treat contents in this class as if they had a stationary popularity (like in the IRM), generating their requests uniformly in the considered time horizon.

In sum, given the six broad classes of behaviour defined, only objects in Classes 1 to 4 (see Table 2) are generated according to the SNM model as follows. First, based on the estimated rate at which contents are generated in each class (see column "Videos" in Table 2), we sample the time instants {τm} at which contents of the class become available. This can be done in a standard way, because the arrival process of contents within each class is assumed to be homogeneous Poisson. Second, we set the life-span of all the contents of the class equal to the corresponding estimated average life-span E[lm], thereby compensating for border effects due to content life-spans comparable with the trace duration. Third, we randomly choose Vm for each content generated in the class according to the corresponding empirical distribution observed in the trace. Finally, the events corresponding to content requests are generated for each content m according to an inhomogeneous Poisson process with fertility function Vmλ(t − τm) according to standard methods [34]. In Sec. 4.3 we will discuss the computational associated with the SNM.

Moreover, for objects in classes 1 to 4 we have chosen a unique "shape" (λm(t)) for the popularity profile of all contents and considered two different shapes, with parameter L: (1) exponential popularity λ(t) = 1 L e − t L for t ≥ 0; (2) uniform popularity λ(t) = 1 2L for t ∈ [0, 2L]. Note that, for each content class, L is chosen to match the desired life-span E[lm] (for the sake of brevity, we omit the details of this calculation).


Model Validation

To evaluate the accuracy of our traffic model we generate synthetic request traces as described in Sec. 4.1 and feed them to a cache implementing the LRU policy. We again report the cache size required to achieve a desired hit probability. For comparison, we also report the results obtained with the original trace and its completely shuffled version. The latter neglects content temporal locality and provides the same performance as the IRM approach based on long-term measurements of the content popularity distribution.

From Table 7 we see that the results obtained using the SNM (using either the uniform or the exponential shape) are very close to those obtained with the original trace. As already mentioned, the shape of the popularity profile chosen (exponential/uniform) has little impact on the results. On the contrary, the discrepancies produced by the shuffled trace (IRM) are quite large, especially for small caches. This confirms that the impact on cache performance of a small number of highly popular contents having relatively short life-span (few days) is significant and should not be neglected.

The results in Table 7 show that our SNM can provide accurate predictions of cache performance, despite the heavy simplifications adopted in the parameter identification. We expect that even better predictions could be achieved by improving the fitting procedure, or by using much longer traces (if available).

Finally, Table 7 also reports a curve (labelled Day/Night) referring to an extended version of the model that incorporates the effects of daily oscillations in the traffic rate. This has been done by simply modulating the shots of all contents by a fixed, periodic function of time f (t) = 1 + sin(2πt) (where t is expressed in days). Here we see that daily variations have a marginal impact on the cache performance. 2


Computational cost

Thanks to its simplicity, the SNM can be effectively used to generate synthetic traces for large-scale simulations, permitting us to explore realistic scenarios that could hardly be studied by employing only experimental traces. More precisely, the computational cost to generate a synthetic trace of the SNM is only slightly larger than the one required by the IRM. When a new content with parameters Vm and lm is introduced to the system, we can i) generate the total number of requests received by this content according to a Poisson distribution of mean Vm; and ii) schedule ahead of time the arrival time of each request according to the content's temporal profile (which depends on lm), recording it into an ordered or partially ordered data structure (e.g., a heap), to be dynamically used in an event-driven simulator.

Hence, with respect to the Θ(1) cost needed to generate a request under the IRM, the cost to generate a request under the SNM equals the insertion time of an element into an ordered data structure, which is Θ(log M ), where M is the number of requests scheduled in the future. Notice that, while as a worst case we can take M equal to the trace length, in practice M is much smaller than this, since it is related to the average number of requests falling in a shot, i.e., M = Θ(γ E(Vm lm)). From our experience, the additional time needed to simulate a cache under our synthetic traffic model, compared to the time needed when an experimental trace is available, is marginal.


FINAL CONSIDERATIONS

In this paper we presented, to the best of our knowledge, the first quantification of the error arising from applying the IRM to the evaluation of cache performance. We have shown that the error is large enough to render the model too pessimistic for practical use, especially in scenarios with small cache sizes. As a replacement, we introduced a parsimonious and novel approach called the Shot-Noise Model (SNM) that accurately models cache performance while being sufficiently simple to be effectively employed in both analytical and scalable simulative studies of large caching systems.

The SNM provides a flexible and accurate approach to model and synthesise the request arrival process and does so by capturing some of the fundamental characteristics of temporal locality. This paper provides an accurate tool to investigate and understand the performance of caches in content-driven systems. Having such a tool enables the development of accurate forecasts of the network's performance, leading to a more efficient dimensioning of content delivery systems and ultimately reducing operating costs while improving the experience of end-users.

Figure 1 :Figure 2 :
12Empirical popularity distributions of the 100 most popular videos observed in TRACE 1. Each distribution is generated by splitting the trace into K slices, where "K=1" corresponds to the entire trace. For each K, we report both the average of the relative frequency for each rank position across all the slices, while the error bars correspond to 5

Figure 3 :
3Evolution of the volume of requests over three weeks for TRACE 3. Requests here are binned in two-hour windows over the week the order of a few hours.

Figure 4 :Figure 5 :
45Cumulative number of requests over time for a subset of videos in TRACE 2; only the requests within the life-span of the content are shown. Density map of contents withVm ≥ 10 observed in TRACE 3, based on estimated number of requestsVm and effective life-spanlm. selected contents over time).

Figure 7 :
7Cache size vs hit probability under LRU policy for TRACE 4. Note that similar results are obtained for all traces.

Table 1 :
1The experiment traces.Trace 
PoP 
Period (2012) 
Length 
IPs 
Requests 
Videos 
TRACE 1 
PoP 1 
20/03-25/04 
35 days 
14224 
1.7M 
0.93M 
TRACE 2 
PoP 1 
30/04-28/05 
27 days 
16172 
1.8M 
0.95M 
TRACE 3 
PoP 2 
20/03-30/04 
40 days 
17242 
2.4M 
1.24M 
TRACE 4 
Pop 3 
20/03-25/04 
35 days 
31124 
3.8M 
1.76M 



Table 2 :
2Model parameters for content classes 1-5.Class 
Life-span [days] 
Trace 
%Reqs 
%Videos 
E[lm] 
E[Vm] 

Class 1l ≤ 2 

TRACE 1 
9.15 
3.17 
1.14 
86.4 
TRACE 2 
10.05 
4.17 
1.09 
76.2 
TRACE 3 
9.44 
3.73 
1.04 
76.0 
TRACE 4 
7.77 
3.34 
1.06 
74.0 

Class 2 
2 <l ≤ 5 

TRACE 1 
6.80 
4.9 
3.36 
41.9 
TRACE 2 
12.55 
7.83 
3.34 
50.7 
TRACE 3 
6.55 
4.54 
3.32 
43.3 
TRACE 4 
6.12 
4.06 
3.41 
48.0 

Class 3 
5 <l ≤ 8 

TRACE 1 
5.87 
2.95 
6.40 
59.5 
TRACE 2 
6.72 
4.74 
6.31 
44.9 
TRACE 3 
6.05 
2.87 
6.42 
63.3 
TRACE 4 
5.14 
2.71 
6.45 
60.3 

Class 4 
8 <l ≤ 13 

TRACE 1 
5.49 
4.45 
10.53 
36.9 
TRACE 2 
10.79 
8.61 
10.86 
39.6 
TRACE 3 
4.84 
3.68 
10.62 
39.5 
TRACE 4 
5.34 
4.48 
10.65 
37.8 

Class 5l > 13 

TRACE 1 
72.69 
84.58 
24.61 
25.7 
TRACE 2 
59.89 
74.65 
19.29 
25.3 
TRACE 3 
73.11 
85.17 
28.19 
25.8 
TRACE 4 
75.63 
85.41 
24.59 
28.1 


The adopted modulation technique does not exactly produce the effect of just stretching/squeezing the sequence of requests generated by the un-modulated process, which explains why the impact on cache performance is not null.

Networking named content. V Jacobson, D K Smetters, J D Thornton, M F Plass, N H Briggs, R L Braynard, ACM CoNEXT. V. Jacobson, D. K. Smetters, J. D. Thornton, M. F. Plass, N. H. Briggs, and R. L. Braynard. Networking named content. In ACM CoNEXT, 2009.

Impact of traffic mix on caching performance in a content-centric network. C Fricker, P Robert, J Roberts, N Sbihi, NOMEN Workshop. C. Fricker, P. Robert, J. Roberts, and N. Sbihi. Impact of traffic mix on caching performance in a content-centric network. In NOMEN Workshop, 2012.

To cache or not to cache: the 3G case. J Erman, A Gerber, M Hajiaghayi, D Pei, S Sen, O Spatscheck, IEEE Internet Computing. 152J. Erman, A. Gerber, M. Hajiaghayi, D. Pei, S. Sen, and O. Spatscheck. To cache or not to cache: the 3G case. IEEE Internet Computing, 15(2), March 2011.

Web caching on smartphones: ideal vs. reality. F Qian, K S Quah, J Huang, J Erman, A Gerber, Z Mao, S Sen, O Spatscheck, ACM MobiSys. F. Qian, K. S. Quah, J. Huang, J. Erman, A. Gerber, Z. Mao, S. Sen, and O. Spatscheck. Web caching on smartphones: ideal vs. reality. In ACM MobiSys, 2012.

Toward energy-efficient content dissemination. U Lee, I Rimac, D Kilper, V Hilt, IEEE Network. U. Lee, I. Rimac, D. Kilper, and V. Hilt. Toward energy-efficient content dissemination. IEEE Network, March 2011.

Orchestrating massively distributed CDNs. W Jiang, S Ioannidis, L Massoulié, F Picconi, ACM CoNEXT. W. Jiang, S. Ioannidis, L. Massoulié, and F. Picconi. Orchestrating massively distributed CDNs. In ACM CoNEXT, 2012.

Enabling content-aware traffic engineering. I Poese, B Frank, G Smaragdakis, S Uhlig, A Feldmann, B Maggs, ACM SIGCOMM CCR. I. Poese, B. Frank, G. Smaragdakis, S. Uhlig, A. Feldmann, and B. Maggs. Enabling content-aware traffic engineering. ACM SIGCOMM CCR, Sep. 2012.

Network-aware forward caching. J Erman, A Gerber, M T Hajiaghayi, D Pei, O Spatscheck, ACM WWW. J. Erman, A. Gerber, M. T. Hajiaghayi, D. Pei, and O. Spatscheck. Network-aware forward caching. In ACM WWW, 2009.

Operating Systems Theory. E Coffman, P Denning, Prentice-HallEnglewood Cliffs (NJE. Coffman and P. Denning. Operating Systems Theory. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs (NJ), 1973.

A versatile and accurate approximation for LRU cache performance. C Fricker, P Robert, J Roberts, ITC. C. Fricker, P. Robert, and J. Roberts. A versatile and accurate approximation for LRU cache performance. In ITC, 2012.

Revisiting cacheability in times of user generated content. B Ager, F Schneider, J Kim, A Feldmann, IEEE Global Internet Symposium. B. Ager, F. Schneider, J. Kim, and A. Feldmann. Revisiting cacheability in times of user generated content. In IEEE Global Internet Symposium, March 2010.

The cache inference problem and its application to content and request routing. N Laoutaris, G Zervas, A Bestavros, G Kollios, IEEE INFOCOM. N. Laoutaris, G. Zervas, A. Bestavros, and G. Kollios. The cache inference problem and its application to content and request routing. In IEEE INFOCOM, 2007.

The output of a cache under the independent reference model: where did the locality of reference go?. S Vanichpun, A M Makowski, ACM SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev. S. Vanichpun and A. M. Makowski. The output of a cache under the independent reference model: where did the locality of reference go? ACM SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., Jun. 2004.

Characterizing reference locality in the WWW. V Almeida, A Bestavros, M Crovella, A De Oliveira, IEEE PDIS. V. Almeida, A. Bestavros, M. Crovella, and A. de Oliveira. Characterizing reference locality in the WWW. In IEEE PDIS, 1996.

Sources and characteristics of web temporal locality. S Jin, A Bestavros, IEEE/ACM Mascots. S. Jin and A. Bestavros. Sources and characteristics of web temporal locality. In IEEE/ACM Mascots, 2000.

A flow-based model for internet backbone traffic. C Barakat, P Thiran, G Iannaccone, C Diot, P Owezarski, Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Internet measurment. the 2nd ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Internet measurmentACMC. Barakat, P. Thiran, G. Iannaccone, C. Diot, and P. Owezarski. A flow-based model for internet backbone traffic. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Internet measurment, pages 35-47. ACM, 2002.

On the intrinsic locality of web reference streams. R Fonseca, V Almeida, M Crovella, B Abrahao, IEEE INFOCOM. R. Fonseca, V. Almeida, M. Crovella, and B. Abrahao. On the intrinsic locality of web reference streams. In IEEE INFOCOM, 2003.

On the steady-state of cache networks. E Rosensweig, D Menasche, J Kurose, IEEE INFOCOM. E. Rosensweig, D. Menasche, and J. Kurose. On the steady-state of cache networks. In IEEE INFOCOM, 2013.

The persistent-access-caching algorithm. P R Jelenković, A Radovanović, Random Struct. Algorithms. 332P. R. Jelenković and A. Radovanović. The persistent-access-caching algorithm. Random Struct. Algorithms, 33(2):219-251, Sept. 2008.

An approximate analysis of the LRU and FIFO buffer replacement schemes. A Dan, D Towsley, ACM SIGMETRICS. A. Dan and D. Towsley. An approximate analysis of the LRU and FIFO buffer replacement schemes. In ACM SIGMETRICS, 1990.

Hierarchical web caching systems: modeling, design and experimental results. H Che, Y Tung, Z Wang, IEEE JSAC. 207H. Che, Y. Tung, and Z. Wang. Hierarchical web caching systems: modeling, design and experimental results. IEEE JSAC, 20(7), Sept. 2002.

Operating systems theory. E G Coffman, P J Denning, Prentice-Hall973Englewood Cliffs, NJE. G. Coffman and P. J. Denning. Operating systems theory, volume 973. Prentice-Hall Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1973.

Cache replacement algorithms for the renewal arrival model. K Kylkoski, J Virtamo, Fourteenth Nordic Teletraffic Seminar, NTS-14. Copenhagen, DenmarkK. Kylkoski and J. Virtamo. Cache replacement algorithms for the renewal arrival model. In Fourteenth Nordic Teletraffic Seminar, NTS-14, pages 139-148, Copenhagen, Denmark, Aug. 1998.

Least-recently-used caching with dependent requests. P R Jelenković, A Radovanović, Theoretical computer science. 3261P. R. Jelenković and A. Radovanović. Least-recently-used caching with dependent requests. Theoretical computer science, 326(1):293-327, 2004.

Experiences of Internet traffic monitoring with Tstat. A Finamore, M Mellia, M Meo, M M Munafò, D Rossi, IEEE Network. A. Finamore, M. Mellia, M. Meo, M. M. Munafò, and D. Rossi. Experiences of Internet traffic monitoring with Tstat. IEEE Network, 2011.

Program popularity and viewer behaviour in a large tv-on-demand system. H Abrahamsson, M Nordmark, ACM IMC. H. Abrahamsson and M. Nordmark. Program popularity and viewer behaviour in a large tv-on-demand system. In ACM IMC, 2012.

Patterns of temporal variation in online media. J Yang, J Leskovec, WSDM '11. J. Yang and J. Leskovec. Patterns of temporal variation in online media. In WSDM '11, 2011.

Rise and fall patterns of information diffusion: model and implications. Y Matsubara, Y Sakurai, B A Prakash, L Li, C Faloutsos, Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. the 18th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data miningACMY. Matsubara, Y. Sakurai, B. A. Prakash, L. Li, and C. Faloutsos. Rise and fall patterns of information diffusion: model and implications. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 6-14. ACM, 2012.

A peek into the future: Predicting the evolution of popularity in user generated content. M Ahmed, S Spagna, F Huici, S Niccolini, ACM WSDM. M. Ahmed, S. Spagna, F. Huici, and S. Niccolini. A peek into the future: Predicting the evolution of popularity in user generated content. In ACM WSDM, Feb. 2013.

Shot noise Cox processes. J Møller, Advances in Applied Probability. 353J. Møller. Shot noise Cox processes. Advances in Applied Probability, 35(3), 2003.

Robust dynamic classes revealed by measuring the response function of a social system. R Crane, D Sornette, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. the National Academy of Sciences105R. Crane and D. Sornette. Robust dynamic classes revealed by measuring the response function of a social system. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(41):15649-15653, 2008.

A measurement-driven analysis of information propagation in the flickr social network. M Cha, A Mislove, K P Gummadi, WWW '09. M. Cha, A. Mislove, and K. P. Gummadi. A measurement-driven analysis of information propagation in the flickr social network. In WWW '09, 2009.

Analyzing the performance of LRU caches under non-stationary traffic patterns. M Ahmed, S Traverso, P Giaccone, E Leonardi, S Niccolini, abs/1301.4909CoRRM. Ahmed, S. Traverso, P. Giaccone, E. Leonardi, and S. Niccolini. Analyzing the performance of LRU caches under non-stationary traffic patterns. CoRR, abs/1301.4909, 2013.

Simulation. S M Ross, Elsevier Academic PressAmsterdamS. M. Ross. Simulation. Elsevier Academic Press, Amsterdam, 2006.