Anatomical variations and interconnections of the superior peroneal retinaculum to adjacent lateral ankle structures: a preliminary imaging anatomy study
2021

Eleni E Drakonaki 
Khaldun Ghali Gataa 
Nektarios Solidakis 
Paweł Szaro pawel.szaro@gu.se 
Eleni E Drakonaki 
Musculoskeletal Radiology Practice
Heraklion Crete Greece & Medical School
European University of Cyprus
Cyprus

Khaldun Ghali Gataa 
Department of Musculoskeletal Radiology
Sahlgrenska University Hospital
Sweden

Department of Radiology
Institute of Clinical Sciences
Sahlgrenska Academy
University of Gothenburg
Sweden

Nektarios Solidakis 
Department of Musculoskeletal Radiology
Sahlgrenska University Hospital
Sweden

Department of Radiology
Institute of Clinical Sciences
Sahlgrenska Academy
University of Gothenburg
Sweden

Paweł Szaro 
Department of Musculoskeletal Radiology
Sahlgrenska University Hospital
Sweden

Department of Radiology
Institute of Clinical Sciences
Sahlgrenska Academy
University of Gothenburg
Sweden

Department of Clinical and Descriptive Anatomy
Medical University of Warsaw
Poland Correspondence: Dr Paweł Szaro

Anatomical variations and interconnections of the superior peroneal retinaculum to adjacent lateral ankle structures: a preliminary imaging anatomy study

J Ultrason
21202110.15557/JoU.2021.0003Submitted: 16.10.2020 Accepted: 04.02.2021 Published: 08.03.2021e12 Research paper Cite as: Drakonaki EE, Gataa KG, Solidakis N, Szaro P: Anatomical variations and interconnections of the superior peroneal retinaculum to adjacent lateral ankle structures: a preliminary imaging anatomy study.ultrasonographyankleligamentconnectionsretinaculum
Aim: This imaging anatomy study aimed at detecting anatomical variations and potential interconnections of the superior peroneal retinaculum to other lateral stabilizing structures. Materials and methods: We retrospectively reviewed the imaging archives of 63 patients (38 females, 25 males, mean age 32.7, range 18-58 years) with available ankle US, MR and CT images to detect whether US and MR can detect the presence of interconnections between the superior peroneal retinaculum and the anterior talofibular ligament, inferior extensor retinaculum and peroneal tendon sheath. We evaluated the presence of common anatomical variations including low peroneus brevis muscle belly, peroneal tubercle, os peroneum, and retromalleolar fibular groove shape in relation to the presence of superior peroneal retinaculum connections. Results: The connections of the superior peroneal retinaculum can be revealed on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and ultrasound (US). The connection to the anterior talofibular ligament was located (a) inferior to the lateral malleolus, (b) at the level of the lateral malleolus and (c) on both levels, respectively (a) 49.2% on MRI and 39.7% on US, p <0.05, (b) 44.4% and 58.7%, p <0.05, 36.5% and (c) 27%, p <0.05. Superior peroneal retinaculum-inferior extensor retinaculum (MRI 47.6%, US 28.6% p <0.001) and superior peroneal retinaculum-peroneal tendon sheath (MRI 22.2%, US 25.4% p >0.05) connections were also found both on MR and US. Conclusion: Ankle US and MR revealed interconnections between the superior peroneal retinaculum and the anterior talofibular ligament, inferior extensor retinaculum, and superior peroneal retinaculum. Our results are a starting point for further studies on the connections of the superior peroneal retinaculum and the applicability of ultrasound and MRI in assessing their occurrence. Knowledge of the anatomical connections of the superior peroneal retinaculum may help radiologists with the assessment of lateral ankle injuries, and surgeons with treatment planning.

Introduction

The peroneal retinacula are fibrous retaining bands that stabilize the peroneal tendons at the malleolar groove (1,2) . The superior peroneal retinaculum (SPR) is a complex structure forming the retromalleolar fibular groove's e13 J Ultrason 2021; 21: e12-e21

Anatomical variations and interconnections of the superior peroneal retinaculum to adjacent lateral ankle structures: a preliminary imaging anatomy study is frequently caused by lateral ankle instability. Chronic lateral ankle instability may be caused by the laxity of the SPR, which may result in peroneus brevis split rupture (9) . There is no sufficient anatomical background for the cited clinical observation. The presence of a concomitant injury of the lateral ankle ligament results from the mechanism of injury and is probably related to interconnections between ligaments (10,11) . Connections of the SPR with ligaments in the Kager's fat pad were previously revealed (12) . The SPR was connected most commonly with the fibulotalocalcaneal ligament, the paratenon, the posterior talofibular ligament, the flexor retinaculum, and the anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL) (12) .

High-resolution magnetic resonance (MR) imaging using 1.5 T and high-resolution ultrasonography (US) with highfrequency linear transducers allow detailed delineation of the anatomy and diseases of the lateral ankle structures, including the SPR (13,14) . Various MR studies have evaluated the appearance of the SPR and variations of the peroneal tendon complex (1,5,(14)(15)(16)(17) . Using MR imaging, interconnections have been reported between the following structures: the anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL), the inferior extensor retinaculum (IER), and the peroneal tendon sheath (PTS), and their association to other common anatomical variations described in the literature (11,12,18,19) .

Interconnections of the SPR to the lateral ankle structures have not been previously reported on US, and limited literature is available using MR (12) .

The research hypothesis was that the connections between the SPR and the neighboring structures are visible in ankle ultrasound.


Material and methods

This is a retrospective study of 63 patients with available ankle US, CT, and MR images (38/25 females/males, mean age 32.7, range 18-58 years). All examinations were performed as part of the clinical routine from July 2018 to November 2019. The findings were reviewed twice, and the final decision was made by consensus.

The inclusion criteria were a non-traumatic indication, availability of complete US videos, at least T2-or PD (proton density)-weighted MR sequences without fat suppression in the axial plane, and ankle CT. The exclusion criteria comprised a history of fracture (12 cases), obvious abnormality in the lateral ankle region such as tumor or inflammation (5 cases), presence of orthopedic hardware (7 cases), and low US video quality (4 cases). In total, 63 patients fulfilled the criteria and were included in the study group.

MR examinations were performed using the Ingenia 3.0T MR system (Philips Healthcare) with a dedicated ankle coil. PD TSE (turbo spin-echo) in the axial plane: TE (echo time) 45 ms, TR (repetition time) 2800-5000 ms, FOV (field of view) 14 cm. T2 TSE in the axial plane: TE 80 ms, TR 3000-5000 ms, FOV 14 cm. US examinations were performed using the GE Logiq 9 system with 6-15 MHz and 8-18 MHz probes. CT examinations were conducted using cone-beam or 256-slice scanners.

We assessed anatomical interconnections between the SPR and the ATFL, PTS, and IER. The interconnections were considered present on MR and/or US, respectively, when thin, linear, low signal intensity bands were evident and/or when thin isoechoic or hyperechoic linear fibrillar structures were found between the above structures. We assessed the presence of connections first on US and then MR images. MR assessment. Firstly, the SPR was found on the horizontal sections based on the anatomical location. We then assessed where the SPR ended by analyzing subsequent cross-sections, and determined whether there was a clear difference between the SPR, which was considered an absent connection. The observations were confirmed on the frontal images on MRI and other projections on ultrasound.

Anatomical variations including the os peroneum, peroneal tubercle, retromalleolar fibular groove shape variation, lowlying peroneus brevis muscle, peroneus tertius, and quartus muscles were assessed on US images. Verification of soft tissue variants was performed on MR and bone variants on CT images, based on previously described criteria (1) . The  Superior peroneal retinaculum -inferior extensor retinaculum MR revealed this connection significantly more often than US (47.6% vs. 28.6%, p <0.001) (Tab. 1). The connection was visualized as a linear echogenic fibrous band on US, and as a narrow, low signal intensity linear strip on MR, and was often evident at the external outline of the lateral malleolus near the cortex ( Fig. 3 and Fig. 4).

The IER served as an intermediate station for connecting the SPR to the ATFL in 8 cases on MRI (12.7%) and in 5 cases on US (7.9%), but the difference was not significant (p >0.05) (Fig. 3). In those cases, a direct connection between the SPR and the ATFL was also noted (n = 13, 20.6%) (Fig. 5).

Superior peroneal retinaculum -peroneal tendon sheath

Connections to the PTS were found in 25.4% cases on US and 22.2% on MR. They were located inferior to the apex of the lateral malleolus (Fig. 6). The difference in the frequency of this connection between MR and US was the smallest among all the connections (difference 3.2%, p >0.05) (Tab. 1).

There were no statistically significant differences in the number of SPR connections between the group of males and females or body sides (p >0.05). retromalleolar fibular groove shape was characterized in line with the standard criteria as flat, convex, or concave (1) . The definition of hypertrophy of the peroneal tubercle was applied from previous studies as the tubercle projecting beyond the outer contour of the peroneal tendons (20) .

Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 8.0. To compare the prevalence of connections between US and MR, a chi-square test was used. The level of statistical significance was set at p <0.05.

The Ethics Committee approved the study and waived the need for informed consent (number 2020-06177). The study was conducted in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The anonymization of patient data ensured data protection following the European General Data Protection Regulation. The data were recorded in a password-protected secure database.


Results

The SPR was found to be connected to at least one of the examined lateral structures in 16 cases (25.3%) on US, and in 14 cases (22.2%) on MR, whereas no connections at all were identified in 6 cases (9.5%) on MR and 3 cases (4.8%) on US; the differences are not statistically significant (p >0.05). When the SPR did not extend beyond the outer outline of the lateral malleolus, connections were considered absent (Fig. 1) 


Superior peroneal retinaculum -anterior talofibular ligament

This was the most common connection seen on US.

Interconnections between the SPR and ATFL were found between the lateral malleolus level and the area inferior to it (Fig. 2 Fig. 7). More flat and convex cases were revealed on US than on CT, yet the difference was statistically significant only for the flat shape. Statistically significant differences in the presence of connections between the SPR and the ATFL were noticed only for the concave type of retromalleolar fibular groove in MRI assessment (Tab. 3).

In most cases, the peroneal tubercle was found both on US and CT (65.1% and 63.5%, respectively) (Tab. 2, Fig. 8); however, no hypertrophy of the peroneal tubercle was observed. US showed the peroneal tubercle presence in 1.6% cases more compared to CT (p <0.05). We identified 6 cases (9.5%) with os peroneum present on CT while only 3 (4.8%) of them were detected on US (p >0.05). Lowlying peroneus brevis muscle belly was identified in 7 cases (11.1%) on US and in 5 cases on CT (7.9%), p <0.05. No case of peroneus quartus or tertius muscle was found.


Discussion

The most important finding of this paper is that SPR connections to the adjacent structures exist and can be visualized on MR and US. The most common SPR connection found on US was that with the ATFL, followed by the connection with the IER and PTS. The most common connection evident on MR was that to the IER, followed by the ATFL and PTS. The IER, MRI (11) . The SPR connection to the calcaneofibular ligament and the Achilles paratenon was reported previously both in cadavers and MR imaging studies (12,21) . Other variations have been previously reported in cadavers, including the inferior due to its location, was found to serve as an intermediate station for connecting the SPR to the ATFL. These imaging studies confirm previous findings regarding lateral ankle ligament interconnections reported in cadaveric studies (18,21) and Anatomical variations and interconnections of the superior peroneal retinaculum to adjacent lateral ankle structures: a preliminary imaging anatomy study  (24) . To our knowledge, the connections found in our study have not been previously described in US, cadaveric or surgical studies.

peroneal retinaculum's connection to the lateral calcaneal process (22) or the IER (23) . These findings probably indicate a tendency for the lateral structures to interconnect and form larger functional units. The tendency to developing the connections between structures was also observed in the medial  Anatomical variations and interconnections of the superior peroneal retinaculum to adjacent lateral ankle structures: a preliminary imaging anatomy study MR has been proved useful for the assessment of foot retinacula (15,25,26) . Additionally, MR is not affected by overdissection, which is a common problem in anatomical research. However, there is scarce evidence on the existence of these connections in MR studies. In a previous MR study, we documented SPR connections to the fibulotalocalcaneal ligament, the posterior talofibular ligament, and the flexor retinaculum via the fibulotalocalcaneal ligament (12) . The SPR-ATFL connection in that study was found in only 9% of cases, which is a lower proportion than in the current study.


Tab. 3. Differences in the presence of interconnections between different variants of retromalleolar fibular groove on US and MRI, p-value

SPR connections are essential components of a functional complex at the lateral malleolus level (12,27) . Statistically significant differences in the occurrence of connections revealed on MRI between the ATFL and PTS were noticed before between groups of single and double fascicular ATFL and CFL (11) . It is challenging to distinguish between single and double fascicular ATFL on US; thus, comparing the results is not entirely possible, which is a limitation of this study.

MR showed significantly more SPR connections than US in all cases except the ATFL-SPR connection located at the lateral malleolus level, and the SPR-PTS connection. This observation indicates the complementary roles of MR and US. The slightest difference between MR and US was encountered for the SPR-PTS connection, and the greatest for the SPR-IER connection. The discrepancies between MR and US may be due to technical issues, mostly affecting the US examination. The SPR is best imaged on US in the axial oblique plane, and the degree of transducer obliquity depends on the course of the retinaculum, which differs widely among patients, and the operator's skills to identify the correct plane (13,14) . Those parameters may result in poor US visualization of the SPR and reduced possibility of identifying the associated connecting fibers.

Moreover, the lack of contrast between the echogenic connecting fibers and the surrounding subcutaneous fat may be another reason for the US's lower sensitivity. On the contrary, the contrast between the fat and fibrous tissue is excellent on MR, allowing the connecting fibrous bands to be easily identified. Interestingly, US was found to reveal more SPR-ATFL connections at the lateral malleolus level than MR. This may be attributed to the fact that the fibers connecting superficially to the lateral malleolus are more clearly delineated on US than MR, where the low signal fibers blend with the low signal of the cortical bone, limiting the discrimination between them (28) .

The results of our study may have important clinical implications. These connections may explain various combinations commonly encountered in lateral ankle instability patterns (3,(6)(7)(8)29) . It has been suggested that a disruption of the lateral collateral ligaments induces strain and injury on the SPR, which may explain why the conditions commonly coexist (8) .

Our findings suggest the presence of an anatomical (besides the biomechanical) connection between the SPR and ATFL. This study's findings could be clinically relevant to radiologists in routine assessment of SPR connections in lateral ankle sprains and surgeons for planning reconstruction procedures.

We also assessed the presence of other anatomical variations which may influence the functions of the peroneal tendons. The incidence of the peroneal tubercle and os peroneum found in our study is comparable to the values reported in the literature. The incidence of the peroneal tubercle is estimated at 40-84%, and os peroneum at 7-20% (1,30) . The low-lying peroneus brevis muscle belly was less common in our study than in previous studies, where it was reported to range between 23.2% and 87% (30,31) . However, the level of the muscle belly changes with foot position (32) , and it is challenging to identify the retromalleolar fibular groove on US, which may explain the reported differences. The retromalleolar fibular groove's concave shape was the most common variant, followed by flat and convex shapes. The finding is in agreement with prior studies reporting a cadaveric incidence of 68-82% for the concave type (1,33) ; however, in other 


Conclusions

In conclusion, US and MRI evaluation may reveal interconnections between the SPR and the ATFL, IER, and PTS. The SPR may connect with other structures in relation to the lateral malleolus. Our results are a starting point for further prospective research in ultrasound and MRI. Our study confirms the complementary role of MR and US examinations in evaluating variable connections of the SPR. However, we see the need of future prospective studies focusing on the usefulness of ultrasound in assessing the presence of connections with correlation to MRI. Knowledge of the anatomical connections of the SPR may help radiologists with the assessment of lateral ankle injuries and assist surgeons in treatment planning.


Conflict of interest

None declared. The authors declare that this work has not received any funding before or during research. There are no relationships with any companies whose products or services may be related to the article's subject matter. studies, the convex or flat shape was shown to be the most common (30,34,35) . Such differences may represent epidemiological, ethnic or developmental variation. It is difficult to determine whether the variants of the retromalleolar fibular groove may be related to the presence of SPR connections, but the developmental background may be possible.

Considering CT as the appropriate bone surface rendering method, we found that US underestimated the concave shape, while overestimating the flat and convex shape frequencies. US also overestimated the incidence of the peroneal tubercle compared to CT. These differences may be attributed to variations in the scanning planes and operator dependency, making CT imaging a more reproducible method for assessing bone morphology than US.

This study has its limitations. We are aware of the most important limitation of this study, namely the use of ultrasound in the context of a retrospective study. The method of minimizing this negative effect was the use of ultrasound films and MRI. The present study and its results are a starting point for further prospective work in ultrasound and MRI. The slide thickness in the MRI protocol was 3 mm, and no 3D sequences were available. Also, we had no surgical correlation for our findings.

Fig
Fig. 1. A 19-year-old patient with a clinical suspicion of rheumatoid arthritis. A. ultrasound, transverse section. B, C. proton densityweighted transverse sections. Fib -fibula. SPR -curved arrow. No connection with IER is present

Fig. 2 .
2A 34-year-old patient with a suspicion of a ganglion. A, B. transverse section on ultrasound corresponding to section d. C, D, E. T2--weighted slightly oblique section. The interconnection (straight arrows) between the SPR (curved arrow) and ATFL (curved dashed arrow); fib -fibula

Fig. 3 .Fig. 4 .
34A 24-year-old patient with pain anterior to the lateral malleolus. A. transverse section on ultrasound, B, C. T2-weighted slightly oblique sections. The interconnection (arrows) between the SPR (curved arrow) and IER (dashed arrow); fib -fibula A 42-year-old patient presenting clinical suspicion of synovitis. A, B, C. transverse section on ultrasound, d-proton density-weighted oblique oriented section. The interconnection (arrows) between the SPR (curved arrow) and IER (dashed arrow); fib-fibula

Fig. 5 .Fig. 6 .
56A 52-year-old patient presented with retromalleolar pain. A, B, C. transverse section on ultrasound. D. proton density-weighted transverse section. The interconnection (arrows) between the SPR (letter R) and IER (curved arrow) and ATFL. Fib -A 28-year-old patient with a clinical suspicion of an intraarticular free body in the ankle joint. A. transverse section at the level of the lateral malleolus (fib -fibula), SPR -curved arrow, connection to the PTS (straight arrow). B. oblique section along the calcaneofibular ligament (asterisk). C. coronal section at the level of the peroneal tubercle (t), PTS -dashed arrow, calcaneus -cal. D, E, F. MRI proton density-weighted axial sections of the ankle. The flexor retinaculum connections with the deltoid ligament, the fibulotalocalcaneal ligament, and the flexor fibrous sheath were reported previously

Fig. 7 .
7Anatomical variations of the peroneal tubercle, three different patients. A, B, C. coronal sections, ultrasound, A. no explicit peroneal tubercle was noted (X), B, C. the peroneal tubercle (t) was present. The peroneus brevis (curved arrow) and the peroneus longus (dashes curved arrow)

Fig. 8 .
8The most common variant of the retromalleolar fibular groove, convex (straight arrow). A 39-year-old patient with a suspicion of rheumatoid arthritis. A, B. cone-beam computed tomography (A. 3D posterior medial view, B. transverse section), C. transverse ultrasound section. SPR (curved arrow) was connected (dashed curved arrow) to IER (not shown). Fib -the lateral malleolus A B C


. The SPR connections are shown in Tab. 1 and other anatomical variations in Tab. 2.


, Tab. 1). The most common variant of the ATFL -SPR at the level of lateral malleolus ATFL -SPR inferior to lateral malleolus ATFL -SPR at the level and inferior to the lateral malleolus SPR -IER SPR -PTS Tab. 1. Interconnections between the SPR, ATFL, IER, and PTS revealed on ultrasound and MRI, N = 63. P-values indicated as * p <0.05 and ** p <0.001 Tab. 2. Prevalence of variants of the retro-malleolar fibular groove, peroneal tubercle, and os peroneum. N = 63. P-values indicated as * p <0.05US 
37 
25 
17 
18 
16 
58.7% 
39.7% 
27.0% 
28.6% 
25.4% 

MRI 
28 
31 
23 
30 
14 
44.4% 
49.2% 
36.5% 
47.6% 
22.2% 
Difference 
14.3%* 
9.5%* 
9.5%* 
19.0%** 
3.2% 

Retromalleolar fibular groove shape 
Presence of peroneal tubercle 
Presence of os peroneum 
concave 
flat 
convex 

US 
n 
39 
14 
10 
41 
3 
% 
61.9% 
22.2% 
15.9% 
65.1% 
4.8% 

CT 
n 
45 
12 
6 
40 
6 
% 
71.4% 
19.0% 
9.5% 
63.5% 
9.5% 
Difference 
% 
9.5%* 
3.2%* 
6.3% 
1.6%* 
1.6% 

e15 

J Ultrason 2021; 21: e12-e21 

Anatomical variations and interconnections of the superior peroneal retinaculum to adjacent lateral ankle structures: 
a preliminary imaging anatomy study 

Other anatomical variations 

The concave shape was the most common anatomical vari-
ant of the retromalleolar fibular groove, found on CT in 
71.4% and on US in 61.9%, (p <0.05) cases, followed by 
flat (CT in 19% and US in 22.2%, p <0.05) and convex 
shapes (CT in 9.5% and US in 15.5%, p >0.05) (Tab. 2, 

J Ultrason 2021; 21: e12-e21Eleni E. Drakonaki, Khaldun Ghali Gataa, Nektarios Solidakis, Paweł Szaro

Normal variants and diseases of the peroneal tendons and superior peroneal retinaculum: MR imaging features. X T Wang, Z S Rosenberg, M B Mechlin, M E Schweitzer, Radiographics. 25Wang XT, Rosenberg ZS, Mechlin MB, Schweitzer ME: Normal variants and diseases of the peroneal tendons and superior peroneal retinacu- lum: MR imaging features. Radiographics 2005; 25: 587-602.

Anatomy of the superior peroneal tunnel. S A Athavale, Swathi, S V Vangara, J Bone Joint Surg Am. 93Athavale SA, Swathi, Vangara SV: Anatomy of the superior peroneal tunnel. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2011; 93: 564-571.

Chronic ankle instability as a cause of peroneal tendon injury. M Sobel, M J Geppert, R F Warren, Clin Orthop Relat Res. Sobel M, Geppert MJ, Warren RF: Chronic ankle instability as a cause of peroneal tendon injury. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1993: 187-191.

Prevalence and role of a low-lying peroneus brevis muscle belly in patients with peroneal tendon pathologic features: a potential source of tendon subluxation. R Mirmiran, C Squire, D Wassell, J Foot Ankle Surg. 54Mirmiran R, Squire C, Wassell D: Prevalence and role of a low-lying peroneus brevis muscle belly in patients with peroneal tendon patho- logic features: a potential source of tendon subluxation. J Foot Ankle Surg 2015; 54: 872-875.

An examination of anatomic variants and incidental peroneal tendon pathologic features: a comprehensive MRI review of asymptomatic lateral ankles. M M Galli, N M Protzman, E M Mandelker, A D Malhotra, E Schwartz, S A Brigido, J Foot Ankle Surg. 54Galli MM, Protzman NM, Mandelker EM, Malhotra AD, Schwartz E, Brigido SA: An examination of anatomic variants and incidental pero- neal tendon pathologic features: a comprehensive MRI review of as- ymptomatic lateral ankles. J Foot Ankle Surg 2015; 54: 164-172.

Lateral ankle instability: MR imaging of associated injuries and surgical treatment procedures. L Alparslan, C P Chiodo, Semin Musculoskelet Radiol. 12Alparslan L, Chiodo CP: Lateral ankle instability: MR imaging of associ- ated injuries and surgical treatment procedures. Semin Musculoskelet Radiol 2008; 12: 346-358.

Magnetic resonance imaging findings of chronic lateral ankle instability. A B Kirby, D P Beall, M P Murphy, J Q Ly, J R Fish, Curr Probl Diagn Radiol. 34Kirby AB, Beall DP, Murphy MP, Ly JQ, Fish JR: Magnetic resonance imaging findings of chronic lateral ankle instability. Curr Probl Diagn Radiol 2005; 34: 196-203.

Recurrent subluxation of the peroneal tendons. N A Ferran, F Oliva, N Maffulli, Sports Med. 36Ferran NA, Oliva F, Maffulli N: Recurrent subluxation of the peroneal tendons. Sports Med 2006; 36: 839-846.

Chronic ankle instability as a cause of peroneal tendon injury. M Sobel, Mj Geppert, Fau, R F Warren, Clin Orthop Relat Res. Sobel M, Geppert Mj Fau, Warren RF: Chronic ankle instability as a cause of peroneal tendon injury. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1993; 187-191.

The lateral ankle ligaments are interconnected: the medial connecting fibres between the anterior talofibular, calcaneofibular and posterior talofibular ligaments. M Dalmau-Pastor, F Malagelada, J Calder, M C Manzanares, J Vega, Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 28Dalmau-Pastor M, Malagelada F, Calder J, Manzanares MC, Vega J: The lateral ankle ligaments are interconnected: the medial connecting fibres between the anterior talofibular, calcaneofibular and posterior talofibu- lar ligaments. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2020; 28: 34-39.

The double fascicular variations of the anterior talofibular ligament and the calcaneofibular ligament correlate with interconnections between lateral ankle structures revealed on magnetic resonance imaging. P Szaro, Ghali Gataa, K Polaczek, M Ciszek, B , Sci Rep. 1020801Szaro P, Ghali Gataa K, Polaczek M, Ciszek B: The double fascicular variations of the anterior talofibular ligament and the calcaneofibu- lar ligament correlate with interconnections between lateral ankle structures revealed on magnetic resonance imaging. Sci Rep 2020; 10: 20801.

The Kager's fat pad radiological anatomy revised. P Szaro, M Polaczek, B Ciszek, Surg Radiol Anat. 43Szaro P, Polaczek M, Ciszek B: The Kager's fat pad radiological anato- my revised. Surg Radiol Anat 2021; 43: 79-86.

Ultrasound of peroneal tendons. S Bianchi, M Delmi, L Molini, Semin Musculoskelet Radiol. 14Bianchi S, Delmi M, Molini L: Ultrasound of peroneal tendons. Semin Musculoskelet Radiol 2010; 14: 292-306.

High-resolution US and MR imaging of peroneal tendon injuries. M S Taljanovic, J N Alcala, L H Gimber, J D Rieke, M M Chilvers, L D Latt, Radiographics. 35Taljanovic MS, Alcala JN, Gimber LH, Rieke JD, Chilvers MM, Latt LD: High-resolution US and MR imaging of peroneal tendon injuries. Ra- diographics 2015; 35: 179-199.

Retinacula of the foot and ankle: MRI with anatomic correlation in cadavers. N Numkarunarunrote, A Malik, R O Aguiar, D J Trudell, D Resnick, AJR Am J Roentgenol. 188Numkarunarunrote N, Malik A, Aguiar RO, Trudell DJ, Resnick D: Reti- nacula of the foot and ankle: MRI with anatomic correlation in cadav- ers. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2007; 188: W348-354.

Accessory ossicles of the foot-an imaging conundrum. S Guo, Y Y Yan, Ssy Lee, T J Tan, Emerg Radiol. 26Guo S, Yan YY, Lee SSY, Tan TJ: Accessory ossicles of the foot-an imag- ing conundrum. Emerg Radiol 2019; 26: 465-478.

Lateral ankle pain and peroneal tendon subluxation in a patient with peroneal quartus muscle and superior peroneal retinaculum injury. D Yıldız, T Ekiz, A Doğan, J Back Musculoskelet Rehabil. 30Yıldız D, Ekiz T, Doğan A: Lateral ankle pain and peroneal tendon subluxation in a patient with peroneal quartus muscle and superior peroneal retinaculum injury. J Back Musculoskelet Rehabil 2017; 30: 1147-1148.

The lateral fibulotalocalcaneal ligament complex: an ankle stabilizing isometric structure. J Vega, F Malagelada, Manzanares Cespedes, M C Dalmau-Pastor, M , Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 28Vega J, Malagelada F, Manzanares Cespedes MC, Dalmau-Pastor M: The lateral fibulotalocalcaneal ligament complex: an ankle stabilizing iso- metric structure. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2020; 28: 8-17.

Morphological features of the anterior talofibular ligament by the number of fiber bundles. M Edama, I Kageyama, T Kikumoto, M Nakamura, W Ito, E Nakamura, Ann Anat. 216Edama M, Kageyama I, Kikumoto T, Nakamura M, Ito W, Nakamura E et al.: Morphological features of the anterior talofibular ligament by the number of fiber bundles. Ann Anat 2018; 216: 69-74.

Anatomic variants associated with peroneal tendon disorders: MR imaging findings in volunteers with asymptomatic ankles. N Saupe, B Mengiardi, C W Pfirrmann, P Vienne, B Seifert, M Zanetti, Radiology. 242Saupe N, Mengiardi B, Pfirrmann CW, Vienne P, Seifert B, Zanetti M: Anatomic variants associated with peroneal tendon disorders: MR im- aging findings in volunteers with asymptomatic ankles. Radiology 2007; 242: 509-517.

The superior peroneal retinaculum: an anatomic study. W H Davis, M Sobel, J Deland, W H Bohne, M B Patel, Foot Ankle Int. 15Davis WH, Sobel M, Deland J, Bohne WH, Patel MB: The superior pero- neal retinaculum: an anatomic study. Foot Ankle Int 1994; 15: 271-275.

Anatomy of the lateral complex of the ankle joint in relation to peroneal tendons, distal fibula and talus: a cadaveric study. M Uğurlu, M Bozkurt, I Demirkale, A Cömert, H I Acar, I Tekdemir, Eklem Hastalik Cerrahisi. 21Uğurlu M, Bozkurt M, Demirkale I, Cömert A, Acar HI, Tekdemir I: Anatomy of the lateral complex of the ankle joint in relation to peroneal tendons, distal fibula and talus: a cadaveric study. Eklem Hastalik Cer- rahisi 2010; 21: 153-158.

New aspect of morphometric study of the superior peroneal retinaculum: pertinent data for surgical repair and reconstruction. P Dangintawat, J Apinun, T Huanmanop, S Agthong, V Chentanez, Folia Morphol. 2019Dangintawat P, Apinun J, Huanmanop T, Agthong S, Chentanez V: New aspect of morphometric study of the superior peroneal retinaculum: pertinent data for surgical repair and reconstruction. Folia Morphol (Warsz) 2019.

The flexor retinaculum connects the surrounding structures into the medial ankle complex. P Szaro, Ghali Gataa, K Polaczek, M Ciszek, B , Szaro P, Ghali Gataa K, Polaczek M, Ciszek B: The flexor retinaculum connects the surrounding structures into the medial ankle complex.

. Appl Sci. 107972Appl Sci 2020; 10: 7972.

Anatomical variations and interconnections of the superior peroneal retinaculum to adjacent lateral ankle structures: a preliminary imaging anatomy study. Anatomical variations and interconnections of the superior peroneal retinaculum to adjacent lateral ankle structures: a preliminary imaging anatomy study

Tibialis anterior tendon and extensor retinaculum: imaging in cadavers and patients with tendon tear. M H Lee, C B Chung, J H Cho, A V Mohana-Borges, M L Pretterklieber, D J Trudell, AJR Am J Roentgenol. 187Lee MH, Chung CB, Cho JH, Mohana-Borges AV, Pretterklieber ML, Trudell DJ et al.: Tibialis anterior tendon and extensor retinaculum: im- aging in cadavers and patients with tendon tear. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2006; 187: W161-168.

MR imaging of the peroneal tunnel. J Zeiss, S R Saddemi, N A Ebraheim, J Comput Assist Tomogr. 13Zeiss J, Saddemi SR, Ebraheim NA: MR imaging of the peroneal tunnel. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1989; 13: 840-844.

Dalmau-Pastor M: Tendoscopic treatment of peroneal intrasheath subluxation: a new subgroup with superior peroneal retinaculum injury. M Guelfi, J Vega, F Malagelada, A Baduell, Foot Ankle Int. 39Guelfi M, Vega J, Malagelada F, Baduell A, Dalmau-Pastor M: Tendo- scopic treatment of peroneal intrasheath subluxation: a new subgroup with superior peroneal retinaculum injury. Foot Ankle Int 2018; 39: 542-550.

Use of ultrasonography versus magnetic resonance imaging for tendon abnormalities around the ankle. M S Rockett, G Waitches, G Sudakoff, M Brage, Foot Ankle Int. 19Rockett MS, Waitches G, Sudakoff G, Brage M: Use of ultrasonography versus magnetic resonance imaging for tendon abnormalities around the ankle. Foot Ankle Int 1998; 19: 604-612.

Endoscopic superior peroneal retinaculum reconstruction. Wws Hau, T H Lui, W K Ngai, Arthrosc Tech. 7Hau WWS, Lui TH, Ngai WK: Endoscopic superior peroneal retinacu- lum reconstruction. Arthrosc Tech 2018; 7: e45-e51.

Anatomical variations related to pathological conditions of the peroneal tendon: evaluation of ankle MRI with a 3D SPACE sequence in symptomatic patients. E Ersoz, N Tokgoz, A Y Kaptan, A M Ozturk, M Ucar, Skeletal Radiol. 48Ersoz E, Tokgoz N, Kaptan AY, Ozturk AM, Ucar M: Anatomical varia- tions related to pathological conditions of the peroneal tendon: evalua- tion of ankle MRI with a 3D SPACE sequence in symptomatic patients. Skeletal Radiol 2019; 48: 1221-1231.

Magnetic resonance imaging analysis of peroneal tendon pathology associated with low-lying peroneus brevis muscle belly: a case-control study. P Highlander, K T Pearson, P Burns, Foot Ankle Spec. 8Highlander P, Pearson KT, Burns P: Magnetic resonance imaging analy- sis of peroneal tendon pathology associated with low-lying peroneus brevis muscle belly: a case-control study. Foot Ankle Spec 2015; 8: 347-353.

Alterations in the distal extension of the musculus peroneus brevis with foot movement. J Rademaker, Z S Rosenberg, J Beltran, E Colon, AJR Am J Roentgenol. 168Rademaker J, Rosenberg ZS, Beltran J, Colon E: Alterations in the dis- tal extension of the musculus peroneus brevis with foot movement. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1997; 168: 787-789.

Morphometrical features of the human malleolar groove. D Ozbag, Y Gumusalan, M Uzel, E Cetinus, Foot Ankle Int. 29Ozbag D, Gumusalan Y, Uzel M, Cetinus E: Morphometrical features of the human malleolar groove. Foot Ankle Int 2008; 29: 77-81.

. C Mabit, P Salanne, M P Boncoeur-Martel, F Fiorenza, D Valleix, B Descottes, The lateral retromalleolar groove: a radio-anatomic studyMabit C, Salanne P, Boncoeur-Martel MP, Fiorenza F, Valleix D, Descottes B et al.: [The lateral retromalleolar groove: a radio-anatomic study].

. Bull Assoc Anat (Nancy). 80Bull Assoc Anat (Nancy) 1996; 80: 17-21.

Morphologic variations of the fibular malleolar groove with recurrent dislocation of the peroneal tendons. N Adachi, K Fukuhara, T Kobayashi, T Nakasa, M Ochi, Foot Ankle Int. 30Adachi N, Fukuhara K, Kobayashi T, Nakasa T, Ochi M: Morphologic variations of the fibular malleolar groove with recurrent dislocation of the peroneal tendons. Foot Ankle Int 2009; 30: 540-544.