INFERIORITY FEELINGS FROM COMPETITIVE UPWARDS: ADOLESCENT'S DIGITAL CULTURE AND SCHOOL COUNSELOR'S ROLE


Desriani Rahmania desrianirahmania12@upi.edu 
Indonesia University of Education
Indonesia

Anne Hafina Adiwinata 
Indonesia University of Education
Indonesia

Nani M Sugandhi 
Indonesia University of Education
Indonesia

INFERIORITY FEELINGS FROM COMPETITIVE UPWARDS: ADOLESCENT'S DIGITAL CULTURE AND SCHOOL COUNSELOR'S ROLE
3BE8388031FB5E96F52F3E798360DE03adolescentdigital cultureschool counselor
Striving for Superiority is one of the personality dimensions from Alfred Adler's theory.Striving for superiority can help adolescents balance their sense of inferiority, so that adolescents have better understanding of their identity roles.Adolescents have a high curiosity tendency to their self-development although at the same time faced inferiority feelings.Adolescent faced the rush of development of technology and the social media era, where the idea of the ideal are everywhere in digital culture.Because of that the majority of adolescents have biased and polarized perspectives in their exploration, so that adolescents need a growth mindset.The school counselor's role guides adolescents to be optimal in adolescent development, by developing a growth mindset, adolescents willing to do self-exploration and understand their identity.The purpose of this study is to know the role of the school counselor on developing adolescents' growth mindset to adjust in inferiority feelings while striving for superiority.The method uses a systematic literature review conducted by 12 recommendations and using criteria for adolescents.The school counselor as a psychoeducational service performs many actions therefore, school counselors are needed developing adults a growth mindset to face inferiority, it focus on cognitive stimulation.The result has a recommendation focus on conceptual of growth mindset on cognitive behavioral intervention such as reframing, journaling, and bibliotherapy

INTRODUCTION

According to Adler , inferiority feelings are natural feelings (Adler, 1927) .Humans in their lifetime are expected to be able to see inferiority feelings as a condition for striving for completeness, striving for recognition, but many books have written striving for superiority (Wolfe, 1958) .Striving for superiority in adolescence is necessary for self-exploration to reach the stage of identity roles (Carlson et al., 2012) .Adolescents today are a digital generation that is attached to the rapid development of technology and social media (Al-Kandari et al., 2016;Vogel et al., 2014) .Adolescents' ease of access to various information will increase opportunities for self-exploration, but Adolescents are also easily distracted in a second because a lot of virtual content from the development of technology and social media which is biased and tends to be ideal, making teens faced with inferiority feelings (Kennedy, 2019) .So it is necessary to develop a mindset so that, Adolescents are not trapped in technological and social media developments (Akdo an & im ir , 2019) One of them is the mindset towards growth mindset, this mindset encourages Adolescents to understand inferiority feelings as a condition to develop towards striving for superiority (Carlson et al., 2012) .

Adolescents who have a growth mindset while striving for superiority because they are able to be oriented towards competence seeking, optimal performance, and able to see mistakes as lessons rather than selfpunishment, able to see collaboration rather than competition, and see talent not as an absolute, also the ability to the openess to exploration of various opportunities (A Adler & Wolfe, 1958;Alfred Adler, nd-b, nd-a;Alfred Adler & Beran Wolfe, nd) .Striving for superiority in adolescents who have a mindset towards a growth mindset encourages adolescents to use technology appropriately, such as self-exploration, seeking inspiration and information, not being trapped in virtual ideal conditions that exist in social media, and can balancing the inferiority feelings .So that, Adolescents dare to show their potential even in the middle of social media content that tends to be ideal, also when their making mistakes they can see it as a means to learn.So that a growth mindset when striving for superiority is needed by Adolescents, especially to compensate for inferiority feelings during self-exploration in the midst of a digital culture that presents many ideal conditions.

Growth mindset on striving for superiority in adolescent development exists but does not immediately develop, initially adolescent are in a mindset that leads to a fixed mindset , this condition tends to see talent as an absolute condition, so it is difficult to open up to exploration opportunities , even though self-exploration can help adolescents understand their identity roles.So Adolescents need to develop a mindset from a fixed mindset to a growth mindset (Dweck, 2015;Park et al., 2020;Robinson, 2017) .Striving for superiority in adolescent development can be developed, based on the results of several studies striving for superiority that the current pattern suggests in a curative manner.As for the psychoeducational efforts that school counselors can undertake, the process of psycho-educational services has evolved from a problem -oriented perspective to a strength-oriented perspective (Gysbers & Henderson, 2012) .Thus, this study will focus on a preventive approach by developing the strengths of adolescents because the phenomenon that is the focus of this study, namely inferiority feelings as a condition for striving for superiority, not an inferiority complex that is more responsive in certain cases, could be more clinical.found in the inferiority feelings research to overcome inferiority feelings, namely with bibliotherapy techniques, the results obtained that bibliotherapy can be used on inferiority feelings to strengthen and implemented at the end of the session, research recommendation is to provide reframing by the school counselor to students .APA Journaling techniques help adolescents to focus and improve social skills This helps adolescents to have a striving for superiority with social interests as suggested by Adler striving for superiority to be positive when having a social interest.So it can be concluded that adolescents need cognitive stimulation as a preventive ways by providing a growth mindset framing, by strengthening journaling and bibliotherapy.So that one of the cognitive-oriented assistance efforts is cognitive behavioral intervention through group activity for positive striving for superiority (Hoyt & Burnette, 2020) .Based on the opinion of several experts, the application of reframing to increase the growth mindset can be done with group activities designed to improve adolescent development (Liu et al., 2003) .Based on the opinion of several experts, the application of journaling to increase the growth mindset in striving for superiority can be done with group activities designed to enhance adolescent development (Erford, 2015) .Based on the opinion of several experts , the application of the biblio to increase the growth mindset in striving for superiority (Erford, 2014;Gagatiga, 2013;Lucas et al., 2019) .Based on the explanation above, this study aims to determine the role of school counselors in providing psycho-educational services that can help adolescents develop a growth mindset for striving for superiority .

In the context of personality psychology, striving for superiority is part of the personality dimensions of Alfred Adler's theory namely individual psychology.Psychological dynamics in Adler's theory is based on the assumption that humans are not only driven by libido as in Freud's theory, humans have a choice in balancing other personality dimensions such as inferiority feelings, according to Adler, inferiority feelings are a natural thing and must be felt by all individuals but must be cultivated to be something that is complete, cognizable and superior.The meaning of superiority in Adler's theory is not a definition of excellence, but a feeling of completeness, a sense of social interest and community feelings embodied in the striving for superiority or called Gemeinschaftsgfuhl , so that inferior feelings and striving for superiority are closely related.As for the aspects of striving for superiority, namely, a growth mindset that sees an advantage for self-development as well as having a purpose, competency seeking a desire to display positive performance that can help achieve goals, and social interest how individuals involve themselves as well as goals in social interests (A Adler, 1933;A Adler & Wolfe, 1958;Alfred Adler, nd-a;McCord et al., 1956) .

There are two directions, namely striving for superiority vertically emphasizing excellence and horizontally emphasizing socialization on collaboration, if individuals in striving for superiority are allowed to go in a vertical direction, if achieved, have a tendency to become a superiority complex and if not achieved, have a tendency to become an inferiority complex.So the striving for superiority needs to be developed in a horizontal direction (A Adler & Wolfe, 1958;Alfred Adler, nd-a) .However, there are still a few studies developing striving for superiority.Current research has a descriptive pattern as to how it profiles striving for superiority in students with special needs, in minority communities, in certain cultures.In addition, they have a pattern of seeing the striving for superiority of the characters in literary works, novels or films.While the current pattern of inferiority research focuses more on curative, School counselors as an integral part of education have an obligation to carry out psychoeducation services not only curatively but also preventively, so in this study the focus is on the role of counselors in a preventive manner.Some techniques that can help Adolescents understand inferiority feelings include biblio according to (Erford, 2015) , journaling technique according to (Fry, 2020) .Meanwhile, there are research recommendations that contain recommendations for school counselors to do reframing to help students understand how to compensate for feelings of inferiority (Jiang & Ngien, 2020) .It can be concluded based on the analysis and recommendations of several studies above, the intervention that can be done to support students' understanding is the cognitive domain.Researchers conducted a systematic literature review to develop an intervention design, namely understanding growth mindset to help positive striving for superiority through cognitive behavioral conceptualization in cognitive behavioral intervention involving reframing techniques as the main technique and techniques to strengthen with biblio & journaling.The cognitive-behavioral approach of REBT was not used in this study because based on the results of research REBT was mostly done on curative which focused on how negative emotions due to memorable events made individuals have irrational thinking patterns (Erford, 2015;Corey, 2008 ) .While the focus of this research is to carry out the psychoeducational function of school counselors on prevention, the fixed mindset is not irrational thinking, but a stage that must occur and needs to be developed into a growth mindset for stiving for superiority.


METHOD

This study uses a literature review technique that uses various scientific works.The source of this research comes from The British Psychology Society, Science Direct, Google Scholar, ERIC Digest , Springer, and Sage Journal with the keywords used to search for related journals are striving for superiority, school counselor's role, growth mindset, cognitive behavioral intervention . .The data analysis technique used is content analysis.The content analyzed relates to the role that school counselors can play in developing a growth mindset and striving for superiority teenagers."Growth Mindset " and "adolescence" " Gr owth Mindset " and " Motivation " or " Goals " or " Hope " "School counselor" and "intervention" "School counselor" and "adolescence"


RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Several findings from the growth mindset that support the indicators in striving for superiority recommend the importance of increasing goals oriented, optimal performances, and the desire to be part of the social environment.These indicators are to help Adolescents have a perspective that their condition and inferiority feelings can help their development .Based on several previous research results, it is stated that the application of a growth mindset can increase various positive variables in aspects that exist in the striving for superiority such as growth mindset , competition seeking and social interest which can bring individuals to a state of development and exploration of opening themselves up to good opportunities for identity roles.(Kwok et al., 2016;Muro et al., 2018;Schueller & Parks, 2014) .So that the role of school counselors that can be done to help adolescents develop positive striving for superiority in a horizontal direction can be through the implementation of psycho-educational services with cognitive behavioral intervention which includes three techniques, namely developing growth mindset, hope, motivation using reframing, journaling, and bibliotherapy .The following is a summary of the results of a literature review related to cognitive behavioral intervention relevant to increasing striving for superiority .Intervention improve their striving to challenges and effort in academic managing motivation (Burnette et al., 2018) students Growth mindset for student performances

Intervention build the students motivation to learn and explore things (Burnette et al., 2020) students

Growth mindset as an active coping for challenges Intervention positively related to treatment value and active coping skills in student and negatively related to psychological distress (Bellini, 2017) Adolescents and adults


Fostering a Growth Mindset: A Cognitive Behavioral Group

The intervention has a positive effect on increasing gratitude and well-being (Zyromski, 2007) students

Journaling as a student personal growth in school counselor tool Intervention in guidance school counselor program improve student goals oriented and self exploration in personal growth (Fry, 2020)


First generation student


Reframing to perceived motivation

Intervention improve students motivation and understanding in goals to career planning impact (Ge & Leifer, 2017)


Reframing for learning new ways of thinking and doing

Reframing can improve a reconstruction one's perception and improve creativity and social cultural understanding (Lucas et al., 2019) Students 7-12 years old


Building hope through Bibliotherapy

These results suggest that the intervention in an improve of hopeful thinking levels.

Students with low levels of hope are the ones benefiting the most from the intervention.There

Previous research has proven that the application of cognitive behavioral intervention To increase striving for superiority, it can be formulated based on three main techniques, namely growth mindset using reframing technique, journaling to help Adolescents focus in two areas, namely goals oriented and reflective, applying framing growth mindset to journaling.Journaling in cognitive behavioral has three stages, namely events, automatical thinking, reflective thinking, goals analysis and tracking.Meanwhile, bibliotherapy focuses on strengthening reframing and journaling by understanding the analysis of stories from books about characters with cognitive behavioral principles that promote exploration of student beliefs and growth mindset principles.Based on a number of technical activities that can be used, counseling services with cognitive behavioral intervention School counselors can do as many as 4 meetings by paying attention to how to process adolescent information, starting from the initial stage containing the opening prayer , apperception tracing the existence of a belief, assimilation tracing a belief if it already exists with increased or reduced follow -up, the core stage of reframing, journaling, and bibliotherapy , the final stage of dualism thinking through reflection and evaluation .


CONCLUSION

Based on the previous explanation, it can be concluded that the role of school counselors in developing striving for superiority is to compensate for inferiority feelings Adolescents can do this by implementing psycho-educational services through a cognitive-behavioral intervention design consisting of reframing, journaling, and bibliotherapy by paying attention to the rules of cognitive behavioral and growth mindset.This psycho-educational service can be carried out in 4 meetings through three stages, namely starting from the initial stage containing the opening prayer , apperception tracing the existence of a belief, assimilation tracing a belief if it already exists with increased or reduced follow-up , the core stage of reframing, journaling, and bibliotherapy., the final stage of dualism thinking through reflection and evaluation.

Table 1 .
1
Inclusion Criteria and Search Keywords
Inclusion CriteriaPublication YearAnySource TypeAcademic Journals, BooksageAdolescence (ie, mean age 12-21 years)Publication LanguageEnglishConstruct RequiredAdolescence's striving for superiority / growthmindsetStriving for superiority relationship with otherGrowth Mindset (broadly)positive variablesMotivationGoalsSchool counselor's roleCognitive Behavioral Group ActivityreframingJournalingBibliotherapySearch KeywordsGrowth Mindset relationship with other positivevariablesInitial SearchSubsequent searchSchool counselor's roleInitial SearchSubsequent search

Table 2 .
2
Summary of Reviewed Intervention
StudySampleIntervention TypeResults(Rhew et al., 2018)Lower Secondary studentsGrowth mindset on self-efficacy and motivationIntervention improve the student's motivation through challenges(Christensen et al., 2020)Upper Secondary studentsa growth mindset are hypothesized to approach challengesIntervention improve their active coping because challenges are construed as learning opportunities that can be overcome with effort.(Martin et al., 2019)studentsadjusting growth mindsets using cognitive behavioral in group interventionIntervention building a growth mindset proposed to assist these students with persevering through academic challenges, setting achieveable goals, and achieving to their full potentialBuilding student success(Hoyert et al.,High schoolthrough a growthIntervention improve the student's GPA2019)studentsmindset using cognitivefrom 1.45 to 2.39Intervention(Burgoyne et al., 2018)studentsGrowth mindset for academic challenges

Advantages and disadvantages of the inferiority feeling. A Adler, Superiority and social interest. Norton New York, NYWW1933

The Feeling of Inferiority and the Striving for Recognition. A Adler, Wolfe, Wbt, 1958psycnet.apa.org

. Alfred Adler, Alfred Adler Revisited by Jon Carlson, Michael P. Maniacci

Linking inferiority feelings to subjective happiness: Self-concealment and loneliness as serial mediators. Alfred Adler, R Akdo An, E , 10.1016/j.paid.2019.05.028the Science of Living By the Same Author. 2019. January149nd-b

The Influence of Culture on Instagram Use. A J Al-Kandari, A A Al-Hunaiyyan, R Al-Hajri, 10.12720/jait.7.1.54-57Journal of Advances in Information Technology. 712016

Understanding Human Nature Qahdbn City. Alfred Adler, , Beran Wolfe, W , New

Fostering a growth mindset: cognitive behavioral group for ninth graders. R Bellini, 2017Saint Mary's Kalmanovitz School of Education

Analysis of a mindset intervention. A P Burgoyne, Hambrick, Dz, J S Moser, Burt, Sa, 10.1016/j.jrp.2018.09.004Journal of Research in Personality. 772018. September

Growth mindsets and psychological distress: A meta-analysis. J L Burnette, L E Knouse, D T Vavra, O' Boyle, E Brooks, Ma, 10.1016/j.cpr.2020.101816Clinical Psychology Review. 771018162020. January 2019

An online growth mindset intervention in a sample of rural adolescent girls. J L Burnette, M V Russell, C L Hoyt, K Orvidas, L Widman, 10.1111/bjep.12192British Journal of Educational Psychology. 8832018

The most fundamental skill: Intentional learning and the career advantage. McKinsey Accelerate. L Christensen, J Gittleson, M Smith, 2020. August 202. August

C S Dweck, Growth mindset, Revised. Education Week. 201535

Research and evaluation in counseling . gelibert. B T Erford, 2014

Reframing the deficit mindset: first-generation students and concurrent enrollment. T Echniques, E Very, Counselor Hould, K Now, J Fry, 2020

Bibliotherapy: Using Books and Stories for Growth and Healing. International Association of School Librarianship. Selected Papers from the. Z C Gagatiga, Annual Conference. 20134024

Design thinking at the core: Learn new ways of thinking and doing by reframing. X Ge, L Leifer, 10.1115/DETC2017-67172Proceedings of the ASME Design Engineering Technical Conference. the ASME Design Engineering Technical Conference20177

Developing & managing: Your school guidance & counseling program. N C Gysbers, P Henderson, 2012American Counseling Association

Increasing Student Success through a Cocktail of Cognitive Interventions. M Hoyert, K Ballard, C O'dell, 10.14434/josotl.v19i1.26778Journal of the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning. 1912019

C L Hoyt, J L Burnette, 10.1177/23727322220941216Growth Mindset Messaging in Stigma-Relevant Contexts: Harnessing Benefits Without Costs. 20207

S Jiang, A Ngien, 10.1177/2056305120912488The Effects of Instagram Use, Social Comparison, and Self-Esteem on Social Anxiety: A Survey Study in Singapore. Social Media and Society. 20206

Positive and Negative Effects of Social Media on Adolescent Well-Being. Pro Quest Dissertations and Theses. K Kennedy, 2019149

Positive psychology intervention to alleviate child depression and increase life satisfaction : A randomized clinical trial. Sycl, M Gu, K Tong, K Kit, 10.1177/10497315166297991HVD/ HVD_URL??url_ver=Z39.88- 2004&rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:dissertation&genre=dissertation+%26+theses&sid=ProQResearch on Social Work Practice. 1122016Pro Quest+ Kwok

A study on the evaluation of the short-term efficacy and feasibility of STD counseling approach in the STD clinic. H Liu, B Li, L Zhang, Journal for China AIDS/STD. 2003

Bibliotherapy as a hope-building tool in educational settings. C V Lucas, D Teixeira, L Soares, F Oliveira, 10.1080/08893675.2019.1639883Journal of Poetry Therapy. 3242019

Growth goals and growth mindset from a methodological-synergistic perspective: lessons learned from a quantitative correlational research program. A J Martin, Collie, Rj, Durksen, Tl, Burns, Ec, Kcp Bostwick, A L Tarbetsky, 10.1080/1743727X.2018.1481938International Journal of Research and Methods in Education. 4222019

The Individual Psychology of Alfred Adler: A Systematic Presentation in Selections from His Writings. F Mccord, Ansbacher, Hl, Ansbacher, Rr, 10.2307/2089120American Sociological Review. 2156421956

A positive psychological intervention for failing students : Does it improve academic achievement and motivation? A pilot study. A Muro, J Soler, , Cebolla, R Cladellas, 10.1016/j.lmot.2018.04.002Learning and Motivation. 6312018

The development of grit and growth mindset during adolescence. D Park, E Tsukayama, A Yu, A L Duckworth, 10.1016/j.jecp.2020.104889Journal of Experimental Child Psychology. 1981048892020

The effects of a growth mindset on self-efficacy and motivation. E Rhew, Piro, Js, P Goolkasian, P Cosentino, 10.1080/2331186X.2018.1492337Cogent Education. 512018

Growth mindset in the classroom. C Robinson, Scope. 4122017

The science of self-help: Translating positive psychology research into increased individual happiness. S M Schueller, Parks, Ac, 10.1027/1016-9040/a000181European Psychologist. 1922014

Social comparison, social media, and self-esteem. E A Vogel, J P Rose, L R Roberts, K Eckles, DISCOVER . 32014

Journaling: An Underutilized School Counseling Tool. B Zyromski, Journal of School Counseling. 5992007