On the nonlinear dynamics of in-contact rigid bodies experiencing stick-slip and wear phenomena
3 October 2024

Francesco D'annibale francesco.dannibale@univaq.it 
Arnaldo Casalotti arnaldo.casalotti@uniroma3.it 

Department of Civil
Construction-Architectural and Environmental Engineering
University of L'Aquila
67100L'AquilaItaly


Department of Architecture
University of Roma Tre
00185RomeItaly

On the nonlinear dynamics of in-contact rigid bodies experiencing stick-slip and wear phenomena
3 October 2024FB736CEA6BB7EA47D652C600B835F59E10.1007/s00161-024-01331-2Received: 25 October 2023 / Accepted: 10 September 2024 /
In this paper, the dynamic behavior of one degree-of-freedom oscillator subject to stick-slip and wear phenomena at the contact interface with a rigid substrate is investigated.The motion of the oscillator, induced by a harmonic excitation, depends on the tangential contact forces, exchanged with the rigid soil, which are modeled through piecewise nonlinear constitutive laws, accounting for stick-slip phenomena due to friction as well as wear due to abrasion, already developed by the authors in a previous work.The nonlinear ordinary differential equations governing the problem are derived, whose solution is numerically obtained via a typical Runge-Kutta-based algorithm.The main target of this study is to analyze and discuss the strong nonlinear behavior, descending from the presence of stick-slip and wear phenomena, thus investigating the effect of the different interface modeling.In this framework, the analysis is carried out considering the whole evolution of non-smooth contact laws, starting from the virgin interface.KeywordsInterface modeling • Nonlinear dynamics • Stick-slip • Wear Communicated by Andreas Öchsner.

Introduction

The mechanics of in-contact bodies encompasses a wide class of problems concerning a large variety of applications in Mechanical Sciences, i.e. structural bearings for bridges [1,2], advanced material modeling [3,4], prosthetic elements in biomechanics [5][6][7], power transmission systems in the automotive context [8,9], nanofilms [10], pantographic meta-materials [11,12], multi-body dynamics and friction-induced vibrations [13][14][15][16][17][18][19], locomotion [20,21].In recent years, further efforts are being carried out not only in the modeling approaches, see, e.g., [22,23], but also from the experimental point of view see, e.g., [24].In particular, when non-smooth laws are taken into account, the solution of the both static and dynamic problems often leads to very rich and complex scenarios [25] and requires further attention from the methodological point of view [26][27][28][29][30].

One of the demanding aspects in analyzing such kind of problems is to deeply understand and model the interface phenomena, such as friction and abrasion.This aspect calls for to also account for complex constitutive models which are able to properly describe the time evolution of the contact interface: this leads to strong nonlinear behaviors depending on the in-contact materials and the type of interactions taking place in the contact region [31][32][33].

In general, when a relative sliding motion takes place between in-contact bodies, a degradation of the force that opposes to the motion is observed: it is due to a degradation of the mechanical properties of the materials at the interface.This phenomenon is called wear and it has been widely studied in Tribology [32] in a larger context of surface interactions, such as adherence, corrosion and surface fatigue [34][35][36].Here, the focus is on the form of wear caused by abrasion which occurs, as a consequence of stick-slip phenomena [33,37], i.e. the softer material experiences damage as a loss of particles, which, trapped between the two bodies, may impede or facilitate the sliding motion, according to their dimensions [38,39].

The derivation of a suitable mathematical description of those contact phenomena can be assessed in the the framework of the Thermodynamics of Irreversible Processes, by introducing the concept of 'interface', namely a plane (or curved) layer, typically a Cauchy's continuum interposed by the two in-contact bodies, endowed (or not) with material properties and additional kinematic descriptors, and with vanishing (or not) volume, see, e.g., [40][41][42].On the other hand, a theoretical description of friction and wear phenomena can be grounded in the context of Damage Mechanics, e.g., [43][44][45][46][47][48].In [45,46], by extending the formal analogy between friction and plasticity (see, e.g., [49,50]) to that of abrasion of a soft body and ductile damage of an elastic-plastic material, a damage constitutive model [51,52] for a Cauchy's interface was developed taking into account for different (coupled) interfacial phenomena, like adhesion, friction, hardening effects and wear.The constitutive laws of [45,46] are sided, in addition to Damage Mechanics, also on the Thermodynamics of Irreversible Processes and the Internal Variables Theory for Standard Generalized Materials [53][54][55].

Another demanding aspect, that is crucial for several engineering applications, is to model the time evolution of the interactions between structures when their contact regions are affected by sliding/friction phenomena.Most of the cases, that have been treated in the literature, are related to elastic beams developing contact interactions with adjacent bodies [56][57][58].On the other hand, the effect of friction has been also widely investigated to study the behavior of structural systems when vibrations are induced by contact dynamics [59][60][61].However, in all these cases, simplified friction models are considered, mostly based on Coulomb's friction law.Thus, it is of great interest to analyze contact interactions on elastic bodies also involving wear, see, e.g., [62], where the behavior of an elastic beam in tangential contact with a rigid substrate in discrete points is investigated taking into account the contact laws of [45].

Most of the cited works, tackle the problem of in-contact bodies in quasi-static conditions, however further efforts needs to be made to investigate the effects of such phenomena in dynamic regimes.Early studies have been conducted on the nonlinear dynamics of oscillators governed bi-linear constitutive laws in [63,64] via an asymptotic approach and in [65] where an experimental campaign was conducted to validate the numerical results.Several investigations are found in [66][67][68][69] on a perfect elasto-plastic oscillator where the bounded nature of the constitutive law allows to obtained closed-form solutions of the dynamic response.Different kind of nonlinear constitutive laws are exploited to study the nonlinear dynamic response of discrete systems with a Bouc-Wen type hysteresis in [70,71] via a multiple scales approach and in [72] via the harmonic balance method, whereas in [73] a numerical path-following algorithm is implemented.On the other hand, the effect of damage in the dynamics of single oscillators is introduced in [74] where the Ramberg-Osgood model is adopted, while in [75] the response of stiffness-degrading systems is investigated by discussing their response when characterized by different damage models.

In this framework, the aim of the present work is to contribute to the analysis of nonlinear dynamic behavior of in-contact bodies, through the study of a sample system, i.e. a rigid block sliding on a rigid substrate, when complex contact phenomena arise at the interface.Typically, in friction-induced vibration problems such as braking or base-isolation systems, the excitation acts on the over-structure whose dynamics influences the overall system behavior.In contrast, here, the focus lies on nonlinear contact interactions inducing dissipation phenomena during sliding motion.Consequently, the external action will be directly applied to the rigid block, which is considered an approximation of a sufficiently rigid over-structure.This approach enables the analysis to focus solely on the effects of contact phenomena on the nonlinear dynamics of the block.In simpler terms, this study should be seen as an initial exploration of the broader problem wherein a vibrating system, with its own dynamics, nonlinearly interacts with a contact interface in the presence of friction and wear, potentially affecting its dynamics.In particular, it is considered that friction forces and wear manifest themselves in the contact region and their effect on the dynamic response is investigated, by exploiting the non-smooth contact constitutive laws introduced in [45].Accordingly, the main novelty of the work is to delve into the effect of the complex mechanisms occurring at the contact region (stick-slip and wear), modeled through the introduction of piecewise nonlinear contact interface laws, on the sliding motion of the rigid block.In this framework, the Fig. 1 Rigid body sliding on a rigid soil with elastic asperities.T (u, g, w): tangential force at the interface; P: amplitude of the harmonic external excitation of frequency f ; u: the total displacement analysis is carried out considering the whole evolution of non-smooth contact laws, starting from the virgin interface.This entails that the nonlinear stationary response strictly depends on the transient phase, in which the way stick-slip and wear evolve gives rise to a dominant contribution.Due to this fact, typical analytical techniques cannot be exploited and, therefore, the so-called transient analysis of contact interactions is carried out numerically by solving the system of ODEs through a predictor-corrector algorithm, as the excitation frequency varies in a specific range.The obtained numerical results are carefully discussed to highlight the key phenomenological aspects on the nonlinear dynamic response of the block, as due to the complex modeling of the contact interactions at the interface.

The paper is organized as follows.In Sect. 2 the equations of motion of the sample system are presented, while in Sect. 3 the constitutive models for the contact interface, introduced in [45], are briefly recalled.In Sect. 4 results of the numerical investigations are presented and discussed.Finally, in Sect. 5 some conclusions are drawn.


The sample model

The object of study is a one degree of freedom system, namely a rigid block in contact with the soil (i.e., a rigid substrate) and is depicted in Fig. 1.It has mass m and it is subject to an external (horizontal) harmonic excitation, with amplitude P and frequency f , which induces the tangential sliding of the block with respect to the soil.As a consequence, a tangential friction force T arises: if the excitation amplitude is below a specific threshold, it does not trigger any motion, namely the stick-phase occurs, otherwise it produces a tangential motion, namely the slip-phase takes place.This gives rise to non-smooth equations describing the time evolution of T , that will be introduced hereafter.The equation governing the dynamic equilibrium of the block with the corresponding initial conditions, is:
m ü + T (u, g, w) = P cos f t u(0) = u(0) = 0 (1)
where the dot denotes differentiation with respect to the time t.Moreover, T (u, g, w) = S c τ (u, g, w) is the tangential force taking place at the contact surface (S c ) while τ = τ (u, g, w) is tangential stress, here assumed constant on S c , which is ruled by the constitutive laws of the specific considered interface (see Sect. 3).When the interface is in the stick-phase, its constitutive response is linear in the tangential displacement, whereas, when the excitation amplitude reaches the threshold (which actually evolves in time, depending on the history of imposed displacements), i.e. in the slip-phase, the interface behavior is nonlinear, including hardening and softening effects.Therefore, when the displacement is sufficiently small, the tangential force reduces to T l (u) = S c k a u (being k a the adherence coefficient as specified in the next section): this entails that the corresponding linear angular frequency of the oscillator, corresponding to the virgin interface, can be evaluated as:
ω 0 = S c k a m (2)
Hence, some main questions arise, on which this work seeks to shed light.What does it happen to the sample system when the excitation frequency f varies in the neighborhood of ω 0 , that is when the excitation induces large amplitude oscillations due to resonance?What are the effects on the nonlinear dynamic response of the sample system, induced by the interface nonlinearities and by the cyclic (harmonic) transition between stick and slip phases, and in the presence (or not) of the wear phenomenon?What are the damping properties of the interface?

To give an answer to the previous questions, the nonlinear dynamic response of the sample system is analyzed in the following, for different interface constitutive laws, by making use of time histories of the response, frequency-response curves and by defining a sort of equivalent damping.


Constitutive models for the interface

To describe the interaction between the rigid block and the substrate, five distinct constitutive models for the interface were presented in [45].Those models have been defined under the guidance of the phenomenological observations that can be recognized in shear tests, performed on a block of ductile material in contact with a rigid soil [76] and are here briefly recalled (see [45] for further details).The block is subject to a normal force (i.e., self weight or an external load) which guarantees the contact with the rigid surface, and by a tangential force which triggers sliding in a quasi-static regime.Typically, the evolution of the friction force against the tangential displacement is characterized by a linear behavior with an initial (positive) slope that subsequently (as the displacement increases) tends to zero if the normal force is small, while it may assume negative values and go to zero (for very large displacements) when the normal forces assumes higher values.The theoretical interpretation of the observed shear tests behavior, given in [45] and based on a micro-modeling of the contact, can be synthesized as follows.

• Asperities are present on both contact surfaces and kept in contact by the normal force.

• An elastic deformation (reversible) of those asperities arises when a small tangential force is applied (stick or adherence phase).• As the tangential force increases, the asperities on the block can overtake those on the soil, giving rise to a sudden inelastic (not reversible) displacement (slip phase).• If the asperities encounter an evolution in time (experiencing plastic or damage regimes), the energy necessary to sustain motion varies resulting in a hardening or softening macroscopic behavior.• Collapse of the asperities (damage) may take place at larger displacement.The detached particles trapped at the interface, depending on their size can impede or facilitate the motion, due to a hardening or lubrication effect, respectively (slip and wear phase).

Therefore, the tangential (friction) force at the contact between the block and the soil, associated with stick, slip and wear phenomena, is strongly influenced by the inelastic phenomena occurring at the contact region and by the size of the debris resting on it.These effects are modeled in [45] through phenomenologicallybased constitutive laws (see also [43,44,46,62]) of a properly defined material interface, which substitutes the "real" discrete asperities with an "ideal" vanishingly small layer of deformable material, capable of shear strains only and bonded to the two bodies.More specifically, constitutive laws of [45] account for stick-slip phenomena, which is caused by friction and for wear, which is caused by abrasion.In particular, they are capable to (phenomenologically) take into account for: i) the hardening effect caused by interposed debris (of sufficiently large dimensions), whose concentration, hardness, size and morphology are well-known in the literature to affect the friction coefficient and the degree of wearing surface damage, and ii) the degradation of the contact region due to the wear evolution, together with the lubrication effect (eventually) caused by (sufficiently small) interposed debris, inducing softening.Formulation of such consitutive laws has been carried out in [45] within the general framework of the Thermodynamics of the Irreversible Processes and accounts for suitable defined internal variables of phenomenological type, namely gap, isotropic friction hardening and wear.In Fig. 2a qualitative sketch of the tangential stress τ versus the tangential displacement u for the five local constitutive laws of [45] is shown.In particular, in Fig. 2a, no-wear models are presented, while in Fig. 2b constitutive laws accounting for wear phenomenon are displayed.

The simplest no-wear law (Fig. 2a, label E P), resembles the very well-known perfect elasto-plastic material behavior, characterized by an adherence coefficient k a and a stress threshold τ 0 .Moreover, two richer contact laws are considered to account for the isotropic hardening phenomenon at the interface (Fig. 2a), namely: a linear hardening model L H and a nonlinear hardening model N L H. In both the models, the hardening effect is governed by the stress variable A, which entails an increase of the adherence (stress) threshold in a cyclic Fig. 2 Qualitative behavior of the contact interface models: a no-wearable models, namely elasto-plastic E P, linear hardening L H and nonlinear hardening N L H; b wearable models, namely linear L H W and nonlinear N L H W hardening with wear behavior.It is worth to note that, in the L H the hardening growth is unbounded, while in the N L H, it is limited to an asymptotic threshold value A ∞ .

On the other hand, the effect of wear is taken into account in the last two models of [45], the linear hardening model with wear L H W and nonlinear hardening model with wear N L H W (Fig. 2b).The effect of wear is evident by considering an unload-reload path of Fig. 2b, where a slope reduction, both of the stick-and slip-phases, is recognized.

The constitutive laws governing the time evolution of the tangential stresses, for the five models described above, are expressed in the follow.For the no-wear models the state laws (differentiated with respect to the time) read:
τ = k a ( u − ġ) E P, L H, N L H Ȧ = k s α L H a A ∞ e −aα N L H (3)
Moreover, the flow laws, describing the time evolution of the internal variables, read:
ġ = ⎧ ⎪ ⎨ ⎪ ⎩ f sw (t) u EP f sw (t) 1 k s τ L H f sw (t) 1 a(A ∞ −A) τ N L H α = f sw (t) 1 k s sign(τ ) τ L H f sw (t) 1 a(A ∞ −A) sign(τ ) τ N L H (4)
In Eqs (3) (4) g is the gap (internal) variable, resulting from the decomposition u (t) = u e (t) + g (t), where u e (t) is a measure of the stick part of the displacement and g (t) of the (irreversible) slip part; α (t) is the internal variable measuring the magnitude of isotropic hardening.Moreover, k a and k s are the adherence and the slip coefficients, respectively, A ∞ is the upper bound of the thermodynamic force A associated to isotropic hardening, while the parameter a governs its evolution rate.Note that f sw (t) represents a boolean (nondimensional) function, namely the switch function, that equals 0 when the stress state evolves in the linear domain, whereas it is equal to 1 when the stress state belongs to the elastic domain, as specified in what follows.

For the wear models instead the following state laws (differentiated with respect to the time) are considered:
τ = k a (1 − w)( u − ġ) − k a ẇ(u − g) L H W, N L H W Ȧ = k s (1 − w) α − k s ẇα L H W ∂ ∂t A ∞ (1 − w) 1 − (1 − w)e − a 1−w α N L H W Ẇ = ⎧ ⎨ ⎩ ∂ ∂t 1 2 k a (u − g) 2 + 1 2 k s α 2 L H W ∂ ∂t 1 2 k a (u − g) 2 + A ∞ α − 3 a + 3(1−w) 2 +a α(1−w) a e − a 1−w α N L H W (5)
while the flow laws read:
ġ = f sw (t) H (1 − w) 2 τ L H W, N L H W α = f sw (t) H 1 − w sign(τ ) τ L H W, N L H W ẇ = f sw (t) H (1 − w) W γ sign(τ ) τ L H W, N L H W(6)
In Eqs (5) ( 6) w (t) is the (internal nondimensional) variable measuring the magnitude of wear and W (t) is the thermodynamically associated force.Moreover, and γ are two parameters governing the evolution rate of wear.Finally, H is the so-called hardening function, which assumes the following expression:
H := ⎧ ⎪ ⎨ ⎪ ⎩ k s (1 − w) − k s α + ||τ || (1−w) 2 W γ −1 L H W a A ∞ − A 1−w + A ∞ − 2 A ∞ (1 − w + a 2 α)e − a 1−w α + ||τ || (1−w) 2 W γ −1 N L H W. (7)
In all the no-wear models, when the interface is in the adherence phase ( f sw (t) = 0), the stress is τ = k a u (i.e.being zero the other functions, thus entailing that the behavior is linear), on the contrary, for the wear models the adherence phase, that takes place after the onset of wear, besides the behavior is still linear, is characterized by a lower adherence coefficient (remember Fig. 2b).

The switch between the linear and nonlinear equations is, therefore, ruled by f sw (t) which actually is related to the so-called slip-function (or control function) F = F( τ , A), τ := τ/ (1 − w) being the so-called effective stress, which is able to establish, at each time, the state of the interface, namely adherence or slip-wear.It is defined as follows:
F( τ , A) = ⎧ ⎪ ⎨ ⎪ ⎩ |τ | − τ 0 E P |τ | − (τ 0 + A) L H, N L H | τ | − (τ 0 + A) L H W, N L H W (8)
In particular:

• when F( τ , A) < 0, the interface is in adherence conditions (i.e. the internal variables g, α, w do not evolve in time); • when F( τ , A) = 0, but Ḟ( τ , A) < 0 the stress state is on the boundary of the slip function, whose evolution in time is negative, thus corresponding to an elastic return phase (g, α, w do not evolve in time); • when F( τ , A) = 0 and Ḟ( τ , A) = 0 the stress state results is on the boundary of the slip function, that does not evolve in time, meaning that slip and wear conditions occur (i.e. the internal variables g, α, w do evolve in time).

Finally, from a geometrical point of view, F( τ , A) = 0 defines the boundaries of a one-dimensional domain, parametrized by the thermodynamic force A and by the wear w.Internal points to the domain characterize adherence-states, boundary points denote slip and wear states, external points cannot be reached, unless the domain is updated.According to such conditions, for all the interface models, f sw (t) is defined as:
f sw (t) = ⎧ ⎪ ⎨ ⎪ ⎩ 0 when F( τ , A) < 0 0 when F( τ , A) = 0, Ḟ( τ , A) < 0 1 when F( τ , A) = 0, Ḟ( τ , A) = 0(9)
The ensuing interface equations are therefore piecewise, since they actually change expression whether the stress state is in adherence condition (linear behavior) or in slip/weare phase (nonlinear behavior).

It is here remarked that the constitutive parameters, appearing in the laws governing the behavior of interface, can only be determined via experimental investigations on the involved materials.In particular, they can mostly be estimated via quasi-static tests, since it becomes very complex to identify the nonlinear phenomena taking place at the interface [77][78][79].The Eq. ( 1), together with the nonlinear constitutive laws (3,4), for the no-wearable interface and with Eqs.(5,6) for the wearable interface, respectively, governs the dynamics of the oscillator and the time evolution of the stress state at the interface.They constitutes a system of nonlinear piecewise ordinary differential equations, which are solved numerically by adopting suitable algorithms available in the Wolfram Mathematica™ package, grounded on the Runge-Kutta methods together with the built-in subroutine WhenEvent which allows to handle the changes in the behavior of the piecewise ODEs, that modify the stress state at each time step, and consequently allows to update the switch function f sw (t).In particular, the obtained solution has been validated against that obtained via another commercial and powerful software, i.e.MATLAB™.More specifically, in the latter the ode45 solver is combined with the Events option function.

The analyses are conducted by fixing the external excitation amplitude P and varying its frequency f in the neighborhood of the linear angular frequency of the oscillator, i.e. ω 0 .The values adopted in the following numerical simulations for the mechanical parameters are: m = 14.13 kg, S c = 0.3 × 0.3 m2 , τ 0 = 500 N/m 2 , k a = 10 5 N/m 3 , k s = 10 4 N/m 3 , A ∞ = 10 N/m 2 , a = 10 3 1/m, = 1 N/m 0.5 , γ = 2 1 .In all the forthcoming figures, displacements u, g are expressed in m, velocities u, ġ in m/s, stresses τ and F in N/m 2 , while w and f sw are nondimensional variables.


Frequency response curves

The (nondimensional) ratio between the excitation frequency and the linear angular frequency of the oscillator is defined as σ = f /ω 0 .It is varied in the range [0.7, 1.3] to obtain the frequency response curves and thus investigating the behavior of the sample system close and far from the resonance condition σ = 1.

The results are illustrated in Fig. 3 for the no-wear models in terms of σ and of the maximum oscillation amplitude of the sample system, denoted with the blue dots in the figure for different σ values; the numerical solution of the linear undamped oscillator is also reported in the same figure with continuous gray lines.It can be seen that when the amplitude is below the corresponding adherence threshold (u 0 = τ 0 /k a = 5 • 10 −3 m), the oscillator endowed with the E P interface is characterized by a response bounded at a displacement slightly larger than u 0 (see Fig. 3a): when the slip-phase is activated, a strong dissipation is obtained.A very similar behavior is obtained when the oscillator obeys to the N L H interface law: though the adherence threshold can increase in time, saturation of A takes place and the resulting behavior tends to an E P interface (see Fig. 3c).

A very different behavior instead is exhibited when the L H interface is considered (see Fig. 3b).As u 0 is reached, the adherence threshold starts increasing, but, since the growth of the hardening stress variable A is unbounded, the effective dissipation is very low and the response of the oscillator tends to diverge when the resonance condition is approached.This aspect deserves to be further investigated and it will be discussed next.

On the other hand, the same frequency response curves are derived for the wear interfaces and are represented in Fig. 4 with the same logic adopted above.It is seen that due to the presence of wear a strong Fig. 4 Frequency response curves for the sample system in the presence of wearable interfaces represented by the blue-scaled dots: a LHW; b NLHW.The solid gray line denotes the response of the linear undamped oscillator.The displacement u is expressed in m, while σ is nondimensional Fig. 5 Displacement time history, stress-displacement and phase diagrams for the sample system in the presence of no-wearable interfaces at σ = 0.98: a-c u vs. t, τ vs. u, u vs. u for the E P interface; d-f u vs. t, τ vs. u, u vs. u for the L H interface; g-i u vs. t and τ vs. u, u vs. u for the N L H interface.The displacement u is expressed in m, the velocity u in m/s, the stress τ in N/m 2 , while t in s dissipation takes place, in both the L H W and N L H W models (see Fig. 4a, b).Despite the fact that, also in this case, the growth of the hardening stress variable A is unbounded, the effect of wear allows the sample system to dissipate energy thus resulting in a bounded response in terms of oscillation amplitude, even though at larger amplitudes with respect to the other interfaces.


Time histories

To better highlight the behavior of the sample system in the presence of wearable and no-wearable interfaces, its dynamic response is illustrated in terms of displacement time history and corresponding stress-displacement diagram, taken at σ = 0.98, that is slightly before the resonance condition.

The results obtained with the no-wear models are illustrated in Fig. 5, namely: (a), (b) u vs. t and τ vs. u for the E P interface; (c), (d) u vs. t and τ vs. u for the L H interface; (e), (f) u vs. t and τ vs. u for the N L H interface.It is seen that the steady-state response of the E P and N L H interface reaches a maximum amplitude that is max(u E P ) 1.13 • u 0 , max(u) N L H 1.15 • u 0 and the corresponding stress-displacement cycle exhibits a considerable hysteresis area: note that the maximum stress reached by the N L H is max(τ N L H ) 510 > τ 0 .On the hand, the L H interface is characterized by an amplitude that increases in time without reaching a steady-state response.Accordingly, the corresponding force-displacement diagram an almost linear cycle.

Figure 6 shows the phase diagrams in the (g, ġ)-plane relevant to the time histories illustrated in Fig. 5.In particular, the trajectories reported in Fig. 6a are referred to the sample system in the presence of an E P interface, while those of Fig. 6b, c are referred to the L H and N L H interfaces, respectively.As a confirmation of the previous results, it is shown that also the trajectories in the phase-plane reach a steady-state behavior in the E P and N L H models, while for the L H model an unbounded behavior is detected.

The same analysis is conducted for the models with wear and the results are illustrated in terms of displacement time history and corresponding stress-displacement diagram, taken at σ = 0.98, in Fig. 7 with the same logic adopted above, in particular: (a), (b) u vs. t and τ vs. u for the L H W interface; (c), (d) u vs. t and τ vs. u for the N L H W interface.The effect of wear is evident in the stress-displacement cycles that both the interfaces clearly exhibit.The effective dissipation is higher than the previous cases, in fact the maximum amplitude in the steady state response for the L H W model is smaller max(u L H W ) = 1.43 • u 0 (remember that the corresponding amplitude of the L H interface diverges) and max(τ L H W ) = 1.13 • τ 0 .On the other hand, for the N L H W model the response is also clearly affected by the presence of wear, since the displacement is max(u N L H W ) = 1.07 • u 0 while the maximum stress in the steady-state regime is max(τ L H W ) = 0.87 • τ 0 : this entails that, as it is expected, the effect of wear allows displacements larger that u 0 with a corresponding stress that is lower than τ 0 .

These results are confirmed by phase-plane diagrams, which are shown in Fig. 8 in the (g, ġ)-plane and in the (w, ẇ)-plane, for the time histories illustrated in Fig. 7.In particular, the trajectories reported in Fig. 8a, b are referred to the sample system in the presence of L H W interface, while those of Fig. 8c, d are referred to the N L H W interface.Trajectories in the (g, ġ)-plane show a bounded response after some cycles required to reach the steady-state and due to the onset of damage.This behavior is similar to the E P and N L H interfaces where, however it is due to the bounded nature of the constitutive laws.Finally, the trajectories in the (w, ẇ)-plane show an increasing amplitude, with the cycle number, due to the fact that wear can only increase in time.

Further additional results are reported in Appendix A in order to give a better overview of the behavior exhibited by the five interface models, highlighting the piecewise nature of the response.


Equivalent damping

Since the obtained stress-displacement diagrams are characterized by closed loop, it is of interest to evaluate a sort of resulting (nondimensional) equivalent damping ratio ζ eq .This is useful in many engineering application, Fig. 7 Displacement time history, stress-displacement and phase diagrams for the sample system in the presence of wearable interfaces at σ = 0.98: a-c u vs. t τ vs. u, u vs. u for the L H W interface; d-f u vs. t, τ vs. u, u vs. u for the N L H W interface.The displacement u is expressed in m, the velocity u in m/s, the stress τ in N/m 2 , while t in s Fig. 8 Phase plane diagrams for the wear interfaces at σ = 0.98: a, b ġ vs. g and ẇ vs. w for the L H W interface; c, d ġ vs. g and ẇ vs. w for the N L H W interface.The displacement g is expressed in m, the velocity ġ in m/s, while w is nondimensional, consequently ẇ is expressed in 1/s Fig. 9 Qualitative representation of the force-displacement diagram for the valuation of the equivalent damping ζ eq Fig. 10 Evaluation of the equivalent damping ζ eq (nondimensional) for the sample system in the presence of no-wearable interfaces, derived at = 0.98 • ω 0 , in terms of: a ζ eq vs n; b ω/ω 0 vs n; c u max in m vs n.Being n (nondimensional) the n-th period during which the evaluations are computed in order to give a measure of the dissipation of the nonlinear (and complex) oscillator (at its steady-state) through the classical linear one, where instead dissipation is modeled by a conventional and simple linear viscous damping term (see, e.g., [80][81][82]).

The motion of the equivalent linear oscillator is governed by the well-known equation:
m ü + c u + k eq u = P cos f t (10)
where c represents the linear damping coefficient, defined as c := 2ζ eq mω 0 , and k eq is the equivalent stiffness evaluated as the secant to the force-displacement diagram (see Fig. 9); therefore, the equivalent angular frequency of the linear oscillator is ω eq = k eq /m.The equivalent damping factor ζ eq has to be identified from the effective dissipation capacity of the actual nonlinear oscillator.This is done here by simply evaluating, for every cycle of the force-displacement diagram, the ratio between the energy actually dissipated by the oscillator and the equivalent elastic energy, according to the following expression:
ζ eq = 1 4π
A loop E eq (11) where A loop is the area enclosed in the force-displacement diagram, represented by the blue shaded region in Fig. 9, while E eq = (1/2)F r,max u max is the gray region below the black line.Note that F r is the tangential force taking place at the interface and is thus F r = A c τ (u, g, w).The equivalent damping is thus retrieved from the time histories reported in Figs. 5, 7 for the first 200 periods and the results are illustrated in Figs. 10, 11 for the sample system in the presence of no-wearable and wearable interfaces, respectively, in terms of ζ eq vs. the period number n.As the behavior of the oscillator becomes nonlinear and thus it starts dissipating energy, it is of interest not only the evaluation of ζ eq (Fig. 10a), but also to monitor how the actual stiffness (i.e. that secant to the force-displacement loop) of the oscillator evolves in time as the nonlinearities take place.That is represented in terms of ratio between the actual frequency ω eq and the original linear angular frequency ω 0 in Fig. 10b together with the oscillation amplitude (Fig. 10c).The results clearly show the different dissipation capabilities of the oscillator strictly depending on the interface model adopted.In particular, the E P model reaches an equivalent damping close to the value of 5%, as the oscillation amplitude overcomes u 0 , then it stabilizes since the equivalent frequency reduces of almost 7%: this brings the oscillator far from resonance.On the contrary, the L H interface exhibits a ζ eq that goes up to almost 5% but rapidly decreases back to zero: this is confirmed by the equivalent frequency that at the beginning Fig. 11 Evaluation of the equivalent damping ζ eq (nondimensional) for the sample system in the presence of wearable interfaces, derived at = 0.98 • ω 0 , in terms of: a ζ eq vs n; b ω/ω 0 vs n; c u max in m vs n.Being n (nondimensional) the n-th period during which the evaluations are computed decreases, but then returns to value very close to ω 0 thus maintaining the oscillator in resonance condition.Indeed, resonance is expected to occur at ω 0 when the oscillator is in the linear phase; however, when the L H is in the slip phase, its stiffness becomes k s k a /(k a + k s ) and, accordingly, its resonance frequency changes.As a consequence, the resulting oscillation amplitude attains larger values (remember that, as illustrated in Fig. 3, with σ = 1, the E P oscillator response diverges).On the other hand, the N L H oscillator exhibits a behavior very similar to the E P interface.This is because, besides the adherence domain evolves in time, the hardening stress variable A reaches its saturation threshold and then the interface behaves as the E P model.

Similarly to the L H interface, the L H W model (Fig. 11) also tends to undergo larger oscillations.The equivalent damping goes to zero, as depicted in Fig. 11a, because the actual change in frequency caused by wear brings the oscillator far from resonance, see Fig. 11b and, therefore, the response tends to be linear but at smaller amplitudes.Even though ω eq /ω 0 tends to cyclically go back the (undamaged) value 1, damage limits this effect and the resulting oscillation amplitude is bounded, see Fig. 11c.Finally, it is observed that the N L H W behaves similarly to the L H W .


Conclusions

In this paper, the nonlinear dynamic behavior of a sample one degree of freedom system, namely a rigid block sliding on a rigid substrate, is investigated in the presence of the stick-slip phenomenon due to friction as well as the wear due to abrasion, both arising at the contact interface.The oscillator is subject to a harmonic excitation and the evolution of the tangential contact forces, exchanged with the rigid soil, are modeled via the nonlinear (and non-smooth) constitutive laws of [45].The ensuing nonlinear ordinary differential equations governing the problem are numerically solved via a typical Runge-Kutta-based algorithm.The obtained results are discussed to highlight the effects of the different interfaces in the nonlinear dynamics of the system.The following concluding remarks can be drawn.

1.The frequency response curves show that all the models (except for the L H one) lead to a bounded response due to the energy dissipated at the interface.2. The frequency response curve obtained for the L H interface shows an unbounded response, due to the unbounded nature of the constitutive law itself.3. The previous considerations are confirmed when the equivalent damping is evaluated, in order to have a quantification of the dissipation capacity of each interface model.In particular, the angular frequency of the oscillator tends to a value far from resonance due to the bounded nature of the no-wear models (except for the L H one) and due to the evolution of wear (when present).4. In the LH model the resulting frequency tends to persist across the resonance value, thus impeding to the oscillator to dissipate energy: the resulting equivalent damping tends to zero. 5.When wear is present, the response stabilizes because the onset of damage brings the oscillator actual frequency far from resonance such that the oscillation amplitude decreases and the evolution of damage stops.

Finally, further work should be conducted to include multi-frequency periodic excitation and, subsequently, random excitation which may give rise more complex and interesting responses.Furthermore, along the same lines, it will be intriguing to investigate the nonlinear dynamics of a viscoelastic, potentially nonlinear, overstructure coupled with a rigid soil through the contact interfaces examined in this paper.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made.The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material.If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

Funding Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi dell'Aquila within the CRUI-CARE Agreement.


Declarations


Conflicting of interest

The authors declared no potential conflict of interest with respect to the research, authorship and publication of this article.


A Time-histories of internal variables, slip and switch functions

To better highlight the nonlinear response exhibited by the five models, additional results are illustrated in the following figures.The time histories of the internal variables, the slip and switch functions associated to the case analyzed in Sect.4.2, i.e. σ = 0.98, are reported in Figs. 12, 13 and 14 for the no-wear models, i.e. the E P, the L H and the N L H models, respectively.

It can be clearly noted that the g does not evolve until F is negative (entailing f sw = 0).On the contrary, as F becomes 0 together with its time derivative (not reported here), f sw becomes 1 thus activating the nonlinear terms in the interfaces equations.Due to the cyclic nature of the external excitation, subsequent elastic return phases are found when F returns negative and f sw returns 0. As already observed in Sect.4.2, the E P (see Fig. 12) and N L H (see Fig. 14) models exhibit a very similar behavior reaching a steady state response characterized by the alternation of stick and slip phases.On the other hand, the L H model (see Fig. 13) shows an unbounded growth of stress followed by a large increase of displacement.When it reaches the amplitude of the corresponding equivalent undamped linear oscillator (t > 28 s), the behavior remains linear ( f sw = 0) with large amplitude oscillations with non zero mean value, i.e. g = 0.

With the same logic adopted above, the time histories of the internal variables associated to the case analyzed in Sect.4.2, i.e. σ = 0.98, are reported in Figs. 15 and 16 for the models with wear, i.e. the L H W and the N L H W models, respectively.In this case, when wear is taken into account, it is observed that there is a first phase in which it evolves modifying not only the slip phase, but also the adherence phase (remember Eq. ( 5)).In this phase, F becomes zero and f sw attains the value 1 several times in alternation with the corresponding elastic return phases.Subsequently, after damage has reached a certain threshold, the resulting linear stiffness, and therefore frequency, of the interfaces changes significantly bringing the oscillator out of resonance (t > 5 s for the L H W and t > 15 s for the N L H W ): the actual oscillation amplitude is limited thanks to the resulting dissipation whose entity can be evaluated in terms of equivalent damping, as explained in Sect.4.3.


Fig. 12

Time histories of the internal variables and of slip and switch functions for the E P interface at σ = 0.98: a g vs t; b F vs t; c f sw vs t.The time t is expressed in s, the displacement g in m, the stress F in N/m 2 , while f sw is nondimensional Fig. 13 Time histories of the internal variables and of slip and switch functions for the L H interface at σ = 0.98: a g vs t; b α vs t; c F vs t; d f sw vs t.The time t is expressed in s, the displacements g, α in m, the stress F in N/m 2 , while f sw is nondimensional Fig. 14 Time histories of the internal variables and of slip and switch functions for the N L H interface at σ = 0.98: a g vs t; b α vs t; c F vs t; d f sw vs t.The time t is expressed in s, the displacements g, α in m, the stress F in N/m 2 , while f sw is nondimensional Fig. 15 Time histories of the internal variables and of slip and switch functions for the L H W interface at σ = 0.98: a g vs t; b α vs t; c w vs t; d F vs t; e f sw vs t.The time t is expressed in s, the displacements g, α in m, the stress F in N/m 2 , while w, f sw are nondimensional Fig. 16 Time histories of the internal variables and of slip and switch functions for the N L H W interface at σ = 0.98: a g vs t; b α vs t; c w vs t; d F vs t; e f sw vs t.The time t is expressed in s, the displacements g, α in m, the stress F in N/m 2 , while w, f sw are nondimensional

Fig. 3
3
Fig.3 Frequency response curves for the sample system in the presence of no-wearable interfaces represented by the blue-scaled dots: a EP; b LH; c NLH.The solid gray line denotes the response of the linear undamped oscillator.The isplacement u is expressed in m, while σ is nondimensional


Fig. 6
6
Fig.6 Phase diagrams ġ vs. g for the no-wear interfaces at σ = 0.98: a for the E P interface; b, for the L H interface; c for the N L H interface.The displacement g is expressed in m, the velocity ġ in m/s

*The numerical values of the parameters have been chosen based on the dimensions of a steel block, measuring 30 × 30 ×
cm, according to potential future experimental investigations. Furthermore, note that the physical dimension of is N/m 1−1/γ , that for γ = 2 reduces to N/m 0.5 .
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Seismic behavior of isolated bridges: a-state-of-the-art review. M Kunde, R Jangid, Electron. J. Struct. Eng. 32003

Historical development of friction-based seismic isolation systems. P M Calvi, G M Calvi, Soil Dyn. Earthq. Eng. 1062018

Multi-scale concrete model with rate-dependent internal friction. I Giorgio, D Scerrato, Eur. J. Environ. Civ. Eng. 217-82017

A continuum model based on rayleigh dissipation functions to describe a coulomb-type constitutive law for internal friction in woven fabrics. A Ciallella, D Scerrato, M Spagnuolo, Z. Angew. Math. Phys. 7352092022

Friction in hip prostheses. R Hall, A Unsworth, Biomaterials. 18151997

Hip prosthetic loosening and periprosthetic osteolysis: a commentary. B Mjöberg, World J. Orthop. 1365742022

Roadmap for 2d materials in biotribological/biomedical applications-a review. M Marian, D Berman, D Nečas, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 3071027472022

A review on sliding wear behaviour of aluminium matrix composites with hybrid reinforcements for automotive applications. J Singh, A Chauhan, Tribol. Online. 932014

A review of vibration-based gear wear monitoring and prediction techniques. K Feng, J Ji, Q Ni, Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 1821096052023

Friction hysteretic behavior of supported atomically thin nanofilms. C Xu, Z Ye, P Egberts, npj 2D Mater. Appl. 7112023

A rate-independent internal friction to describe the hysteretic behavior of pantographic structures under cyclic loads. A Ciallella, D Pasquali, M Gołaszewski, Mech. Res. Commun. 1161037612021

Shear rupture mechanism and dissipation phenomena in bias-extension test of pantographic sheets: Numerical modeling and experiments. A Ciallella, D Pasquali, F D'annibale, Math. Mech. Solids. 27102022

Friction-induced vibration of an elastic slider on a vibrating disc. H Ouyang, J Mottershead, M Cartmell, Int. J. Mech. Sci. 4131999

Modeling and analysis of friction including rolling effects in multibody dynamics: a review. F Marques, P Flores, J P Claro, Multibody Syst. Dyn. 452019

Vibration energy flow transmission in systems with coulomb friction. W Dai, J Yang, M Wiercigroch, Int. J. Mech. Sci. 2141069322022

Friction-induced vibration, chatter, squeal, and chaos-part I: mechanics of contact and friction. R A Ibrahim, Appl. Mech. Rev. 4771994

Friction-induced vibration, chatter, squeal, and chaos-part II: dynamics and modeling. R A Ibrahim, Appl. Mech. Rev. 4771994

Friction-induced stick-slip vibration and its experimental validation. X Wang, B Huang, R Wang, Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 1421067052020

Friction-induced vibration considering multiple types of nonlinearities. N Liu, H Ouyang, Nonlinear Dyn. 1022020

Improving performance: recent progress on vibration-driven locomotion systems. J Xu, H Fang, Nonlinear Dyn. 9842019

An earthworm-like modular soft robot for locomotion in multi-terrain environments. R Das, S P M Babu, F Visentin, Sci. Rep. 13115712023

Finite element analysis of adhesive contact behaviors in elastoplastic and viscoelastic media. J Luo, J Liu, H Xia, Tribol. Lett. 72172024

Dynamic modeling and analysis considering friction-wear coupling of gear system. K Zhang, R Shen, Z Hu, Int. J. Mech. Sci. 2751093432024

The influence of interfacial wear characteristics on stick-slip vibration. Q Zhang, J Mo, Z Xiang, Tribol. Int. 1851085352023

Non-smooth dynamics of buckling based metainterfaces: rocking-like motion and bifurcations. N Hima, F D'annibale, F Dal Corso, Int. J. Mech. Sci. 2421080052023

The non-smooth contact dynamics method. M Jean, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 1773-41999

Self-excited vibrations of a non-smooth contact dynamical system with planar friction based on the shooting method. L Charroyer, O Chiello, J J Sinou, Int. J. Mech. Sci. 1442018

A strain gradient variational approach to damage: a comparison with damage gradient models and numerical results. L Placidi, E Barchiesi, A Misra, Math. Mech. Complex Syst. 622018

A continual model of a damaged medium used for analyzing fatigue life of polycrystalline structural alloys under thermal-mechanical loading. I A Volkov, L A Igumnov, F Dell'isola, Continuum Mech. Thermodyn. 3212020

Micro-mechano-morphology-informed continuum damage modeling with intrinsic 2nd gradient (pantographic) grain-grain interactions. L Placidi, D Timofeev, V Maksimov, Int. J. Solids Struct. 2541118802022

Contact, Adhesion and Rupture of Elastic Solids. D Maugis, 2013Springer

Friction and Wear of Materials. E Rabinowicz, 1995WileyNew York

Contact Mechanics and Friction. V L Popov, 2010SpringerBerlin

Survey of possible wear mechanisms. J T Burwell, Jr, Wear. 121957

. G W Stachowiak, A W E T Batchelor, 2005Elsevier, Butterworth-Heinemann

Wear and wear particles: some fundamentals. J A Williams, Tribol. Int. 38102005

Contact and rubbing of flat surfaces. J F Archard, J. Appl. Phys. 241953

Mechanisms of scratching frictions and damage maps for rubber compounds. K Maeda, A Bismarck, B J Briscoe, Wear. 2592005

Abrasion of rubber and its relation to tire wear. K A Grosch, Rubber Chem. Technol. 651992

M Shillor, M Sofonea, J J Telega, Models and Analysis of Quasistatic Contact: Variational Methods. Springer2004

An anisotropic friction and wear model. Z Mróz, S Stupkiewicz, Int. J. Solids Struct. 311994

On the derivation of thermomechanical balance equations for continuous systems with a nonmaterial interface. F Dell'isola, A Romano, Int. J. Eng. Sci. 2511-121987

Derivation and analysis of a generalized standard model for contact, friction and wear. N Strömberg, L Johansson, A Klarbring, Int. J. Solids Struct. 33131996

A model of damage coupled to wear. P Ireman, A Klarbring, N Strömberg, Int. J. Solids Struct. 40122003

A damage constitutive model for sliding friction coupled to wear. F D'annibale, A Luongo, Continuum Mech. Thermodyn. 252012

Constitutive Models and Analysis of Structures subjected to Damage and Wear due to Quasi-Static Friction Contact. F D'annibale, 2010University of L'AquilaPhD Thesis

Two-dimensional strain gradient damage modeling: a variational approach. L Placidi, A Misra, E Barchiesi, Z. Angew. Math. Phys. 692018

Simulation results for damage with evolving microstructure and growing strain gradient moduli. L Placidi, A Misra, E Barchiesi, Continuum Mech. Thermodyn. 312019

Computational contact mechanics. P Wriggers, Comput. Mech. 321-21412003

A further analysis on the analogy between friction and plasticity in solid mechanics. N Antoni, Int. J. Eng. Sci. 1212017

J Lemaitre, J Chaboche, Mechanics of Solid Materials. Cambridge University Press1994

Engineering Damage Mechanics: Ductile, Creep, Fatigue and Brittle Failures. J Lemaitre, R Desmorat, 2005Springer

Inelastic constitutive relations for solids: an internal-variable theory and its application to metal plasticity. J R Rice, J. Mech. Phys. Solids. 1961971

Sur les matériaux standard généralisés. B Halphen, Q S Nguyen, J. de Mécanique. 141975

On unilateral constraints, friction and plasticity. J J Moreau, New variational techniques in mathematical physics. Springer2011

Contact with friction between beams in 3-d space. G Zavarise, P Wriggers, Int. J. Numer. Meth. Eng. 4982000

Contact-friction modeling within elastic beam assemblies: an application to knot tightening. D Durville, Comput. Mech. 4962012

Modal coupling in presence of dry friction. M De Simone, D Guida, Machines. 612018

Experimental and numerical investigation of friction-induced vibration of a beamon-beam in contact with friction. A Meziane, L Baillet, B Laulagnet, Appl. Acoust. 7192010

Self-excited vibrations of a non-smooth contact dynamical system with planar friction based on the shooting method. L Charroyer, O Chiello, J J Sinou, Int. J. Mech. Sci. 1442018

Model reduction for friction-induced vibration of multi-degree-of-freedom systems and experimental validation. Z Li, X Wang, Q Zhang, Int. J. Mech. Sci. 1452018

Stick-slip and wear phenomena at the contact interface between an elastic beam and a rigid substrate. F D'annibale, A Casalotti, A Luongo, Math. Mech. Solids. 2662021

Sinusoidal excitation of a system with bilinear hysteresis. T Caughey, J. Appl. Mech. 2741960

Forced vibration of the damped bilinear hysteretic oscillator. S Masri, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 571975

On the dynamic behavior of an elastoplastic oscillator. G Ballio, Meccanica. 521970

Asymptotic motions and stability of the elastoplastic oscillator studied via maps. D Capecchi, Int. J. Solids Struct. 30231993

Asymptotic response of a two dof elastoplastic system under harmonic excitation. internal resonance case. D Capecchi, F Vestroni, Nonlinear Dyn. 731995

Stability and dynamics of a harmonically excited elastic-perfectly plastic oscillator. N Challamel, G Gilles, J. Sound Vib. 3013-52007

The steady state responses of sdof viscous elasto-plastic oscillator under sinusoidal loadings. C S Liu, Z M Huang, J. Sound Vib. 2731-22004

Multiple time scale analysis of hysteretic systems subjected to harmonic excitation. N Okuizumi, K Kimura, J. Sound Vib. 2723-52004

Nonlinear vibration absorber optimal design via asymptotic approach. A Casalotti, W Lacarbonara, Procedia IUTAM. 192016

Resonant and coupled response of hysteretic two-degree-of-freedom systems using harmonic balance method. R Masiani, D Capecchi, F Vestroni, Int. J. Non-Linear Mech. 3782002

Nonclassical responses of oscillators with hysteresis. W Lacarbonara, F Vestroni, Nonlinear Dyn. 3232003

Nonlinear dynamics of a harmonically-excited inelastic inverted pendulum. E B Williamson, K D Hjelmstad, J. Eng. Mech. 12712001

Steady-state dynamic analysis of hysteretic systems. D Capecchi, F Vestroni, J. Eng. Mech. 111121985

A guide for engineers to computational contact mechanics. G Zavarise, P Wriggers, U Nackenhorst, Conzorcio TCN. 2006

In situ friction and wear measurements in integrated polysilicon mechanisms. K Gabriel, F Behi, R Mahadevan, Sens. Actuat. A. 211-31990

Tribological analysis of thin films by pin-on-disc: evaluation of friction and wear measurement uncertainty. R Novak, T Polcar, Tribol. Int. 742014

Friction and wear measurements of friction stir processed aluminium alloy 6082/caco3 composite. M S Prabhu, A E Perumal, S Arulvel, Measurement. 1422019

An experimental study on scale effect in dynamic shear properties of high-damping rubber bearings. N Murota, T Mori, 10.3389/fbuil.2020.00037Front. Built Environ. 2020

Hysteretic damping model for laterally loaded piles. Y Zhang, K K Aamodt, A M Kaynia, 10.1016/j.marstruc.2020.102896Mar. Struct. 761028962021

Dynamic response of nonlinear oscillators with hysteresis. B Carboni, W Lacarbonara, Proceedings of the ASME 2015 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences-IDETC/CIE 2015. the ASME 2015 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences-IDETC/CIE 2015