Diagnostic Pathology Evaluation of oxidative stress in Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus (IDDM) patients


Vadde Ramakrishna 
Department of Biochemistry
Shri B.M. Patil Medical College
586 103BijapurIndia

Department of Biotechnology
Sri Krishnadevaraya University
515 003AnantapurIndia

Rama Jailkhani ramajailkhani@yahoo.com 
Department of Biochemistry
Shri B.M. Patil Medical College
586 103BijapurIndia

Diagnostic Pathology Evaluation of oxidative stress in Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus (IDDM) patients
10.1186/1746-1596-2-22BioMed Central Page 1 of 6 (page number not for citation purposes) Research * Corresponding author
Background: Free radical mediated oxidative stress is mainly involved in the pathogenesis of diabetic complications. Proteins and lipids are among the prime targets for oxidative stress. In the present study, we evaluated the oxidative stress in chronic IDDM patients by estimating the lipid peroxidation, protein oxidation, and antioxidants status.Subjects and design:A total of 35 (15 IDDM + 20 normal healthy) children were examined in the study and estimated the lipid peroxidation, protein oxidation, and antioxidants -vitamin A (βcarotene, retinol), vitamin C, vitamin E and enzymatic antioxidants and nitric oxide.Results: A statistically significant higher values of protein carbonyl groups and MDA as lipid peroxides were observed in diabetic patients with slight reduction in the synthesis of nitric oxide. It is interesting to note that there was a decrease in the antioxidant levels with corresponding increased protein and lipid oxidation. On PAGE under native conditions, we observed decreased levels of proteins -albumin, transferrin, ceruloplasmin and heptoglobulins and variable GC globulin fractions in IDDM compared to normal healthy controls.Conclusion:Hyperglycemia induces the overproduction of oxygen free radicals and consequently increases the protein oxidation and lipid oxidation. A significance difference in the mean plasma concentration of total antioxidant status was observed in IDDM patients. The findings of the present study suggest that diabetes in an altered metabolic state of oxidation-reduction and that it is convenient to give therapeutic interventions with antioxidants.

Background

Free radicals are very reactive chemical species, can cause oxidation injury to the living beings by attacking the macromolecules like lipids, carbohydrates, proteins and nucleic acids. Under normal physiological conditions, there is a critical balance in the generation of oxygen free radicals and antioxidant defense systems used by organisms to deactivate and protect themselves against free rad-ical toxicity [1,2]. Impairment in the oxidant/antioxidant equilibrium creates a condition known as oxidative stress. Oxidative stress is known to be a component of molecular and cellular tissue damage mechanisms in a wide spectrum of human diseases [3][4][5].

Diabetes is associated with a number of metabolic alterations and principal among these is hyperglycemia. The precise mechanism by which hyperglycemia may contribute to the development of coronary heart disease (CHD) is a matter of some controversy. Known sequelae of hyperglycemia such as cellular damage, increased extra cellular matrix production and vascular dysfunction have all been implicated in the pathogenesis of vascular disease in type I and type II diabetes [3,[5][6][7][8][9][10]. Mechanisms involved in the increased oxidative stress in diabetes include not only oxygen free radical generation due to nonenzymatic glycosylation (glycation), autooxidation of glycation products, but also changes in the tissue content and activity of antioxidant defense systems. Increased levels of the products of oxidative damage to lipids have been detected in serum of diabetic patients, and their presence correlates with the development of complications [6,[10][11][12][13][14][15]. A variety of natural antioxidants exist to scavenge oxygen free radicals and prevent oxidative damage to biological membranes. One group of these antioxidants is enzymatic (intracellular), which include super oxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase and catalase. In addition to enzymatic antioxidants, the major natural antioxidants, most of them derived from natural sources by dietary intake are vitamin A, vitamin C and vitamin E and carotenoids. Also, numerous small molecules are synthesized or produced within the body that has antioxidant capacity (e.g. glutathione and uric acid) [3,6,[14][15][16][17][18].

There are several studies evaluated the free radical induced lipid peroxidation and the antioxidants in diabetic patients. Many of these studies assessed individual antioxidants that act cooperatively in vivo to provide greater protection to the organism against free radical damage than could be provided by any single antioxidant acting alone. Controversial reports have been reported concerning the antioxidant status in diabetic patients [17,[19][20][21]. Protein oxidation, in contrast to lipid peroxidation, does not have the features of chain reactions. The plasma proteins destructed by peroxidation have a quite long period. Therefore, the evaluation of protein oxidation (PCG) in plasma is a respected marker of free radical intensity. There are only a few reports regarding the protein oxidation in various other pathogenic conditions and no reports are available for that processes along with antioxidants in type I diabetic patients. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the free radical reaction intensity in chronic diabetic IDDM patients on basis of protein carbonyl groups of proteins, lipid peroxidation and the status of antioxidants in plasma.


Subjects and methods


Subjects

A total of 35 (15 IDDM + 20 normal healthy) children were examined in the study. Based on preliminary survey, all 15 patients are treated but controlled who had the high levels of blood glucose and glycosylated hemoglobin (Gly-Hb), well above the normal ranges, were selected for the study. These children were treated with insulin, had no other medications and they had no supplemental intake of vitamins or other nutrients. The remaining 20 age-matched healthy children were chosen from the community and used as control subjects. Non-fasting heparinized venous blood samples were collected from each subject with their/parental prior consent.

The total plasma proteins were measured by biuret method, plasma albumin was measured by a colorimetric method based on the bromocresol green dye at pH 4.2 giving a colored complex [22]. Protein Oxidation was evaluated by measuring carbonyl group content in plasma proteins is a marker of free radical activity. It was measured with use of Levine method [23]. 100 µl of plasma was incubated with a 100 µl of 20 mM 2, 4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNPH) for 60 min. Subsequently, the protein was precipitated from the solution with the use of 20 % trichloroaceticacid. Then it was washed three times in the solution of ethanol and ethylacetate and dissolving in 1 ml of 6 M guanidine HCl in 60°C. The carbonyl group content was evaluated in a spectrophotometer at wavelength 360 nm. The results were expressed as µmol/mg of protein. The lipid peroxidation in terms of MDA was estimated by using TBARS method [24].

From all subjects, 5 -8 ml of blood was collected in heparinized tubes at 8.00 AM after an overnight fast and immediately centrifuged at 1500 × g for 15 min at 4 C. Plasma and pelleted RBC were separated stored in eppendorf tubes and kept at -80 C until analysis. We measured SOD, GPx and catalase activity in plasma according to the methods of Beutler [25], Flohe and Gunzler [26] and Renu et al. [27]. The vitamin A and β-carotene, ascorbic acid, α-tocopherol and glutathione spectrophotometrically determined by Carr-Price reaction, DNP method and TLC methods [24]. Nitric oxide estimated in plasma by the method of Moshage et al. [28]. Electrophoresis was carried out in 10% polyacrylamide slab gels, according to the method of Laemmli [29].


Statistical analysis

Statistical analysis was performed by Minitab software. Subjects with IDDM were compared with healthy controls. Means and standard error of means were calculated and differences between means were student's t-test. The strength of association between pairs of variables was assessed by Pearson correlation coefficient. The level of significance was set at p < 0.05.


Results

The biochemical particulars of the study subjects including IDDM and non-diabetic controls are given in table 1. The subjects with diabetes had duration of the disease ranged from 5 -10 years. They all were being treated with insulin. Despite of their treatment, they had hyperglycemia having blood glucose levels more than 3-fold higher than in healthy subjects. The lipid profile of IDDM is statistically insignificant changes with nondiabetics. However, the TBARS (lipid peroxidation) levels increased by 4 fold in diabetics compared to healthy controls (table 2). No significant differences were found between patients with type 1 diabetes and control subjects in the concentration of total, HDL, and LDL cholesterol and triglycerides in age and in BMI.

The protein oxidation (PCG) in IDDM subjects was increased 3.5 fold with decreasing the plasma levels of total protein, albumin, globulin and their ratio compared to non-diabetic subjects. In native PAGE (not shown), the diabetic children had also decreased plasma levels of ceruloplasmin, ceruloglobulin and retinol binding protein (RBP), which are the carrier proteins for copper and vitamin A, respectively and also observed the decreased levels of proteins -albumin, transferrin, and heptoglobulins and variable GC globulin fractions in IDDM compared to normal healthy controls. Table 3 shows a significant decrease in the activities Cu-Zn super oxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase and catalase in children with IDDM compared to controls. The glutathione peroxidase in the whole blood was also decreased in diabetic children, but their differences with those of the non-diabetic counterparts were not statistically significant. The antioxidant activity containing vitamins retinol, β-carotene, vitamin C and vitamin E were significantly decreased in plasma by 25 -50 % respectively in diabetic children.


Discussion

Diabetes mellitus is a chronic, systemic, metabolic disease defined by hyperglycemia and characterized by alterations in the metabolism of carbohydrate, protein and lipid. Oxidative stress thought to be increased in a system where the rate of free radical production is increased and/or the antioxidant mechanisms are impaired. In recent years, the oxidative stress-induced free radicals have been implicated in the pathology of IDDM [14,19,[30][31][32][33][34].

The present study was examined the changes in both extra and intracellular antioxidants and oxidant status in a children suffering from IDDM. The diabetic children were treated with insulin and yet they were hyperglycemic. Prolonged exposure to hyperglycemia and consequent nonenzymatic posttranslational modification of proteins resulting from chemical reaction between glucose and primary amino groups of proteins -glycation, and also increased oxygen free radicals through auto oxidation of glucose [15,[33][34][35][36]. Our results are in accordance with those of previous finding clearly show the increased glucose levels induces diabetes, the overproduction of oxygen free radicals and consequently increases the protein oxidation and lipid oxidation (table 2). Plasma MDA and PCG levels were significantly higher, which would indicate that free radical mediated oxidative damage of lipids and proteins is produced at in diabetics [35,42,42]. To our knowledge, there are no reports in the literature concerning plasma PCG levels in IDDM patients in relation with antioxidant status. Carbonyl group formation is considered an early and stable marker for protein oxidation. Oxi-  Results are expressed as mean ± SD. $ p < 0.05 against the control values According to Gliesner et al [35] showed no statistically significant differences were found for any of the oxidative stress markers (PCG) assessed between patients with DM1 and controls. In addition, weight, height, and routine metabolic tests, including creatininemia and cholesterol levels, were similar between the groups. The lack of significant differences between healthy controls and patients with DM1 suggested that treatment is able to counteract the increase in free radical production. Ahmed et al [41] observed profound increases in proteolytic products of glycated and oxidised proteins in diabetic patients, concurrent with much lower increases in protein glycation and oxidation adduct residues. Oxidative stress therefore diminishes vessel endothelium-dependent relaxation, which is apparent in some experimental preparations even after acute exposure to hyperglycemia. Defective endothelium-dependent relaxation has been observed in chronic diabetic animals, and also in type 1 and type 2 diabetic subjects [41,45,46] and is an important potential target for antioxidant treatment.

The relationship between hyperglycemia and oxygen free radicals is supported by our results demonstrating an association between blood levels of glucose and enzymatic oxidants such as super oxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase, only in children with IDDM (table 3). The decreased erythrocyte Cu/Zn-SOD and catalase activity in our young diabetic patients also supports the hypothesis of radical mediated injury in this disease. These results are in agreement with others [47-49]. Circulating RBC act as a sink for free radicals. Consequently, erythrocytes are subject to a continuous flux of O 2 and H 2 O 2 . It is, therefore, possible that SOD may have an important physiological role in combating this process, since this enzyme can catalyze the dissimulation of two super oxide radicals into H 2 O 2 . In the present study, on native PAGE, the plasma concentration of ceruloplasmin in IDDM was significantly lower than those of controls. These results are in agreement with others [50] who reported a significant reduction in the plasma concentration of ceuloplasmin in type I diabetic patients. It has been reported that ceruloplasmin is immunologically altered with decrease in enzymatic oxidants. These results may explain the significant reduction in SOD activity in IDDM patients, since increased H 2 O 2 and decreased ceruloplasmin [51]. Selenium-dependent glutathione peroxidase (GPx), which works in parallel with SOD, protects cell proteins and cell membranes against oxidative damage. In the present sudy, the GPx activity was decreased significantly compared to that of the controls and a negative correlation coefficient between GPx activity and blood glucose concentration was observed in these children ( The findings of the present study suggest that diabetes in an altered metabolic state of oxidation-reduction and that it is convenient to give therapeutic interventions with antioxidants. The loss of antioxidant capacity is statistically associated with accelerated aging processes in diabetic patients, due to an increase in basal oxidation products of etrythrocytes associated with monosaccharide autooxidative glycation [4,11,18,60]. Our present work takes into account the hypothesis involving the relation between individual components in the intact clinical model and the complex oxidant-antioxidant plasmatic systemic balance. We clearly identified antioxidant markers that were affected in the presence of IDDM; include SOD, plasma albumin, ascorbic acid and α-tocopherol. Theoretically, one should be able to reverse these effects through dietary supplementation, especially of vitamin C and E.


Abbreviations used

IDDM -Insulin dependent diabetes mellitus, PAGE -Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, MDA -Melondialdehyde, PCG -Protein carbonyl groups, TBARS -Thiobarbutyricacid reactives species, TLC -Thin layer chromatography, GPx -Glutathione peroxidase, NO -Nitric oxide, SOD -Superoxide dismutase.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every scientist can read your work free of charge 

Table 3 :
3Effect of IDDM on the blood levels of antioxidantsSl No. Antioxidant 
Control 
IDDM 

1. 
Vitamin A (retinol) 
2.24 ± 0.25 1.35 ± 0.32 $ 
2. 
β-carotene 
2.86 ± 0.34 1.83 ± 0.4 $ 
3. 
Vitamin C (Ascorbic acid) 
68 ± 14 
38 ± 10 $ 
4. 
Vitamin E (α-tocopherol) 
20.4 ± 0.8 
15.2 ± 1.2 $ 
5. 
Glutathione peroxidase (GPx) 
52 ± 5 
38 ± 4 $ 
6. 
Superoxide dismutase (SOD) 
1620 ± 80 
1240 ± 68 $ 
7. 
Catalase 
256 ± 32 
178 ± 28 $ 
8. 
Uric acid (mmol/l) 
0.15 ± 0.05 0.10 ± 0.02 $ 

Results are expressed as mean ± SD. $ p < 0.05 against the control 
values 



Table 1 :
1Biochemical characteristics of normal and IDDM patientsSl. No 
Clinical data 
Normal 
IDDM 

1. 
Number 
20 
15 
2. 
Age 
5 -20 
5 -20 
3. 
Body mass index (BMI) 
18.14 ± 2.4 
18.92 ± 3.4 
4. 
Blood glucose 
80 ± 12 
342 ± 56 $ 
5. 
Serum total protein 
6.85 ± 0.96 
5.60 ± 0.6 $ 
6. 
Serum albumin 
3.84 ± 0.45 
2.80 ± 0.4 $ 
7. 
A:G ratio 
1 -2 
0.92 ± 0.12 
8. 
Triglycerides 
110 ± 34 
153 ± 32 
9. 
Cholesterol 
172 ± 31 
187 ± 23 
10. 
VLDL -cholesterol 
23 ± 5.6 
34 ± 5 $ 
11. 
LDL -cholesterol 
102 ± 14 
121 ± 14 
12. 
HDL -cholesterol 
38 ± 6 
34 ± 8 
13. 
Blood urea 
31 ± 8 
42 ± 10 
14. 
Serum creatinine 
1.10 ± 0.3 
1.62 ± 0.42 
15. 
Glycosylated Hb 
6.12 ± 0.3 
11.5 ± 3.2 



Table 2 :
2Effect of IDDM on the levels of Oxidative stress parametersSl No. 
Oxidative parameter 
Control 
IDDM 

1. 
Lipid peroxidation (TBARS) 
60 ± 10 
231 ± 24 $ 
2. 
Protein oxidation (PCG) 
3.42 ± 0.5 
12.2 ± 2 $ 
3. 
Nitric oxide 
34 ± 5.4 
86 ± 6.5 $ 

Results are expressed as mean ± SD. $ p < 0.05 against the control 
values 



carotene. A significance difference in the mean plasma concentration of total antioxidant status was observed in IDDM patients(table 3). Low levels of vitamin E are associated with increased incidence of diabetes and some research suggests that people with diabetes have decreased levels of antioxidants[32,42,55]. People with diabetes may also have greater antioxidant requirements because of increased production of free radicals in hyperglycemia[56]. The results of Martin-Gallan et al[42]   clearly show systemic peroxidative damage associated with insufficient defense mechanisms against ROS to be already present at clinical onset of type 1 diabetes mellitus in children and adolescents. The present study has also demonstrated a significantly lower plasma ascorbate children compared with their controls. A significant negative correlation coefficient between blood glucose and vitamin C has been observed. Patients with diabetes or the metabolic syndrome have low levels of the antioxidant vitamin C [58,59] and also control the diabetes[33]. Chen et al[59]  shown that high-dose oral vitamin C partially replenishes vitamin C levels in patients with Type 2 diabetes and low vitamin C levels but does not improve endothelial dysfunction or insulin resistance.table 3). However, in the published lieterature, the 
GPx response to diabetes has been conflicting. Diabetics 
have been reported to be associated with increased 
[48,52] decreased [53] or unchanged [54]. In lieu with 
GPx, the catalase activities were also decreased in diabetes 
compared to control subjects (table 3). The low GPx activ-
ity could be directly explained by either low GSH content 
or enzyme inactivation under sever oxidative stress. 

In addition to antioxidant enzyme activities, the capacity 
of the antioxidant system to cope with or trap the free rad-
icals generated under normal or pathological conditions 
was evaluated by measuring the level of total antioxidant 
status. It reflects the status of α-tocopherol, vitamin A, β-
carotene, ascorbic acid, albumin, uric acid and other anti-
oxidants [42,49,57]. These extracellular nonenzymatic 
antioxidants delay or inhibit the oxidative process. 
Enhanced lipid peroxidation increases the need for lipid 
soluble antioxidants, such as α-tocopherol and vitamin A 
and β-


"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK Your research papers will be: available free of charge to the entire biomedical community peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central yours -you keep the copyright Submit your manuscript here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.aspBioMedcentral 

Diagnostic Pathology 2007, 2:22 
http://www.diagnosticpathology.org/content/2/1/22 

(page number not for citation purposes)

H Sies, Oxidative stress: Oxidants and antioxidants. New YorkAcademic pressSies H: Oxidative stress: Oxidants and antioxidants. New York, Academic press; 1991.

Measuring reactive species and oxidative damage in vivo and in cell culture: how should you do it and what do the results mean?. B Halliwell, M Whiteman, ReviewHalliwell B, Whiteman M: Measuring reactive species and oxida- tive damage in vivo and in cell culture: how should you do it and what do the results mean? [Review].

. Br J Pharmacol. 142Br J Pharmacol 2004, 142:231-55.

Free radicals in biology and medicine. B Halliwell, Jmc Gutteridge, Oxford University Press936New YorkHalliwell B, Gutteridge JMC: Free radicals in biology and medi- cine. New York: Oxford University Press; 1999:936.

Role of free radicals in the neurodegenerative diseases: therapeutic implications for antioxidant treatment. B Halliwell, ReviewHalliwell B: Role of free radicals in the neurodegenerative dis- eases: therapeutic implications for antioxidant treatment [Review].

. Drugs Aging. 18Drugs Aging 2001, 18:685-716.

Biomarkers of Oxidative Damage in Human Disease. Isabella Dalle-Donne, Rossi Ranieri, Colombo Roberto, Giustarini Daniela, Milzani Aldo, Clinical Chemistry. 524Isabella Dalle-Donne, Rossi Ranieri, Colombo Roberto, Giustarini Daniela, Milzani Aldo: Biomarkers of Oxidative Damage in Human Disease. Clinical Chemistry 2006, 52(4):601-623.

Diabetes, oxidative stress, and antioxidants: a review. A C Maritim, R A Sanders, J B Watkins, J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 17Maritim AC, Sanders RA, Watkins JB: Diabetes, oxidative stress, and antioxidants: a review. J Biochem Mol Toxicol 2003, 17:24-38.

Increased Plasma Markers of Oxidative Stress Are Associated with Coronary Heart Disease in Males with Diabetes Mellitus and with 10-Year Risk in a Prospective Sample of Males. W Stephens Jeffrey, Gable David, R , Hurel Steven, J , Miller George, J , Cooper Jackie, A , Humphries Steve, E , Clinical Chemistry. 523Stephens Jeffrey W, Gable David R, Hurel Steven J, Miller George J, Cooper Jackie A, Humphries Steve E: Increased Plasma Markers of Oxidative Stress Are Associated with Coronary Heart Disease in Males with Diabetes Mellitus and with 10-Year Risk in a Prospective Sample of Males. Clinical Chemistry 2006, 52(3):446-452.

Glucose and diabetic vascular disease. N B Ruderman, J R Williamson, M Brownlee, FASEB J. 611Ruderman NB, Williamson JR, Brownlee M: Glucose and diabetic vascular disease. FASEB J 1992, 6(11):2905-14.

American Diabetic Association: Guidelines. Standards of medical care in Diabetes. Diabetes Care. 28Supplement 1American Diabetic Association: Guidelines. Standards of medical care in Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2005, 28(Supplement 1):S4-36.

Oxidative stress and atherosclerosis in early chronic kidney disease. Guillermo Zalba, Fortuño Ana, Díez Javier, Nephrol Dial Transplant. 21Guillermo Zalba, Fortuño Ana, Díez Javier: Oxidative stress and atherosclerosis in early chronic kidney disease. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2006, 21:2686-2690.

Free radicals, transition metals and oxidative stress in the etiology of diabetes mellitus and complications. S P Wolff, Diabetes mellitus and free radicals. 49Wolff SP: Diabetes mellitus and free radicals. Free radicals, transition metals and oxidative stress in the etiology of dia- betes mellitus and complications. Br Med Bull 1993, 49:642-652.

Biochemistry and molecular cell biology of diabetic complications. M Brownlee, Nature. 414Brownlee M: Biochemistry and molecular cell biology of dia- betic complications. Nature 2001, 414:813-820.

Metabolic control quality and free radical activity in diabetic patients. B Wieruszwysocka, H Wysocki, H Byks, D Zozulinska, A Wykretowicz, M Kazierczak, Diabetes Res. Clin Pract. 27Wieruszwysocka B, Wysocki H, Byks H, Zozulinska D, Wykretowicz A, Kazierczak M: Metabolic control quality and free radical activity in diabetic patients, Diabetes Res. Clin Pract 1995, 27:193-197.

Heistad Donald, D , Oxidative Stress and VascularDisease. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 26Heistad Donald D: Oxidative Stress and VascularDisease. Arte- rioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2005, 26:689-95.

Advanced Oxidation Protein Products Accelerate Atherosclerosis Through Promoting Oxidative Stress and Inflammation. Liu Shang Xi, Guo Hou Fan Fan, Nagai Zhi Jian, Ryoji, Wei Zhang, Ru, Liu Zhi Qiang, Zhou Zhan, Zhou Mei, Di Mei, Wang Guo Xie, Zhang Bao, Xun, Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 26Liu Shang Xi, Hou Fan Fan, Guo Zhi Jian, Nagai Ryoji, Zhang Wei Ru, Liu Zhi Qiang, Zhou Zhan Mei, Zhou Mei, Di Xie , Wang Guo Bao, Zhang Xun: Advanced Oxidation Protein Products Accelerate Atherosclerosis Through Promoting Oxidative Stress and Inflammation. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2006, 26:1156-1162.

Effect of supplementary antioxidant vitamin intake on carotid arterial wall intima-media thickness in a controlled clinical trial of cholesterol lowering. S P Azen, D Qian, W J Mack, A Sevanian, R H Selzer, C R Liu, C H Liu, H N Hodis, Circulation. 94Azen SP, Qian D, Mack WJ, Sevanian A, Selzer RH, Liu CR, Liu CH, Hodis HN: Effect of supplementary antioxidant vitamin intake on carotid arterial wall intima-media thickness in a controlled clinical trial of cholesterol lowering. Circulation 1996, 94:2369-2372.

Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group: MRC/BHF Heart Protection Study of antioxidant vitamin supplementation in 20,536 high-risk individuals: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 360Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group: MRC/BHF Heart Protection Study of antioxidant vitamin supplementation in 20,536 high-risk individuals: a randomised placebo-control- led trial. Lancet 2002, 360:23-33.

Mietus-Snyder M: Antioxidant vitamins C and E improve endothelial function in children with hyperlipidemia: Endothelial Assessment of Risk from. M M Engler, M B Engler, M J Malloy, E Y Chiu, M C Schloetter, S M Paul, M Stuehlinger, K Y Lin, J P Cooke, J D Morrow, P M Ridker, N Rifai, E Miller, J L Witztum, Lipids in Youth (EARLY) Trial. Circulation. 108Engler MM, Engler MB, Malloy MJ, Chiu EY, Schloetter MC, Paul SM, Stuehlinger M, Lin KY, Cooke JP, Morrow JD, Ridker PM, Rifai N, Miller E, Witztum JL, Mietus-Snyder M: Antioxidant vitamins C and E improve endothelial function in children with hyperli- pidemia: Endothelial Assessment of Risk from Lipids in Youth (EARLY) Trial. Circulation 2003, 108:1059-1063.

Antioxidant status and insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM). M Ashour, S Salem, H Hassaneen, H El-Gadban, N Elwan, A Awad, T K Basu, J Clin Biochem Nutr. 26Ashour M, Salem S, Hassaneen H, EL-Gadban H, Elwan N, Awad A, Basu TK: Antioxidant status and insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM). J Clin Biochem Nutr 1999, 26:99-107.

Santini Stefano A: Early Increase of Oxidative Stress and Reduced Antioxidant Defenses in Patients with Uncomplicated Type 1 Diabetes. Marra Giampiero, Cotroneo Patrizia, Pitocco Dario, Manto Andrea, A S Mauro, Ruotolo Valeria, Caputo Salvatore, Giardina Bruno, Phirlanda Iovanni, Diabetes Care. 25Marra Giampiero, Cotroneo Patrizia, Pitocco Dario, Manto Andrea, diLeo Mauro AS, Ruotolo Valeria, Caputo Salvatore, Giardina Bruno, Phirlanda Iovanni, Santini Stefano A: Early Increase of Oxidative Stress and Reduced Antioxidant Defenses in Patients with Uncomplicated Type 1 Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2002, 25:370-375.

Total antioxidant status in plasma and body fluids. C Rice-Evans, N J Miller, Methods Enzymol. 234Rice-Evans C, Miller NJ: Total antioxidant status in plasma and body fluids. Methods Enzymol 234:279-293.

Albumin standards and the measurement of serum albumin with bromocresol green. B T Doumas, W A Watson, H G Biggs, Clin Chem Acta. 3187Doumas BT, Watson WA, Biggs HG: Albumin standards and the measurement of serum albumin with bromocresol green. Clin Chem Acta 1971, 31:87.

Determination of carbonyl content in oxidatively modified proteins. R L Levine, D Garland, C N Oliver, A Amici, I Climent, A G Lenz, B W Ahn, S Shaltiel, E R Stadman, Methods in Enzymology. New York, AcademicPecker L, Glazer AN186Levine RL, Garland D, Oliver CN, Amici A, Climent I, Lenz AG, Ahn BW, Shaltiel S, Stadman ER: Determination of carbonyl content in oxidatively modified proteins. In Methods in Enzymology Vol- ume 186. Edited by: Pecker L, Glazer AN. New York, Academic; 1990:464-478.

A manual of laboratory techniques. National Institute of Nutrition. N Raghuramulu, Madhavan Nair, K Kalyanasundaram, S , Hyderabad. IndiaRaghuramulu N, Madhavan Nair K, Kalyanasundaram S: A manual of laboratory techniques. National Institute of Nutrition, Hydera- bad. India; 2003.

Red cell metabolism. E Beutler, A manual of biochemical methods. New York3rd editionBeutler E: Red cell metabolism. In A manual of biochemical methods 3rd edition. New York; 1984.

Assays of glutathione peroxidase, Methods enzymol. L Flohe, W A Gunzler, 105Flohe L, Gunzler WA: Assays of glutathione peroxidase, Meth- ods enzymol. 1984, 105:114-121.

Abnormalities of retinol metabolism in diabetes or experimental galactosemia. Free radical. A K Renu, S K Timothy, R L Engerman, Biol Med. 224Renu AK, Timothy SK, Engerman RL: Abnormalities of retinol metabolism in diabetes or experimental galactosemia. Free radical Biol Med 1997, 22(4):587-92.

Nitrite and nitrate determinations in plasma: A critical evaluation. H Moshage, B Kok, J R Huizenga, Plm Jansen, Clin Chem. 41Moshage H, Kok B, Huizenga JR, Jansen PLM: Nitrite and nitrate determinations in plasma: A critical evaluation. Clin Chem 1995, 41/6:892-896.

Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head bacteriophage T 4. U K Laemmli, Nature. 227Laemmli UK: Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head bacteriophage T 4 . Nature 1970, 227:680-685.

Oxidative stress biology and cell injury during type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus. K Maiese, S D Morhan, Z Z Chong, Curr Neurovasc Res. 41Maiese K, Morhan SD, Chong ZZ: Oxidative stress biology and cell injury during type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Curr Neurovasc Res 2007, 4(1):63-71.

Involvement of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of diabetes. H Kaneto, N Katekami, D Kawamori, T Miyatsuka, K Sakamotot, T A Matsuoka, M Matsuhisa, Antioxid Redox Signal. 9Kaneto H, Katekami N, Kawamori D, Miyatsuka T, Sakamotot K, Mat- suoka TA, Matsuhisa M: Involvement of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of diabetes. Antioxid Redox Signal 2007, 9:355-66.

Diabetes mellitus worsens antioxidant status in patients with chronic pancreatitis. Quilliot Didier, Walters Evelyne, Bonte Jean-Paul, Fruchart Jean-Charles, Duriez Patrick, Ziegler Olivier, Am J Clin Nutr. 81Quilliot Didier, Walters Evelyne, Bonte Jean-Paul, Fruchart Jean- Charles, Duriez Patrick, Ziegler Olivier: Diabetes mellitus wors- ens antioxidant status in patients with chronic pancreatitis. Am J Clin Nutr 2005, 81:1117-25.

Simultaneous control of hyperglycemia and oxidative stress normalizes endothelial function in type I diabetes. A Ceriello, S Kumar, L Picon, K Esposito, D Giugliano, Diabetes care. 30Ceriello A, Kumar S, Picon L, Esposito K, Giugliano D: Simultane- ous control of hyperglycemia and oxidative stress normal- izes endothelial function in type I diabetes. Diabetes care 2007, 30:649-54.

Effects of diabetes duration and glycemic control on free radicals in children with type 1 diabetes mellitus. W T Hsu, L Y Tsai, S K Lin, K Hsiao, B H Chen, Ann Clin Lab Sci. 36Hsu WT, Tsai LY, Lin SK, Hsiao K, Chen BH: Effects of diabetes duration and glycemic control on free radicals in children with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Ann Clin Lab Sci 2006, 36:174-8.

Oxidative stress markers in plasma and urine of. A Gleisner, L Martinez, R Pino, I G Rojas, A Martinez, S Asenjo, M I Rudolph, Gleisner A, Martinez L, Pino R, Rojas IG, Martinez A, Asenjo S, Rudolph MI: Oxidative stress markers in plasma and urine of