3D Model Retrieval Based on Vector Quantisation Index Histograms


Z M Lu 
Shenzhen Graduate School
Harbin Institute of Technology
518055ShenzhenChina

H Luo 
Shenzhen Graduate School
Harbin Institute of Technology
518055ShenzhenChina

Kaohsiung University of Applied Sciences
807KaohsiungTaiwan, China

J S Pan 
Kaohsiung University of Applied Sciences
807KaohsiungTaiwan, China

3D Model Retrieval Based on Vector Quantisation Index Histograms
10.1088/1742-6596/48/1/083
This paper proposes a novel technique to retrieval 3D mesh models using vector quantisation index histograms. Firstly, points are sampled uniformly on mesh surface. Secondly, to a point five features representing global and local properties are extracted. Thus feature vectors of points are obtained. Third, we select several models from each class, and employ their feature vectors as a training set. After training using LBG algorithm, a public codebook is constructed. Next, codeword index histograms of the query model and those in database are computed. The last step is to compute the distance between histograms of the query and those of the models in database. Experimental results show the effectiveness of our method.

Introduction

Three-dimensional (3D) models play an important role in many mainstream applications, including medicine, chemistry, architecture and entertainment. Recent developments in techniques for modeling, digitizing and visualizing has led to an explosion of 3D models on the Internet and in domain-specific databases. Therefore, it has changed the focus from generating new models to retrieving existing similar 3D objects. Nowadays many methods are developed to represent 3D models. Our target is 3D triangular mesh model, the most popular description for 3D objects.

Generally speaking, 3D model retrieval consists of feature extraction and feature comparison. To extract feature, most methods are based on shape for it is a defining attribute. Feature comparison is also called shape matching in shape-similarity based methods. Nowadays available feature extraction methods can be divided into following categories. (1) Global feature based methods. These methods apply global properties, such as volume, surface area, curvature, moments, etc., to describe 3D shapes. Novotni et al [1] apply 3D Zernike moments to extract shape features. Kazhdan et al. [2] describe the shape based on spherical harmonics, and Vanic et al. [3] present a descriptor based on 3D Fourier Transform. These approaches are quick to compute, and can be applied to classify models. Since they fail to capture the details of a shape and they are also not very robust, they therefore fail to discriminate among locally dissimilar shapes. (2) Statistic based methods. These approaches sample points on the surface of 3D models and extract characteristics from the sample points. These characteristics are organized in the form of histograms or distributions representing frequency of occurrence. Ankerst et al. [4] subdivide the space into spherical shells and sectors around the center of gravity of an object; the resulting partitions correspond to the bins of 3D shape histogram. Osada et al. [5] represent the shape signature as a probability distribution sampled from a shape function measuring the geometric properties of a 3D model. Ohbuchi et al. [6] improve Osada's method by constructing 2D histograms. Compared with other methods, statistic based methods are not only fast and easy to implement, but also have some desired properties, such as robustness and invariance. However, the discrimination ability of these methods is not good enough due to the fact that local shape features are not depicted explicitly. (3) Topology based methods. Besides geometric and physical properties, topology structure is the third important information for 3D shapes. Hilaga et al. [7] propose a topology-based method, in which Multiresolutional Reeb Graph is constructed by using a continuous function such as the geodesic distance. Siddiqi et al. [8] present a shape description based on shock graphs. Sundar et al. [9] describe a method that encodes the geometric and topological information in the form of a skeletal graph. Topology-based methods have properties of intuition, invariance and generality. However, they require a consistent model of the object's boundary and interior, and a large amount of computational resources are needed to compute the skeleton. (4) Image based methods. The human vision system has an uncanny ability to recognize objects from a single view. On the basis of this idea, Christopher et al. [10] adopt a concept named aspect graph to group all views and represent a 3D model with a set of 2D views. Thus, 3D problems can be transformed to 2D problems. Pu et al. [11] represent 3D shape accurately by three views. In these methods, several thumbnail images must be computed beforehand. Generally, these methods are robust but timeconsuming.

Our method is to employ vector quantisation index histogram as the shape descriptor. First, five subfeatures of sample points are computed. Second, a public codebook is created based on training feature matrices of some representative models selected from categories. Third, the index histograms are constructed with respect to the codebook. The last step is to measure the similarity of histograms of the query and those in database, and the results are returned according to the distance sorted in an ascending order.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 extensively describe the proposed method, including feature extraction and comparison. In Section 3, experimental results are presented and analyzed; Section 4 concludes the whole paper.


Proposed Method

Generally, the desirable properties of a 3D shape descriptor are as follows: invariance to transformation; robustness to noise; conciseness for storage; less computational complexity; shape discrimination, etc. In this section, we present a novel 3D shape description method with above properties. Steps are described below.

(1) Sample points on surface uniformly. A 3D mesh consists of vertices coordinates and their connectivity information. Since different models may contain different number of vertices, we randomly sample points on model surface to guarantee all models including the query model and those in database have the same number of points. We use Osada's method [12] to generate sample points on model surface. For each selected triangle T (A, B, C) with vertices (A, B, C), we sample a point on its surface by generating two random numbers, r 1 and r 2 and using the Formula (1).
1 1 2 12 (1 ) (1 ) p r A r r B r r C
(1) where the random numbers r 1 and r 2 are uniformly distributed between 0 and 1. Clearly, the number of sample points on a triangle is proportional to its area. This step aims to guarantee the number of sample points of all models is exactly the same, suppose k denotes it.

(2) Subfeatures computation. This step is to compute subfeature vectors of sample points. After sampling, we perform the principle component analysis (PCA) on the model first. Using the point mass on the surface, the covariance matrix Cov can be computed as
1 1 ( ) ( ) k T i i i Cov p m p m k(2)
where p i is a sample point, and m is the center of mass. The center of mass is computed as Formula (3). where s i and g i is the area and gravity of triangle T i . Three eigenvectors of the covariance matrix Cov are the principal axes of inertia of the model. The first, the second and the third significant principle axles correspond to the associated magnitude of the eigenvalues in the decreasing order.

Next, five subfeatures are extracted for each point. Suppose a cord c i is defined to be a vector that goes from the center of mass m to the sample point p i . Thus the cos , cos , cos and cos can be computed like this. We associate a vertex with a value that represents its visual importance [13], defined by:
1 i i i v i i n VI (5)
where n i is unit normal of the neighbor triangle of and i is its area. VI of p i is estimated as the mean of visual importance of three vertices of the triangle it lies on. Formula (4) shows VI of p i computation. 

It is obvious that VI is in the range of [0, 1], which can indicate the local curvature around p i . When VI is equal to 0, the point is on a flat plane. VI increasing is coupled with the curvature increases.

After the five subfeatures computation, we construct a feature vector for each point as Formula (7). (3) Codebook generation. Suppose there are K categories models in database. We randomly selected l models from each class to constitute a training set. The feature matrices of these models are regarded as entries of LBG algorithm [14]. In other words, totally kl subfeature vectors as input vectors are trained. After training, a public codebook is constructed.

(4) Index histogram construction. To models in database, we construct their codeword index histograms offline, while that of the query model is obtained online, all based on the public codebook. As the sample points in all histograms are equal to k, there need not normalization before comparison. Suppose all index histograms contain b bins.

(5) Feature comparison. This step is to measure the similarity between the histogram of the query and those of the models in database. We employ the Euclidean distance as the similarity metric.

Suppose Q={q 1 , q 2 , …, q b } denotes the index histogram of the query, H={h 1 , h 2 , …, h b } is the histogram of a model from database.
2 1 ( ) b i i i D q h(9)
After computing the distances, retrieval results can be returned ranked according to the distance sorted ascending between the query and models in database.


Experimental results and Discussions

In the experiment, the database contains 95 models, which are classified into 10 categories. The names of the categories are: bottle(5 models), car (8), dog (6), human body(24), plane(8), tank (5), television (7), fire balloon(19), helicopter(5), chess (8). From each class, we randomly select one model and thus our training set has ten models. Each model we sample 30000 points on surface, thus there are 300000 subfeature vectors as training vectors. The codebook contains 500 codewords. Each index histogram also consists of 500 bins. Some samples of model retrieval are shown in Figure 1. We can see our method is effective. In experiments, we find that the retrieval performance is closely related to the number of sample points. On one hand, sampling more points can improve the retrieval precision. This is because our method is based on statistics. In addition, more subfeatures of sample points also results in higher precision. On the other hand, these improvements will cause larger computational complexity. Therefore, it is necessary to achieve a good tradeoff between precision and computational complexity according to different requirements.


Conclusion

This paper proposes a novel 3D model retrieval method. Five subfeatures of sample points are extracted. And a public codebook is constructed based on a small training set selected from database. Then index histograms of all models are computed and compared. Our method is a statistical technique. A good tradeoff need to be achieved between good performance and low computational complexity.

D 1 :
1the Euclidean distance between p i and m, i.e. the length of c i . : the angle between c i and the most significant principle axle. : the angle between c i and the second most significant principle axle. : the angle between c i and the third most significant principle axle. : the angle between c i and the normal vector of p i . VI: visual importance of the point p i . Here normal vector of a point is estimated as normal of the triangle it lies on. Clearly, D 1 , , , and describe the relationship between the local points and the global properties, while VI denotes the local characteristics. Suppose is the inclination of two vectors OM, ON, the cosine of this inclination is computed as cos OM ON OM ON (4)


i k and the D 1 of a specific model has been normalized. Thus, k feature vectors for each model are obtained, in which five components are real values in the range of [0, 1]To each model, we obtain its feature any model, the size of F is k 5.

Figure 1 .
13D query models and the four top matches listed from left to right.
© 2006 IOP Publishing Ltd

N Marcin, Reinhard K , Shape retrieval using 3D Zernike descriptors Proceedings of the eighth ACM symposium on Solid modeling and applications. Marcin N and Reinhard K 2003 Shape retrieval using 3D Zernike descriptors Proceedings of the eighth ACM symposium on Solid modeling and applications 216-225

Rotation invariant spherical harmonic representation of 3D shape descriptors Proceedings of the. K Michael, Thomas F Syzmon, R , Eurographics/ACM SIGGRAPH symposium on Geometry processing. Michael K, Thomas F and Syzmon R 2003 Rotation invariant spherical harmonic representation of 3D shape descriptors Proceedings of the 2003 Eurographics/ACM SIGGRAPH symposium on Geometry processing 156-164

D V Vranic, D Saupe, 3D Shape Descriptor Based on 3D Fourier Transform Proceedings of the EURASIP Conference on Digital Signal Processing for Multimedia Communications and Services. Vranic D V and Saupe D 2001 3D Shape Descriptor Based on 3D Fourier Transform Proceedings of the EURASIP Conference on Digital Signal Processing for Multimedia Communications and Services 271-274

A Mihael, K Gabi, P Hans, S Thomas, 3D shape histograms for similarity search and classification in spatial databases Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium on Advances in Spatial Databases 1651. Mihael A, Gabi K, Hans P K and Thomas S 1999 3D shape histograms for similarity search and classification in spatial databases Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium on Advances in Spatial Databases 1651 207-226

. O Robert, F Thomas, Bernard Cand David, D , Shape Distributions ACM Transactions on Graphics. 21Robert O, Thomas F, Bernard Cand David D 2002 Shape Distributions ACM Transactions on Graphics 21 807-832

Shape-Similarity Search of 3D Models by using Enhanced Shape Functions. O Ryutarou, M Takahiro, T Tsuyoshi, International Journal of Computer Applications in Technology. 23Ryutarou O, Takahiro M and Tsuyoshi T 2005 Shape-Similarity Search of 3D Models by using Enhanced Shape Functions International Journal of Computer Applications in Technology 23 70-85

M Hilaga, Y Shinaagagawa, T Kohmura, T L Kunii, Topology Matching for Fully Automatic Similarity Estimation of 3D Shapes Proc. SIGGRAPH 2001 Computer Graphics Proceedings Annual Conference Series. Hilaga M, Shinaagagawa Y, Kohmura T and Kunii T L 2001 Topology Matching for Fully Automatic Similarity Estimation of 3D Shapes Proc. SIGGRAPH 2001 Computer Graphics Proceedings Annual Conference Series 203-212

. K Siddiqi, A Shokoufandeh, S Dickinson, S Zucker, Shock Graphs and Shape Matching Computer Vision. 35Siddiqi K, Shokoufandeh A, Dickinson S and Zucker S 1999 Shock Graphs and Shape Matching Computer Vision 35 13-20

Skeleton Based Shape Matching and Retrieval Proc. H Sundar, D Silver, N Gagvani, S Dickinson, Shape Modeling International. Sundar H, Silver D, Gagvani N and Dickinson S 2003 Skeleton Based Shape Matching and Retrieval Proc. Shape Modeling International 130-142

M C Christopher, B K Benjamin, 3D Object Recognition using Shape Similarity-Based Aspect Graph Proc. 8th International Conference On Computer Vision. Christopher M C and Benjamin B K 2001 3D Object Recognition using Shape Similarity-Based Aspect Graph Proc. 8th International Conference On Computer Vision 254-261

J T Pu, Y Liu, G Y Xin, H B Zha, W Liu, U Yusuke, 3D Model Retrieval Based on 2D Slice Similarity Measurements Proceeding of the 2nd International Symposium on 3D Data Processing. Pu J T, Liu Y, Xin G Y, Zha H B, Liu W B and Yusuke U 2004 3D Model Retrieval Based on 2D Slice Similarity Measurements Proceeding of the 2nd International Symposium on 3D Data Processing, Visualization, and Transmission 95-101

. R Osada, T A Funkhouser, Chazelle B Dobkin, D P , Shape distributions ACM Trans. Graph. 21Osada R, Funkhouser T A, Chazelle B and Dobkin D P 2002 Shape distributions ACM Trans. Graph 21 807-832

Efficient and Feature-Preserving Triangular Mesh Decimation WSCG. M Hussain, Y Okada, K Niijima, Hussain M, Okada Y and Niijima K 2004 Efficient and Feature-Preserving Triangular Mesh Decimation WSCG 167-174

An Algorithm for Vector Quantizer Design IEEE Trans. Y Linde, A Buzo, R M Gray, Communications. 8495Linde Y, Buzo A and Gray R M 1980 An Algorithm for Vector Quantizer Design IEEE Trans. Communications 84-95