THE HISTORY AND PREVENTION OF VENEREAL ^ DISEASE.1 U


M.DDavid Newman 
Glasgow Royal Infirmary


THE HISTORY AND PREVENTION OF VENEREAL ^ DISEASE.1 U



they were looked upon as fundamentally the same until Ricord, by his investigations, demonstrated the different nature of these diseases.

The early belief in the identity of the venereal affections makes it difficult now to trace the true history of syphilis, especially when viewed in the light of modern dermatological development, which has made us familiar with whole groups of diseases, viz., pseudo-venereal and pseudo-syphilitic, and even sixty years ago the physician Canstatt held that these diseases furnished all the reputed cases described by the older writers. Those who hold the view that syphilis existed in the old world since ancient times must bear in mind that diseases such as herpes, pemphigus, impetigo, lichens rubor, and psoriasis may imitate syphilitic syndromes, and may manifest themselves upon the body, the genitals, and in the oral cavity at the same time. But, notwithstanding this, it is difficult to put aside the following description, referred to by Lancereaux, " On syphilis in ancient times and in the Middle Ages," and assert that the disease described is not syphilis.

Appearance in China 600 years ago. ? The Chinese medical writer, Hoang-ty (2,637 B.C.) gives the following graphic description of a disease prevalent in his time :? " A corroding ulcer produced by a poison of a particular kind, and communicable by direct contact, is met with in the genital organs of the male and female: it generally appears from the third to the ninth day, either singly or accompanied by a number of other lesions of the same kind. It begins as a small red spot raised at its centre, and causing either pain or itching. In a short time a white spot appears in the centre, and forms a cavity, and increases insensibly in size and depth. At the base is seen and felt a kind of hard thick skin of whitish colour, the edges become equally hard with irregular notches. The consequent ulcers of the mouth, throat and nose, the mucous patches of the anal region."

[If this disease was syphilis, is it not possible that it might have been carried from China over sea to America, a means of transit in these days difficult but still possible, while the conveyance of the disease by land from the extreme eastern to the western parts of the old world was impossible].

The tertiary lesions are clearly indicated :?Sanious .discharges, ulceration, destruction of the septum, &c., and this at a date well over 4,000 years before Hunter lived. Roman writers.?Similar descriptions are to be found among the writings of the old Latin authors of affections of the genital organs, but they approached the subject with caution, if not with fear. Celsus spoke only with reserve of the private parts, and says, "It is not, therefore, an easy thing for one who wishes to observe the rules of propriety without departing from those of art to treat these diseases," and nothing but a sense of duty led him to allude to matters so delicate. But, at the same time, he thought it right that his country should have the benetit of his experience, and he considered it to be "desirable to disseminate among the people some medical principles with regard to a class of diseases which are never revealed to anyone." The Roman doctors declined to treat secret diseases, and termed them " morbus indecens." Women affected with the disease prayed to Juno Fluonia for relief, and used aster atticus as a medicine. The Romans called it " Bubonium," and ultimately the name of the drug came to be applied to the disease?hence the term, Spaniards affected with syphilis, accompanied by a following of women.

During the stay of the French army in Naples (1495) the disease appeared, and very soon spread to other Italian towns, and from there to France, Switzerland, and Northern Europe.

Most of the Italian writers accuse the French of having introduced the disease. Benevenie, on the other hand, asserts that it was brought from Spain, and the Spaniards on their part believe that the new disease was imported from America by the sailors of Columbus, who contracted the disease from the Indians of Haiti, and that the majority of the sailors returned to Spain sick of the malady. To substantiate this contention, an endeavour was made to demonstrate the presence of syphilis in America prior to the time of Columbus, and the absence of the disease in the old world up to the date of his return to Spain. This was to be done by the discovery of syphilitic bones in graves and mounds. From the circumstance that cremation was largely practised by the natives, and by reason of the climatic conditions, few skeletal remains were to be found in many parts of America; but during recent investigations amongst the graves of the mound builders in the southern part of the United States, bones with lesions resembling those of tertiary syphilis have been found in abundance among the skeletons discovered in these mounds.

On the other hand, in the old world, where we have any number of bones of all ages, from the time of the barrows, lake dwellings, and cave dwellings, onwards, in none of them, so far, has a single syphilitic bone been found. Therefore, it is clearly demonstrated that syphilis was brought from the New World to the Old. At least from Eastern America to Western Europe, but it is quite possible that Western America got the disease from Eastern Asia. This has still to be proved.

Syphilis amongst Indians of mild type.?Syphilis existed in Espanola from very early times, " being beyond the memory of any man," and the Indians had discovered various methods of treating the disease by certain internal remedies compounded of vegetable drugs. Writers of the time of Columbus, such as Oviedo and Diaz de Isla (1504), agree as to the American origin of syphilis, and declare that the disease was prevalent in the Antilles and Central America, and that the disorder should be called the " West Indian disease" rather than the "French evil" or "Neapolitan disease," and Oviedo declares that syphilis is common amongst the Indians. He says, " in those regions is not so dangerous as with us," clearly pointing to some degree of acquired immunity. Las Casas also states that while the natives suffered only slightly from the disease, the Spaniards who contracted it were severely attacked, just as we find in the present day when introduced into a fresh soil and allowed to run riot without treatment the disease acquires great virulence, as, for example, in Uganda, where the population are now mutilated with syphilis: also as our troops were in Spain during the Peninsular War.

Scattering of syphilis over Europe and in Scotland.?

Amongst the mercenaries of Charles the VIII were English and Scottish soldiers who served during the war in Italy. s diseases. On 20th October, 1586, the session " ordains some to visit the leper folks house or spittle beyond the brig, to see how the same, and the dykes of the yards may be reformed, and that nane be received but towns folks." But again, in 1592, the same session directed " that the house beyond the stable-green-port for women affected with the Glengore be looked after."1 And a few years later, 1600, the Kirk Session of Glasgow requested the Magistrates " to consult the chirurgeons how the distemper of Glengore could be removed from the city."

The history of the treatment of venereal disease in Glasgow is full of local interest, and at some future time the subject will be taken up.

Syphilis not known to be of venereal origin for many years.

?From the onset of this great outbreak until 1544 no great light was thrown upon the true nature of syphilis. It is true, however, that the symptoms and treatment were as well understood then as they were fifty years ago, and Fracastoro's description of the disease, published in 1546, held good until the middle of last century. From the middle of the sixteenth till well on in the nineteenth century little progress was made.

The profession, misapprehending their duty, refused to attend patients attacked by the disease, and the sufferers were left to the mercies of barbers, quacks, and old women.

For a considerable time following the great outburst of syphilis the true mode of infection was unknown. The primary sore being probably small and insignificant, sexual intercourse was not suspected as the source of contagion, hence the secondary and tertiary lesions alone attracted attention?the ulcerated throat, the hideous eruptions on the skin, the bone lesions, and the nocturnal pains. Pierre Maynard was the first to point out the symptomatic value of induration of the primary sore in the diagnosis of true syphilis.

" Sunt pustula, cum durite et callositati, quce sanari nequeunt, quod morbi Gallici certum signum est," and a few years later Fallopius says, "Calli isti sunt manifestissima et demonstrave signa morbi Gallici confirmati." Following on these writers we have the work of Bell, Carmichael, Ambrose Pare, Hunter, Swediaur, and, most important of all, Ricord and Neisser. Hunter s wrong conclusions do much harm to progress.?

During the eighteenth century considerable doubt was raised as to the identity of the various venereal disorders by Balfour, Ellis, and Duncan. In 1793 Benjamin Bell published his treatise on Gonorrhoea Virulenta and Lues Venerea, and he proved that gonorrhoea and syphilis were two distinct diseases.

The great Hunter, most unfortunately, was led by certain experiments to believe that gonorrhoea and syphilis were produced by the same virus. He inoculated himself on the glans and prepuce with the discharge from a gonorrhoea, and induced a soft chancre as well as constitutional syphilis. The infection was what we now know as "mixed," and Hunter very naturally came to the conclusion that one virus was common to all?when planted on a mucous surface it produced a gonorrhoea, and when inoculated on the skin it produced a chancre. He opposed the view that the internal organs were involved in syphilis, although Morgagni had previously carefully described syphilitic lesions of the cerebral vessels. Hunter said, " I have not seen that the brain, heart, stomach, liver, kidneys, and other viscera have been attacked by syphilis, although such cases have been described by authors." He, however, carefully studied the appearances of the primary sore, and laid great diagnostic importance upon the induration of the initial sclerosis of true syphilis, which is now recognised under the term " Hunterian chancre." Hunter's influence was very great, so much so that nearly all British practitioners were influenced by his opinion, probably not knowing that Morgagni, Valsalva, and others had demonstrated the presence of syphilitic lesions of the heart and blood-vessels, of the lungs, the larynx, and of bone.

Believed to be infectious by touch and through air.?It was, however, believed to be communicable from one person to another by the employment of clothes, domestic utensils, baths, &c., by kissing, by inoculation, and by the slightest contact of the sick with the healthy, or even by inhaling the same air. This is well illustrated by the indictment of Cardinal Wolsey before the House of Lords in 1529 :?

The first correct views regarding the mode of transference of the syphilitic poison are found in the writings of Jean Ferrel, published before the middle of the sixteenth century, and from that time onward considerable progress was made in the knowledge of the subject. Lancisi also studied the relationship of syphilis to diseases of the heart and bloodvessels.

The great difficulty in clearly separating the venereal diseases in these times probably arose from the circumstance that the possibility of mixed infection was unknown, and it seems very certain that when Hunter inoculated himself on the prepuce and glans with the excretion from a gonorrhoea the patient also had syphilis, as the inoculation produced a true chancre, followed by constitutional symptoms. But this made Hunter believe that gonorrhoea, chancre, and syphilis were due to one and the same virus?a most unfortunate error, which retarded progress in this country for many years.

Ernest Horn was probably the first observer to affirm decidedly that gonorrhoea could not produce a true chancre, nor a chancre result from gonorrhoeal infection. jRicord's great work.?In 1838 appeared Ricord's Traite pratique snr les Maladies veneriennes, and, until the grand discovery of the specific organisms of the diseases, his investigations must be looked upon as marking the most important epoch in the history of syphilis. He began his researches at the Hospital du Midi in 1831, and, before publishing his results, performed 2,500 inoculations, and demonstrated daily the great fact that when pus was taken from the urethra in a, case of gonorrhoea and inoculated upon the patient no result followed, whereas when pus was taken from a suppurating sore and inoculated subcutaneously a suppurating chancre was always produced. He experimentally traced the diseases through their various stages, and offered his experimental illustrations to all who wished to witness them. He demonstrated that syphilis and gonorrhoea were distinct diseases, but failed to recognise the specific nature of the virus of the latter.

Distinction of Jtard and soft chancre: mixed infection.? Such were the results obtained and the opinions held in 1838, so that still there was much to learn regarding many essential features of syphilis. Further investigation into the different kinds of chancre established the possibility of what we now know under the term of mixed infection?that is to say, there might be a combination of the different venereal poisons. Soft chancre with syphilis, soft chancre with gonorrhoea, syphilis with gonorrhoea, or the whole three combined, the "chancre mixte" of Rollet. This gradually led to a further advance, and, in place of the unitarian doctrine of Hunter, the doctrine of duality of the poisons became established, and it was shown, as a consequence of the clinical observations of Barensprung, that a soft chancre never gave rise to a hard chancre, and that the induration of the base of the latter was the result, not the cause, of the general infection?that is to say, that the result of venereal contagion is not always the same. While Ricord's descriptions applied accurately to the local venereal sores, they did not apply to those which do not begin with a pustule, but with a papule, a tubercle, or an abrasion with a thickened base. In 1859 the contagiousness of secondary syphilis was recognised, and, later, VirchowT showed that from various organs and tissues the specific virus passed into the blood, and that the disease might remain latent, and, after a considerable time, burst out afresh. Onward from this time till the beginning of the twentieth century a great amount of labour was devoted to the study of venereal disease in all its aspects, both from the clinical and from the pathological standpoints.

Discovery of specific organisms of gonorrhoea, soft chancrey and syphilis.?A second great epoch was now near. The advances made in the study of morbid histology cast much fresh light on the whole subject, but it was in the domain of bacteriology that new discoveries were specially looked for during the eighties of last century. Many false starts were made in seeking an organism peculiar to syphilis and other venereal diseases at a time when microbiology as a science did not yet exist, and the methods of staining tissues and organism was as yet an unacquired art. The first organism to be found was the diplococcus of gonorrhoea by Neisser in 1879; the bacillus of soft chancre was demonstrated by Ducrey in 1889 ; and, finally, the epoch-making discovery by Schaudinn and Hoffmann in 1905 of the spirochete pallida of syphilis demonstrated beyond doubt the true infective organism of the disease. It was shown that when the organism invaded the human being it flourished, like all other parasites, at the expense of its host, and the longer it remained the graver the damage inflicted on his tissues and organs.

For many years, although all the features of the disease clearly pointed to a bacterial origin, observers failed to prove an etiological relationship between any particular organism and these venereal affections, and they had theory rather than demonstrated facts to guide them. But since the specific organism of each lesion has been clearly differentiated, exact and something approaching scientific treatment has been rendered possible. Serum diagnosis; Wassermann reaction.?Prior to 1906 we had no exact way of determining when a patient was cured of syphilis and free to marry without evil results, nor had we an effective guide in the management of syphilitic cases.

Immediately following the discovery of the organism of syphilis, and founded on the work of Bordet and Gengou, the serum diagnosis of the disease was introduced by Wassermann, Neisser, and Bruck. This reaction, which is a very complicated blood test, if properly carried out by an expert, shows almost infallibly the presence of syphilis in any of its stages?primary, secondary, tertiary, or congenital ?and makes the diagnosis possible at a very early stage of the disease.

Not only is a positive Wassermann reaction a reliable indication of the presence of syphilis, but it is also a most valuable guide in estimating the effects of treatment, and in finding out the relative values of different agents. Salvarsan treatment.?Four years later, by Ehrlich, it was discovered, not by chance, but by a long systematic research, that a synthetic preparation called " 606," or salvarsan, when introduced into the blood or subeutaneously had the power of destroying the parasites, without at the same time damaging the tissues of the host. As the pathological changes in the tissues depend upon the length of time the spirochete is permitted to multiply, as well as the virulence of the infection and the susceptibility of the subject, it is of the utmost importance that the anti-syphilitic treatment should be employed with energy and as early as possible. Salvarsan meets these requirements admirably as far as the immediate results show, but it has been introduced so recently that time must pass before its permanent value can be estimated.

Undoubtedly, salvarsan is of great value in primary and secondary syphilis, and even in the tertiary stages the results obtained are very remarkable, especially in skin affections, and in certain nervous diseases.

In general paralysis,and in locomotor ataxy there is little improvement, but the progress of the disease is checked if not stopped. Up to 1910 the most efficient drag employed in the treatment of syphilis was mercury, but it was slow and not always certain in its action, and when pushed to large doses was liable to produce evil effects.

Public interest in Glasgow. Merchants House and Royal Infirmary.?Scientific enquiry, etiological and therapeutic, has about reached its limit. What is now required is to bring their power against venereal disease into full action, together with the aid of preventive measures. The question is of great public interest, and that it has become so in Glasgow is demonstrated by the fact that wrhen the Merchants' House found itself in a position to apportion the income of the Ewing and Buchanan Bequests for educational objects, amounting eventually to about ?800 a year, the Royal Infirmary board of managers made a successful application for a grant sufficient to establish a lectureship in the University of Glasgow on Venereal Disease. The University Court made the appointment, and the managers of the infirmary undertook to supply facilities for giving practical instruction. In this way the managers proved that they knew wThat was required, and showed their sympathy with the movements going on elsewhere to facilitate the study of the diseases now under consideration,, and the best methods of reducing the evils associated with them.

Preventive measures advocated and Royal Commission appointed.?Two generations back preventive medicine did not exist?the function of the surgeon being to find a cure, not to seek a check for the spreading of disease; but now it has become a fixed principle of the profession that, along with finding a remedy, we must also search for and discover the cause, and in every way in our power counteract its action and limit its influence. This particular work is very clearly within the limits of our professional duty, and it is only by being taken up by the medical men of this country that any hope can be held out of materially reducing the ravages of venereal disease. But in order to do this effectively they must become acquainted with the advances which are being made in this special department. Within recent years preventive methods have been enormously increased in all branches of our art, and as Professor J. G. Adami remarked in an address to the students of the Rush Medical College, Chicago, in June last:?"In every centre of population throughout the world, we have presented groups of medical men giving their whole time and all their energies to the investigation and perfection of methods, not of cure, but of prevention of disease. We can proudly state that ours is the only profession which, were the making of money its prime object, with open eyes and set purposes indulges in the suicidal policy of endeavouring consistently to reduce its means of sustenance.

Our leading thinkers, our leading investigators, have before them the banishment from among us of the vast array of infectious diseases, and in their efforts have the loyal support of the whole profession."

These remarks apply to the venereal diseases as well as all other infectious maladies. In the past, very unfortunately for the community, these diseases have been, for obvious reasons, kept in the background; but now that the serious consequences to the public health are known and properly appreciated, they have been forced into the first rank.

At the International Congress, held in London in August, 1913, the question was discussed, and the following resolutions adopted:? " That, sensible of the ravages wrought by syphilis, in the health of the community, and deploring the inadequacy of existing facilities for checking its dissemination, the International Medical Congress calls upon the Governments of all the countries here represented?

1. To institute a system of confidential notification of the disease to a sanitary authority, wherever such notification does not already obtain.

2. To make systematic provision for the diagnosis and treatment of all cases of syphilis not otherwise provided for." A hope was expressed that the British Government would listen to the appeal for a Royal Commission, and it was pointed out that confidential notification was the pre-requisite of any effective action by the State to check what Lord Morley characterised as "this hideous scourge." The ease with which the disease could be communicated, the enormous number of those who were its innocent victims, the inadequacy of proper means of treatment were facts of which the general public were almost entirely ignorant, and they were most imperfectly appreciated even by legislators.
 " Bubo."Severe epidemic of syphilis in fifteenth century.?Whether in Europe true syphilis existed throughout the Middle Ages or not, certainly venereal disease resembling it, termed sometimes leprosy, sometimes yudendagra, which selected the organs of generation for its chief seat, commonly prevailed, although it was not until the close of the fifteenth century that public attention was called to syphilis. In 1495 a terrible and widespread European epidemic prevailed. Neglected in its early stages, favoured by social disorder and European wars, it spread with great rapidity over a wide area. The question, was this a new disease, or merely a modification of pre-existing venereal disease,-has caused much controversy.Syphilis brought to Europe from America in H93.?According to all accounts the disease appeared in Barcelona in 1493 and in other parts of Spain soon after. The followingyear Charles VIII of France, in his victorious campaign in Italy, led many mercenary bands. Amongst these were
On returning home, they brought the disease with them. It wras introduced into England through Bristol in 1498 from Bordeaux, and was called " Morbus Burdigalensis." But even in this Scotland was ahead of England by one year. In 1497 syphilis was first seen in Aberdeen, and King James IV, who personally practised the art of leechcraft and experimented in alchemy and physiology, took a great interest in the new disease, and in September of the following year ordered all persons suffering from it to leave Edinburgh. They were treated in the Island of Inchkeith, the old "Urbs Guidi" of the Venerable Bede. Edicts were issued by the Privy Council of Scotland and by the Town Council of Aberdeen. The following are the words of the Aberdonian Record, dated 21st April, 1497 :? "The said day, it was statut and ordanit be the Alderman and Consale for the eschevin of the infirmitey cumm out of Franche and Strang partis. That all licht weman be chargit and ordanit to decist fra thar vices and syne of venerie, and at thair buthis and houssis skalit, and thai to pas and wirk for thar sustentacioun undir the payne of ane key of het yrne one thair chekis, and banysene of the toune."1 Likewise in Paris, in 1497, it was ordered that all persons suffering from les grands vevoles leave the city and return not till they were cured. For those who could not be moved an hospital was provided in the Faubourg St. Germain. No proper treatment was carried out, and no good resulted? rather the contrary.Greek leprosy and syphilis, which in Scotland wTas called " gor," " gore," " grandgore," or " glengore," were often confounded together, but the kirk session books of Glasgow show that here at least the two were looked upon as separate1  The mode and means of propagation were little understood in the early years, and were not generally believed to be associated with coition. The Town Council of Aberdeen, the fathers of a shrewd people, arrived early at the conclusion that the " licht weman " spread the contagion, and were not slow to put their opinions into force, by branding them and expelling them from the town.
This was the fourth pre-reformation hospital in or near Glasgow, and was founded in 1524 by Holland Blacadyr, prebendary of Cadder and subdean of the Cathedral, and the site was that of the present Barony U.F.Church.
" Whereas your Grace is our Sovereign Lord and Head, in whom standeth all surety and wealth of this realm, the same Lord Cardinal, knowing himself to have the foul and contagious disease of the great pox, broken out upon him in divers places of his body, came daily to your Grace, rowning in your ear, and blowing upon your most noble Grace with his perilous and infected breath, in marvellous danger of your Highness.".
An end must be put to the silence in which this subject had too long been shrouded.Local authorities were encouraged to build fever hospitals, and in a thousand ways the State stretched out its long arm to safeguard the health of the community, but it did not lift a finger to protect the nation from this devastating pestilence, which, more ruthless than the Destroying Angel, smote the unborn babe.Within a few weeks the following intimation appeared:? "The King has approved the appointment of a Royal Commission to inquire into the subject of venereal diseasesin the United Kingdom. The terms of reference are?"To inquire into the prevalence of venereal diseases in the United Kingdom, their effects upon the health of the community, and the means by which those effects can be alleviated or prevented, it being understood that no return to the policy or provisions of the Contagious Diseases Acts of 1864, 1866r or 1869 is to be regarded as falling within the scope of the inquiry.