Phytopharmacological and ethnomedicinal uses of the Genus Berberis (Berberidaceae): A review


Ibrahim Khan ibrahimkhan.qau@gmail.com 
Syed Najeebullah 
Muhammad Ali 
Zabta Khan 
Roots Hussain 
] B Orthobotrys 

Faculty of Pharmacy
Pharmacotherapy Group
University of Benin
300001Benin CityNigeria


Department of Biotechnology
Quaid-i-Azam University
IslamabadPakistan


B. calliobotrys Berberine
Nmethyl-6, 7-Dimethoxy-isoquinolineOxyberberine, Karachine, Corydaldine, Methylcorydaldine, Aromoline, Pakistanine


Waziristanine Root bark Ahmed
[34] B. jaeschkeana AlkaloidsGlycosides, Flavonoids, Steroids, Saponins, Reducing Sugars, Terpenoids

Phytopharmacological and ethnomedicinal uses of the Genus Berberis (Berberidaceae): A review
1596-5996 (print); 1596-982704C1C9984849201C13E157C688DFD11210.4314/tjpr.v15i9.33Received: 8 April 2016 Revised accepted: 17 August 2016Berberis, Alkaloids, Berberine, Pharmacology, Phytochemistry, Ethnomedicinal uses Tropical Journal of Pharmaceutical Research is indexed by Science Citation Index (SciSearch), Scopus, International Pharmaceutical Abstract, Chemical Abstracts, Embase, Index Copernicus, EBSCO, African Index Medicus, JournalSeek, Journal Citation Reports/Science Edition, Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ), African Journal Online, Bioline International, Open-J-Gate and Pharmacy Abstracts B. aristata Berbamine, Berberine, Colunbamamine, Jatrrohirine,, Karachine , Oxyacanthine, Oxyberberine , Palmatine, Palmitine, Taxilamine, Tetrahydropalmitine Roots and leaves Srivastava et al., [14]Bhardwaj and Kaushik, [9] B. lycium Baberine, Berbericine hydrochloride, Berbericine hydroiodide, Berberine chloride, Berberine-chlorofrom, Chenabine, Diphenolic, Palmatine, Gilgitine, Jhelumine, Kara-koramine, Palmitine chloroform along with oxyberberine, Punjabine, Secobisbenzylisoquinolines, Sindamine, Umbellatine Roots , Leaves, Stems and Decoctions Ikram et al., [11]Miana, [26] B. pachycantha Berbamine, Cyanidin-3 glucoside, Isotetrandrine, Jatrorrhizine, Magnoflorine, Oxyacanthine, Oxyberberine, Polar gonidin -3 glucoside Roots and Fruits Reviewed by Srivastava et al., [14] B. vulgaris 8-Oxyberberine, Aromoline, Auroxanthin, Baluchistanamine, Berbamine, Berberine Chloride, Capsanthin, Carbohydrates, Chilenine Chrysanthemaxanthin, Flavoxanthin, Palmatine, Isotetrandrine, Jatrorrhizine Chloride, Lutein, Obaberine, Obamegine, Organic acids, Oxycanthine, Palmitine Chloride, Pectic substances, Tannin, Tejedine, Thalifoline, Thaligrisine, Vitamin C, Zea xanthin, βcarotene Fruits, Root bark, Decoctions and Fruits Stem, Bark and Fruits Tiwari and Singh, [29] Srivastava et al., [14] B. calliobotrys 1-0-methylpakistanine, Chitraline, Kalashine, New dimeric aporphine Benzylisoquinoline-Khyberine, Pakistanamine, Pakistanine B. brandisiana Berbamine-2'--N-oxide, Berbamine, Palmitine, Berbernine, Thalifoline, Reticuline, Apoglaziovine, Isoboldine, Isotetrandrine Aerial parts Hussain et al., [31]Karimov et al., [12] B. pseudoumbellata Berberine, Palmitine, Pisbenzy isoquinoline alkaloid oxyaoanthine, Omethyl oxyacanthine
Plants belonging to Berberis are reported in several folklore medicinal pharmacopeias and are used in traditional medicines in Asia and European countries.The plants have been used in the preparation of various traditional and synthetic medicines since pre-historic times for wound healing, fever, eye disease, jaundice, vomiting during pregnancy, rheumatism, kidney and gall balder stones, and several other illnesses.Their healing properties are appear to be due to the presence of secondary metabolites and important alkaloids with different pharmacological activities.Their antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, anti-diabetic, and anti-tumor activities as well as positive effects on the cardiovascular and body immune systems have been reported.Root extracts of some species of the plant genus contain quinine which acts as a powerful anti-malarial agent.The main chemical constituents of Berberis plants are alkaloids, steroids, glycosides, flavonoids, saponins, terpenoids and reducing sugars.Of these alkaloids, berberine is the most important.The present review focuses on recent advances in phytopharmacological and ethnomedicinal uses of plants belonging to Berberis genus.

INTRODUCTION

Traditionally medicinal plants have been used in the preparation of medicines [1,2]; In developing countries, about 25 % of ingredients in prescribed medicines are derived from medicinal plants [2,3].Most of these preparations include plant extracts and their active components.In addition, a number of modern drugs are isolated from natural medicinal plants [4].

The genus, Berberis, is a major dicotyledonous genus belonging to the Berberidaceae family; mainly spiny, woody, deciduous or evergreen shrubs or small trees with characteristic yellow wood and flowers.Different taxonomists have reported different number of species in this genus.Recent reports indicate 17 genera and 650 species of Berberidaceae [5].The genus has wide distribution all over the world mainly in India, Pakistan, Japan, China, Central and West Asia, South-East Asia, Europe, East Africa, South America and North America [6].In Pakistan, species belonging to this genus are found across most of the mountainous regions (1400m -3500 m above sea level) and are key components of both traditional and modern medicines [5,[7][8][9].Based on habitat, these plants are clustered into three groups namely Rocky Mountain group which includes B. aquifolium Pursh, the Asiatic group which includes B. aristata and the European group which includes B. vulgaris [11].Apart from their medicinal uses, some of the species are also used as sources of natural dyes [10,12].

Research findings have been published by various groups on the phytochemical and pharmacological properties of Berberis species.Ikram [13] reviewed studies on the chemical and pharmacological aspects of 24 Berberis species.The number of chemical studies on Berberis species increased immensely between 1975 and 1990.Karimov [14] also tabulated 76 Berberis species and listed 129 distinct new alkaloids belonging to 16 different classes.The present review focuses mainly on recent advances in different ethno-medicinal uses and pharmacological studies of chemical substances from plants belonging to genus Berberis.In addition we discussed the biological activities of chemical compounds found in Berberis species, and their relevance to phyto-medicinal properties.


PHYTOCHEMISTRY OF GENUS BERBERIS

Almost similar types of chemical constituents are present in the roots and stems of Berberis plants.However, variations exist in the chemical constituents of leaves of different species of the genus [11].These include alkaloids, flavanoids, terpenoids, anthocyanins, sterols, vitamins, lignins, carotenoids, proteins and lipids which have been isolated and characterized from different Berberis species (Table 1 and 2).Some of the main alkaloids reported are berberine, berbamine, columbamine, palmatine, jatrorrhizine and oxyacanthine [10,[14][15][16].From methanolic extract of all parts of B. pachyacantha an isoquinoline alkaloid, pachycanthine, was isolated [17].Furthermore, Torres et al [18] isolated lignins from the stem and leaves of these plants.

Although most of the phytochemical studies focused on wild species, some of the research groups have carried out comparative studies on the phytochemical compositions of wild and cultivated plants of this genus.For example, differences have been reported in the amount of alkaloids isolated from wild and cultivated plants [19,20].For example, Gorval and Grishkovets [21] reported that evergreen Berberis species contain more alkaloids than deciduous species.While most of the phytochemical studies were carried out on the stem, stem bark, root and root bark of Berberis plants, there are reports of characterization of phytochemicals from other parts like leaves, fruits and flowers.Various polyphenolic flavonoids like caffeic acid, quercetin; meratin, chlorogenic acid and rutin have been extracted from the flowers of B. aristata.Chemical constituents present in the fruits have nutraceutical potential and provide health benefits [22].B. lycium is a good source of various nutrients like β-carotene, anthocyanin, ascorbic acid and minerals.

Studies carried out on five different species of Berberis from West Himalaya showed that the fruits contained appreciable amounts of protein (seeds 5.9-8.5 %; pulp 4.7-7.2%); fat (seeds 4.6-5.3%; pulp 2.6-4.0 %); fiber (seeds 4.4-5.3%; pulp 7.0-8.1 %), and minerals, especially potassium and calcium [23].However, they have anti-nutritional factors like tannins and phytic-acid which lower food energy.Hence, care should be taken while selecting these fruits for value addition as health foods.

The major chemical constituents of different species of the genus Berberis are illustrated in Figure 1.Different parts of the plants have been explored for different purpose viz. the fruits of B. vulgaris have been explored more broadly for their neutraceutical properties in comparison to other parts.Also, the stem and roots of B. aristata and B. lyceum (these species mainly found in Asia) have been extensively studied for their medicinal rather than for neutraceutical properties [23,24].


PHARMACOLOGY OF GENUS BERBERIS

A number of pharmacological and clinical studies have been reported for different Berberis species, thus indicating their importance as medicinal plants (Table 3).Traditionally, in 668 BC Assyrian (present day Iraqi) people used Berberis species, especially barberry fruit extracts, for blood purification [14].In a number of homeopathic and ethno-medicines, the stem and roots of Berberis species have been extensively used as ingredients or raw materials; they are used in Ayurveda (traditional Indian medicine system) for quick healing of wounds, various infections of ear, eye and mouth, piles and hemorrhoids; for reducing obesity, for the treatment of dysentery, indigestion and vaginal diseases, and as antidotes for snake bites [39].Extracts prepared by boiling the roots and stem barks of B. aristata, B. chitria and B. lyciumin in water have been used since ancient times as domestic cure for conjunctivitis, bleeding piles, ophthalmic problems, skin diseases, ulcers, jaundice, inflamed spleen and inflamed liver [40].A decoction of some Berberis species is mixed with honey and used for treatment of jaundice and painful micturition.Extracts of Berberis plants have been effectively used for treating gynecological inflammatory diseases [11].Attempts have been made at synthesizing some alkaloid products originally isolated from Berberis species; some of the synthetic berbamine derivatives have been found to have anti-leukemia activity [41].

Two important alkaloids (Table 2 for details), berberine and berbamine, found in Berberis plants have antioxidant, anti-hyperglycemic, antiinflammatory, heptoprotective, and hypotensive properties [42].Aqueous extract of B. lyceum  showed hypotensive effects in dogs, and reduced mean arterial pressure in cats [43].


B. aristata, an extensively studied species of

Berberis genus, is reported to have a number of pharmacological and clinical uses.Extracts of its root appear to be better treatment option for malaria (compared to cinchona and quinine), because it does not cause cardiac depression during treatment of intermittent fever in malaria [65,68].Butter is mixed with powdered root and used for the treatment of bleeding piles.Cambium paste of B. aristata is used for the treatment of rheumatism [44].The best clinical use includes treatment of diarrhea due to viral, protozoal, bacterial and fungal infections [45].Ripe B. aristata exhibits hypochlolestrolemic activity and is used as a mild laxative for children [34].[26,47,48].In vitro, ethanolic extracts of B. aristata showed inhibitory effects against Propionibacterium acnes [50].


ANTIMICROBIAL ACTIVITIES OF GENUS

Berberine; an alkaloid isolated from Berberis species has been used as anti-diarrheal medication from time immemorial.It has been reported to inhibit the secretory responses of heat-labile enterotoxins of E. coli and V. cholera in rabbit ligated intestinal loop model [49].Orally administered berberine resulted in more effective elimination of parasites than other established drugs [51].

Hydro-alcohol (50 %) extract of air-dried roots and stems of B. lycium has exhibit antibacterial activity against Micrococcus luteum, B. cereus, Enterobacter aerogenes, Klebsiella pneumonia, E. coli, Proteus mirabilis, Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Streptococcus pneumonia [52].The root extract also showed antifungal activities against fungal strains of Aspergillus terreus, Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus spinulosus, while the stem extract inhibited only Aspergillus spinulosus.The hydroalcoholic extract exhibited stronger and broader range against bacterial strains than fungal strains [52].These findings show that main berberine might be has promising antimicrobial potential.When B. lycium was mixed in drinking water of broilers along with other medicinal plants showed good immune boosting activity against Newcastle disease, infectious bursal disease and infectious bronchitis.A significant reduction in coccidial oocysts per gram of feces was also noticed [53].


ANTI-DIABETIC ACTIVITY

Studies have shown that B. aristata roots have potent and orally effective anti-diabetic constituents which either promote insulin secretion or have insulin-like effects [54].Ethanolic and methanolic extracts of stem bark of B. aristata have significant anti-hyperglycemic effect in alloxan-induced diabetic rats.The antioxidant and anti-hyperglycemic activity of 50 % aqueous ethanolic extracts of B. aristata roots have been reported in alloxan induced diabetic rats.Aqueous ethanolic extracts, besides being safe also lowered blood glucose significantly with no hypoglycemic effect on the control groups.Root extracts of B. aristata are also reported to have strong tendencies to regulate glucose homeostasis through decreased gluconeogenesis [45].

Crude powder Berberis species has been reported to decrease level of glucose in blood both in diabetic and normal rabbits [17,55].The root bark extracts of B. lycium in various solvents including water, aqueous methanolic, methanolic, chloroform and n-hexane were prepared and screened for their antidiabetic activities in alloxanized rabbits.Results revealed that amongst the extracts, water extract (500 mg/kg) showed maximum hypoglycemic activity when administered orally, for almost 6 h.Similar doses of aqueous methanol, methanol, and n-hexane extract reduced blood glucose levels for 4 h.The chloroform extract did not show any significant anti-diabetic activity [17,55].Ethanolic and aqueous extracts of the roots of the plant were administered in normal and alloxanized rats and 20 mg/kg glibenclamide was utilized as a control drug.Water extract was further compared in combination with insulin.The 50 and 100 mg/kg doses reduced hyperglycemia after 3 to 5 h of administration.Oral glucose tolerance tests showed that the plant extracts decreased serum glucose in a dose-dependent manner [55].The mechanism involved in the hypoglycemic effects may involve insulin-like effects, possibly through increased peripheral glucose consumption [56].Anti-diabetic activity of pure berberine was compared with that of ethanolic root extract of B. lycium in normal and alloxan-induced diabetic rats using similar doses (50 mg/kg) of each.Both treatments reduced blood glucose levels significantly and demonstrated significant effects on glycosylated haemoglobin, glucose tolerance, serum lipid profiles and animal body weights.Thus the root extract was comparable in efficacy with berberine [56].Moreover, aqueous root extract of B. vulgaris shows potent and significant hypoglycemic effects in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats, with significant increases in serum cholesterol and serum triglycerides levels [57].B. brevissima and B. parkeriana are also have anti-diabetic activities [58].


ANTI-INFLAMMATORY ACTIVITIES

Topical application of aqueous extracts B. aristata showed potent anti-inflammatory activity against endotoxin-induced uveitis in rabbits.Anterior uveitis was induced in rabbits by intravitreal injection of lipopolysaccharide from E. coli after pre-treatment with B. aristata aqueous extracts [59].Alcoholic extract of B. aristata was found to have moderate anti-proteolytic activity toward trypsin-induced hydrolysis of bovine serum albumin, but no inhibitory activity against β.-glucuronidase [60].Aqueous extracts of the plant were effective in arresting the initial phases of acute inflammation, while the alcoholic extracts worked better at the later phases of acute inflammation.Studies indicate that the alcoholic extract acts by hindering the release of mediators of late-phase mediators e.g.prostaglandin, while the aqueous extracts blocks the mediators released in the early phase (i.e.bradykinin, serotonin and histamine), as well as mediators released in the later phase e.g.. prostaglandin [26].

B. baluchistanicais is a popular species found in Pakistan (Balochistan).This plant is reported in folklore pharmacopeias for its different medicinal uses.Decoction of roots is used against cough and internal injury of livestock and human beings.Two new alkaloids (pakistanamine and pakistanine)

and a new phenolic bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloid, (+)-baluchistine, have been isolated from B. baluchistanica [35].


ANTIOXIDANT ACTIVITIES

Aqueous and ethanolic extracts of roots of B. aristata roots have been studied for their antioxidant potential, and results obtained showed that they decreased oxidative stress [45].In addition, aqueous and methanolic extracts of the aerial parts of B. aristata, significantly improved antioxidant status in CCl 4induced liver injury [61].

The antioxidant properties of the fruits of B. lycium have also been studied, with respect to DPPH radical scavenging potential of its phytochemicals [62].These compounds include, 4, 4 dimethyl hexadeca 3-ol, berberine, β-sitosterol, 3-[4-(6methyl butyl) phenyl] propan-1-ol and butyl -3hydroxypropyl phthalate.


ANTICANCER ACTIVITIES

Methanolic extract of the stem of B. aristata was screened for anticancer potential against human colon cancer cell line and found to be effective.

The extract also showed concentrationdependent inhibition of HT29 cells.Indeed, berberine, an alkaloid isolated from the plant B. aristata, has been reported to significantly inhibit carcinogenesis induced by 20-methylcholanthrene or nitrosodiethylamine, in a dosedependent manner in small animals [63].


WOUND HEALING PROPERTIES

Root extracts of B. lycium have been studied in Swiss Wistar rats for their wound-healing potential.Methanolic and aqueous extracts of the plant roots were examined using incision, excision and dead wound space models of wound repair.Both extracts increased the area of epithelization and also showed increase in breaking potency.In aqueous extract-treated group, moderate collagen deposition, fibroblasts and macrophages were found, whereas a significant increase in collagen deposition with lesser macrophages and fibroblasts were observed in methanol extract-treated group.A significant increase in dry weight and hydroxyproline content of granulation tissue was also observed.It was shown that methanolic extract was more effective than the aqueous extract [64].


Pakistani perspective

The altitudes in Pakistan range from 0 to 8611 m, with a unique geography rich in floral diversity.Therefore the public interest is focused on indigenous plants and these medicinal plants have great value for scientists like ethnobotanists, anthropologists, pharmaceutical chemists, and physicians [2].Pakistan has more than 6,000 species of valuable medicinal plants [73].It is one of the leading countries which export medicinal plants to international markets [74].The medicinal plants are mostly collected by untrained hands, and their identification and storage depends on inherited knowledge from elders.Some plant species are considered for a specific disease and illness, while some have mixed usage.In many cases, closely related species to the desired one, are collected and sold under one name, leading to nonachievement of the desired results.Recent reports indicate only 14 species of Berberis in Pakistan which contradicts the earlier figure of 19 species.A trained plant taxonomist and good herbaria are necessary for identification and collection of desired plant species but their numbers are decreasing worldwide especially in Pakistan [5,64].


CONCLUSION

The actual number of Berberis species could be more than those discovered so far.Therefore, conservation strategies are needed for these medicinal plants.Trained plant taxonomists and good herbaria are necessary for identification and collection of desired plant species.Berberis species are rich sources of phytonutrients and have important pharmacological properties such as anti-cancer, antibacterial, anti-viral, antidaibetic, antioxidant, cholesterol-lowering and anti-hypertensive potential (table 3).A good number of phytochemical and pharmacological studies in Pakistan have been carried out on B. aristata, followed by B. vulgaris and B. lycium.Studies reported from Western countries mainly emphasized the chemistry of the different Berberis plants and isolation of new lead compounds.In view of their bioactive compounds the development and discovery of new activities in related species are very important.

Phytochemical and pharmacological studies (Table 1 and 2) of the genus Berberis have received more interest in the recent past.These include investigation of its potential towards cardiovascular, hepato-protective, anti-microbial and anti-cancer activities.Berberis species from Pakistan are not well investigated for anti-cancer and anti-diabetic potential.Further research should be focused on human cell culture systems to elucidate the anti-cancer potential and antidiabetes activities of the species from this genus.


DECLARATIONS

Figure 1 :
1
Figure 1: Major chemical constituents of different species of the genus Berberis


Table 1 : Photochemistry of Berberis plants No Botanical Name The compounds isolated Parts used ReferencesTable 1 :
11
Photochemistry of Berberis plants (continued)
NoBotanical NameThe compounds isolatedParts usedReferences13B. chitriaAlkaloids named chitrian A, B, C,RootsAporphine base-o-methyl corydine N-Hussaini andoxide, Berbamine, Berbamunine,Shoeb, [36]Berberine, Berlambine, Cetyl alcohol,Columbamine, Dihydro kaempferol,Dihydropalmitine N-oxid, Glucose,fructose and rhamnose,Hentriacontane, Hydroxyacanthine,Jatrorrhizine, Lambertine, Linoleicacids, Oleic acids, Oxyacanthine,Palmitic, Palmitine, Palmitine,Quercetin, Steric acids, Triacontan,Trimethoxyl dibenzo-quinoliziaiumchloride, Umbellatine, Yuziphine, β-sitosterol

Table 2 :
2
Major alkaloids present in species belonging to the genus Berberis
S/no.AlkaloidSpeciesReference1BerberineB. aristata, B. lycium, B. vulgaris, B. chitria, B.Rashmi et al [34]corearia,B. umbellata, B. pseudumbellata, B. jaeschkeana,B. waziristanica, Berberis brevissima2BerbamineB. aristata, B. vulgaris, B. coriaria, B. jaeschkeana,Rashmi et al [34]B. pachycantha, B. brandisiana, B. chitria3PalmatineB. aristata, B. lycium, B. vulgaris, B. chitria, B.Rashmi et al [46]; Bhardwajjaeschkeanaand Kaushik [11]4ColumbamineB. vulgaris, B. chitriaHussaini and Shoeb [38]5JatrorrhizineB. aristata, B. lycium, B. vulgaris, B. chitria, B.Rashmi et al [46]pachycantha,B. vulgaris6OxyacanthineB. aristata, B. chitria, B. coriaria, B. pachycantha, B.Rashmi et al [46];pseudoumbellata,

Table 3 :
3
Ethnomedicinal claims of Berberis species
S/N BotanicalLocal NameEthnomedicinal uses*nameRSe FSt BW Fr DeReference1. B. aitchisonii Kwary+--++-+ -Has Activity against carrageenanKüpeli et aland serotonin-induced hind paw[65]oedema,aceticacid-inducedincreased vascular permeability,castor oil-induced diarrhea andFreund's complete adjuvant-inducedarthritis models.2. B. vulgarisZarlog/+--++-+ +Used to heal internal injuries in manTor kwaray/and cattle. For the relief of jointTantaquidgeonZarch/Zralgpain. Used the roots decoction for, [66]athe cure of internal injuries and forthe removal of kidney stones. UsedChaudhary etfor sore throat and fever. Poultice ofal [67]pounded root or bark used for sorethroat.Coldandcompounddecoctions are taken in fever. Rootsare boiled in water and decoction isused in both human and cattle forthe treatment of internal injuries andalso used for tanning skin.3. B.Shugloo----+++ -Leaves decoction is useful inKhan et al [5]brandisianadysentery and sore throat. Root andstem bark is tonic and is frequentlyutilized for healing of wounds andarthritis.4. B.Zeyar largy +--+----Antidiabetic and antimicrobialAli et al [58]brevissimaactivities.5. B.Shin zaralga ----+-+ +Traditionally used as a gargle forSingh et al [30]calliobotryspharyngitis for the relief of intestinalcolic.6. B. aristata Kingore/Dar+---+-+ +Anti-microbial, anti-pyretic, anti-Küpeli etu haldhihepatotoxic,anti-hyperglycaemic,al [65]anti-lipidemic, anti-cancer, and anti-oxidant agent. Useful in thetreatmentofgynaecologicalBhattacharjeedisorders, diarrhoea, haemorrhoids,et al [68]osteoporosis, HIV-AIDS, diabetes,ear and eye infections, jaundice,wound healing, malarial fever andskin diseases. Root extract anddecoction is used for eye disorders.The decoction of the root of thisplant is used in Piles, gastricdisorders and other allied complaint.Used in snake and scorpion bite.Extract of root with butter used forthe treatment of bleeding piles.7. B.Jaeschke's++----+ -Used in Eye trouble, fever, stomachSingh et al [30]Jaeschkean/kaymalidisorders, skin diseases, bloodapurifier, astringent, diuretic, jaundiceGaur et al [69]and menorrhea. Root extract iscommonly, used as an astringent,diuretic,bloodpurifierandalternative. It is also used in eyedisorders, menorrhea, jaundice andskin diseases by the local tribes.8. B. lyciumSpeen++++ -+-+Antibacterial,anticarcinogenic,Jee et al [70]Kwaraycarminativefebrifugeandophthalmic. Fruit is used medicinallyfor stomachache. Fruits are used ascoagulant.

Table 3 :
3
Ethnomedicinal claims of Berberis species (continued)
S/N BotanicalLocal NameEthnomedicinal uses*nameRSe FSt BW Fr DeReference9. B.Kishmal+--++---Used for external and internalKhan andorthobotryswounds, infections, jaundice, piles,Khatoon [64]liver problems, kidney stone, swellings, sore throat, diabetes, bleeding, leucorrhoea, uterineAkhtar et al [71]tumors and its related problems.The extract of stem and root barkhas been used in stomach ulcersand other related problems.10. B.Karpa+-----+ -Traditionally used to treat stomachSingh et al [30]pachyacanttrouble, fever and dyeha11. B.KalaAntidiabetic and antimicrobialAli et al [58]parkerianaSimblooactivities.12. B.Kashmal/kw+---+++ -Traditionally used as astringent,Singh et al [30]pseudumbelaraidiuretic and as cure for jaundice,lataIntestinal disorders, eye trouble,oxytocic and throat ache.13. B. ulicinaGorse+---+---Against ringworm. cholagogue,Khare [72]Barberryantidiarrhoeal, stomachic, laxative,Diaphoretic, antipyretic, antiseptic.Used externally in opthalmia,conjunctivitis, ulcers, sores, swollengums.Have Anti-inflammatory,hypoglycaemic, hypotensive,antiamoebic, anticoagulant,antibacterial activities.Bark used in liver complaints,diarrhoea, dysentery, cholera,gastric disorders enlargement ofspleen and for regulatingmetabolism.Berries are used as antiscorbuticand laxative.
*R (Roots), Se (Seeds), F (Flower), St (Stem), B (Bark), L (Leaves), W (Whole plant), Fr (Fruit), D (Decoction)

Trop J Pharm Res, September 2016; 15(9): 2050
Conflict of InterestNo conflict of interest associated with this work.Contribution of AuthorsThe authors declare that this work was done by the authors named in this article and all liabilities pertaining to claims relating to the content of this article will be borne by them.ZKS conceived the study.IK and SN drafted the manuscript.MA and IK revised the manuscript.All the authors read approved the manuscript.
Identification and traditional uses of some common medicinal plants in Ezinihitte Mbaise LGA, of Imo State. C Nwachukwu, C Umeh, I Kalu, Report Opin. 212010

Medicinal plants of Udigram. H Sher, A Midrarullah, F H Khan, S A , Pak. J. Forest. 532003

Synergistic antibacterial effect of honey and Herba Ocimi Basilici against some bacterial pathogens. A T Khalil, I Khan, K Ahmad, Journal of Traditional Chinese Medicine. 332013

Phytotherapeutic claims about euphorbeaceous plants belonging to Pakistan; an ethnomedicinal review. A T Khalil, Z K Shinwari, M Qaiser, K B Marwat, Pak. J. Bot. 462014

A review on Berberis species reported from Gilgit-Baltistan and Central Karakoram National Park. T Khan, I A Khan, A Rehman, Pakistan. Journal of Medicinal Plants. 22014

Revision of the family Berberidaceae of India: 1. R Rao, T Husain, B Dutt, A Garg, Rheedea. 81998

A pictorial guide to Medicinal Plants of Pakistan. Z Shinwari, T Watanabe, M Rehman, T Youshikawa, 2006KUSTKohat, Pakistan

Medicinal and other useful plants of District Swat. Z K Shinwari, A A Khan, T Nakaike, Nsh Kyōkai, Pakistan. ZK Shinwari. 2003

Status of medicinal plants in Pakistani Hindukush Himalayas. Z Shinwari, S Gilani, M Kohjoma, T Nakaike, Proceedings of Nepal-Japan Joint Symposium on Conservation and utilization of Himalayan Med. Nepal-Japan Joint Symposium on Conservation and utilization of Himalayan Med2000

A review on biological and chemical diversity in Berberis (Berberidaceae). S Srivastava, M Srivastava, A Misra, 2015

Phytochemical and pharmacological studies in genus Berberis. D Bhardwaj, N Kaushik, Phytochemistry reviews. 112012

Functional dyeing of wool with natural dye extracted from Berberis vulgaris wood and Rumex hymenosepolus root as biomordant. A Haji, Iran. J. Chem. Chem. Eng. 292010

review on the chemical and pharmacological aspects of genus Berberis. M Ikram, Plant Med. 1975

Berberis alkaloids. A Karimov, Chemistry of natural compounds. 291993

The isoindolobenzazepine alkaloids. E Valencia, I Weiss, S Firdous, Tetrahedron. 401984

Quantitative estimation of berberine in roots of different provenances of Berberis aristata DC by HPLC and study of their antifungal properties. A Rajasekaran, R Pokhriyal, Y Singh, Pharmacognosy Magazine. 53552009

Pachycanthine: A new isoquinoline alkaloid and its antihepatotoxic activity from Berberis pachycantha Koehne. B Ahmed, M H Masoodi, S Khan, Indian journal of chemistry. Section B, Organic including medicinal. 479452008

Biogenetic relationships between lignans and alkaloids in Berberis Khan et al. R Torres, F Dellemonache, G Marinibettolo, Trop J Pharm Res. 159September 2016. 1979Planta Medica

Berberis alkaloids XXXVI. Turcomanidine-A new alkaloid from Berberis turcomanica. I Khamidov, S Aripova, M Telezhenetskaya, Chemistry of natural compounds. 321996

Berberis alkaloids. XXXVII. Investigation of the alkaloids ofB. oblongata andB. integerrima. Crystal structure of 8-trichloromethyldihydroberberine. I Khamidov, B Tashkhodzhaev, S Aripova, Chemistry of natural compounds. 321996

Alkaloids of some species of the genusBerberis introduced into the Crimea. L Gorval, V Grishkovets, Chemistry of natural compounds. 351999

Polyphenolic constituents of the flowers of Berberis aristata. R Sivakumar, Kamachandran Nair, A , Journal of the Indian Chemical Society. 681991

Comparative studies on the nutritive and anti-nutritive properties of fruits in selected Berberis species of West Himalaya. H C Andola, R S Rawal, I D Bhatt, India. Food Research International. 442011

Variations of berberine contents in Berberis pseudumbellata: A high value medicinal shrub of west Himalaya. H C Andola, R Rawal, M Rawat, India. Medicinal Plants-International Journal of Phytomedicines and Related Industries. 22010

Berberine suppresses the TPA-induced MMP-1 and MMP-9 expressions through the inhibition of PKC-α in breast cancer cells. S Kim, J Han, S K Lee, Journal of Surgical Research. 1762012

Ethnobotanical studies on Berberis aristata DC. root extracts. M Shahid, T Rahim, A Shahzad, African Journal of Biotechnology. 82009

Alkaloids: nature's curse or blessing?. M Hesse, 2002Wiley-VCH

Tertiary dihydroprotoberberine alkaloids of Berberis lycium. G Miana, Phytochemistry. 1973

Hypoglycemic effect of methanolic extract of Berberis aristata DC stem on normal and streptozotocin induced diabetic rats. N K Upwar, R Patel, N Waseem, N K Mahobia, Int J Pharm Pharm Sci. 32011

Diversity, indigenous uses and conservation prioritization of medicinal plants in Lahaul valley, proposed Cold Desert Biosphere Reserve. A Singh, M Lal, S Samant, India. International Journal of Biodiversity Science & Management. 52009

. U L Tiwari, Singh Adhikari, B , Berberis rawatii sp. nov.(Berberidaceae) from India. Nordic Journal of Botany. 292011

Kalashine, a novel type aporphine-benzylisoquinoline alkaloid. S F Hussain, M Shamma, Tetrahedron Letters. 211980

Berbamine 2'-β-N-oxide, a New Bisbenzylisoquinoline from Berberis brandisiana. S F Hussain, M T Siddiqui, L Khan, Journal of Natural Products. 491986

The genus Berberis linn.: A review. A R Rashmi, J Pant, Pharmacognosy Reviews. 22008

Screening of antibacterial activity of four medicinal plants of Balochistan-Pakistan. S A Kakar, R B Tareen, M A Kakar, Pak. J. Bot. 442012

Studies on the constituents of Berberis waziristanica and cd studies of chiral metal complexes. H Ahmed, 1992KarachiUniversity of Karachi

Isolation, structure elucidation and enzyme inhibition studies of a new hydroxy ester and other compounds from Berberis jaeschkeana Schneid stem. M Alamzeb, M R Khan, Mamoon-Ur-Rashid , Natural product research. 2015

Isoquinoline derived alkaloids from Berberis chitria. F A Hussaini, A Shoeb, Phytochemistry. 246331985

selection of prime ayurvedic plant drugs. S Dev, 2006

Rasont-a traditional crude drug prepared from Berberis sp. and its uses. A Rajasekaran, N Kumar, Indian J Tradit Know. 82009

Berbamine derivatives: a novel class of compounds for anti-leukemia activity. J Xie, T Ma, Y Gu, European journal of medicinal chemistry. 442009

Evaluation of antioxidant activities and phenolic content of Berberis vulgaris L. and Berberis croatica Horvat. M Z Končić, D Kremer, K Karlović, I Kosalec, Food and chemical toxicology. 482010

Study of the hypotensive action of berbamine, an alkaloid isolated from Berberis lycium. I Khan, A Qayum, Z Qureshi, Life sciences. 81969

Indigenous use and bio-efficacy of medicinal plants in the Rasuwa District, Central Nepal. Y Uprety, H Asselin, E K Boon, Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine. 62010

Antihyperglycemic and antioxidant effect of Berberis aristata root extract and its role in regulating carbohydrate metabolism in diabetic rats. J Singh, P Kakkar, Journal of ethnopharmacology. 1232009

Quantitative estimation of berberine in roots of different provenances of Berberis aristata DC by HPLC and study of their antifungal properties. P J Rashmi, A Rajasekaran, P Rekha, Yp S , Pharmacog Mag. 52009

Antifungal activity of some Himalayan medicinal plants and cultivated ornamental species. R S Sharma, V Mishra, R Singh, Fitoterapia. 792008

Medicinal plants from Riau Province, Sumatra, Indonesia. Part 2: antibacterial and antifungal activity. P W Grosvenor, A Supriono, D O Gray, Journal of ethnopharmacology. 451995

Berberis aristata: A review. S Komal, B Ranjan, C Neelam, Int J Res Ayvd Pharm. 22011

Antimicrobial effects of Indian medicinal plants against acne-inducing bacteria. G Kumar, K Jayaveera, C Kumar, Tropical Journal of Pharmaceutical Research. 62007

Use of berberine in treatment of giardiasis. S Gupte, American Journal of Diseases of Children. 1291975

Antimicrobial studies of stem of different Berberis species. M Singh, S Srivastava, A Rawat, Nat Prod Sci. 152009

Aqueous extract from different medicinal plants as anticoccidial, growth promotive and immunostimulant in broilers. H Nidaullah, F Durrani, S Ahmad, Journal of agricultural and biological science. 2010

Hypoglycaemic effect of Berberis aristata roots, aqueous and methanolic extracts in normal and alloxandiabetic rabbits. M S Akhtar, S M Sajid, M S Akhtar, M Ahmad, Pharmacologyonline. 22008

Effect of berberis lycium royle on lipid profile in alloxan induced diabetic rabbits. M Ahmed, A Alamgeer, T Sharif, Ethnobotanical leaflets. 42009. 2009

Antihyperglycemic effects of Berberis lyceum Royle in alloxan induced diabetic rats. M Gulfraz, G Qadir, F Nosheen, Z Parveen, Diabetologia croatica. 362007

Hypoglycaemic effect of Berberis vulgaris L. in normal and streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. N Meliani, Mea Dib, H Allali, B Tabti, Asian Pacific journal of tropical biomedicine. 12011

Antidiabetic and antimicrobial activities of fractions and compounds isolated from Berberis brevissima Jafri and Berberis parkeriana Schneid. S Ali, J Igoli, C Clements, Bangladesh Journal of Pharmacology. 82013

The antiinflammatory effects of Curcuma longa and Berberis aristata in endotoxin-induced uveitis in rabbits. S K Gupta, R Agarwal, S Srivastava, Investigative ophthalmology & visual science. 492008

Antioxidant and possible antiinflammatory potential of selected medicinal plants prescribed in the Indian traditional system of medicine. R Gacche, N Dhole, Pharmaceutical biology. 442006

Evaluation of the hepatoprotective and antioxidant effect of Berberis asiatica against experimentally induced liver injury in rats. B K Tiwari, R Khosa, International Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences. 22010

Phytochemical and antioxidant studies of Berberis lycium. S Sabir, K Tahir, N Rashid, Pakistan journal of pharmaceutical sciences. 262013

Cytotoxic Activity of Methanolic Extracts of Berberis aristata DC and Hemidesmus indicus R. Br. in MCF7 Cell Line. P M Mazumder, S Das, S Das, M K Das, Journal of Current Pharmaceutical Research. 12010

Ethno botanical studies on useful trees and shrubs of Haramosh and Bugrote valleys In Gilgit Notheren areas of Pakistan. S W Khan, S Khatoon, Pak J Bot. 392007

A comparative study on the anti-inflammatory, antinociceptive and antipyretic effects of isoquinoline alkaloids from the roots of Turkish Berberis species. E Küpeli, M Koşar, E Yeşilada, Khc Başer, Life sciences. 722002

Mohegan Medicinal Practices, Weather-Lore and Superstitions. G Tantaquidgeon, 192843SI-BAE Annual Report

Ethnobotanical uses of Herbaria II. R Chaudhary, H N Guha, A R Chaudhary, Dc P , J Eco Taxo Bot. 11980

. S Bhattacharjee, K Tiwari, R Majumdar, A Misra, Folklore medicine from district Kamrup (Assam). Bull Medic-Ethno-Bot Res. 11980

A survey of high altitude medicinal plants of Garhwal Himalaya. R Gaur, J Semwal, J Tiwari, Bull. Medicoethnobot. Res. 10241983. 1983

Taxo-ethnobotanical studies of the rural areas in district Rajouri (Jammu). V Jee, G Dar, P Kachroo, G Bhat, J. Econ. Taxon. Bot. 51984

Possible mechanism of cardiac depressant activity of Berberis orthobotrys roots in isolated rabbit heart. M Akhtar, Q Jabeen, S Bashir, Acta poloniae pharmaceutica. 712013

Indian medicinal plants: an illustrated dictionary. C P Khare, 2008Springer Science & Business Media

The ethnobotany of Chitral valley, Pakistan with particular reference to medicinal plants. H Ali, M Qaiser, Pak. J. Bot. 412009

Proximate and nutrient analysis of selected vegetable species: A case study of Karak region. J Hussain, A L Khan, N Rehman, Pakistan. African Journal of Biotechnology. 82009