Improvement of Teacher's Capability in Developing Christian Ethics of Elementary School Students


Uranus Zamili :uranuszamili87@gmail.com 
Institut Agama Kristen Negeri Tarutung
Indonesia

Improvement of Teacher's Capability in Developing Christian Ethics of Elementary School Students
Christian Religious Education Teachersforming Christian ethicselementary schools
Something that becomes a reality that often happens that Christian ethics has begun to disappear in millennials, especially in the world of education in this millennial era. Violation of Christian ethics is not only done by students, but even school principals and teachers do so. Not only those students who did it, but children have committed acts of violence that caused the death of a friend. Education in schools has lost the image of Christian ethics like this millennial era, becoming the delivery of knowledge, giving less formation of Christian ethics and the personality of children today. Forming Christian ethics is no longer an art that is based on heart and affection. What always happens is that it doesn't become a role model for children. has become a culture in schools by Christian religious education teachers and students without feeling sorry and compassion. Examples of elementary school students whose families are less well-off, their parents are only as peasants by their friends are used as material for their insults and humiliation so that the children suffer inward. Events like this are precisely in schools with religious backgrounds. These events indicate that ethics education is no longer the basis for the formation of Christian ethical education which is the main basis in the formation of ethics. Education of Christian ethics has been marginalized and forgotten only by pursuing a greater number of students and graduations on the national examination. So Christian Religious Education Teachers must shape the Christian ethics of children today so they do not save when they grow up or become adults.

Introduction

Christian ethics is a major factor in the formation of the nature and personality of Christian children. On the other hand, the process of physical development and Christian Ethics of Christian students is also influenced by the formation process by teachers in schools. Therefore, Christian students throughout their lives will always be influenced by teachers and schools. The Christian religious education teacher (PAK) is often referred to as tripusat in the developing of Christian Ethics.

In other words, the process of forming the Christian Ethics to the maximum does not only depend on how the Christian Ethics system in the school is run but also depends on the PAK teacher.


Christian Ethics

Christian Ethics has broad meaning and can be interpreted from the perspective of Christian Ethics. But in this paper Christian Ethics is meant only as a method to develop skills, values, habits and attitudes that are expected to make a person better and more beneficial to society, especially for the future of Christian students. Thus, Christian Ethics is the process of changing one's attitudes and behavior obtained through education.

According to the Law, education itself is interpreted as:

1. UU SISDIKNAS No. 2 of 1989: Education is a conscious effort to prepare students through guidance, teaching and training activities for their role in the future.


UU SISDIKNAS No. 20 of 2003:

Education is a conscious and planned effort to create an atmosphere of learning and learning process so that students actively develop their potential to have spiritual strength, self-control, personality, intelligence, and the skills needed by themselves and the community.

To achieve the above mentioned two things the teacher involvement is needed. The word teacher comes from the Greek word Rabbi. Based on this meaning teachers are expected to be able to educate and guide their students with the truth of God's Word according to regulations. Therefore, Christian Ethics is guidance by educators on the physical, spiritual and intellectual development of students or students so that they can form an ethical person in the future in accordance with the prevailing regulations in society.

In the teaching corridor, the word teaching is derived from the Greek language Pedagogy, a combination of paid (children) and agogos (guiding). That is why the term pedagogy can be interpreted as the science and art of teaching children. Based on this understanding the teacher's task in teaching Christian Ethics includes all forms of activities undertaken by the teacher so that the Christian Ethics taught can be owned by Christian students. As mentioned above, the function of Christian Ethics is as a solid foundation for every child in this case Christian students to change attitudes and behavior by practicing and learning not limited to the school environment so that even though school is finished will continue to learn things that are not available outside of school. This is important because students who are not Christian ethics are feared that they will not achieve the perfection of life. If the perfection of life is not achieved, it means that Christian Ethics has not produced encouraging results.


Purpose of the Establishment of Christian Ethics

The purpose of the formation of Christian Ethics in elementary school students is that they can be closer to God and put God first. By definition the purpose of establishing Christian Ethics is to:

1) Fostering Bible knowledge about Christian Ethics 2) Forming student skills in Christianity 3) Developing Christian mind 4) Formation of Christian personality in students 5) Self-servitude to God 6) Prepare students for life in the world and the hereafter 4.


Responsibilities of Teachers of Christian Religious Education in the Formation of Christian Ethics

Although the Christian Religious Education Teacher is not responsible for the physical maturity of Christian students, in the formation of Christian student personality, within ± 5 hours in the school the teacher greatly influences the ownership of the Christian Ethics. Schools in general are deliberately used as tools in the educational process (clothing, housing conditions, game equipment, books, props, etc.) for ownership of the Christian Ethics. The responsibility of the Christian Religious Education (PAK) teacher will be achieved through the Christian Ethics channel at school or the Christian Ethics channel outside the school (courses, study groups and so on). The role of the Christian Ethics pathway in schools is increasingly important, especially with regard to aspects of education and skills. Therefore, Christian Religious Education (PAK) teachers are expected to work together in supporting schools as centers of Christian Ethics education activities in schools.

The form of responsibility of Christian Religious Education Teachers (PAK) in the formation of Christian Ethics will be seen as:

1) The first experience of the students' childhood 2) Guarantor of the emotional life of students 3) Moral Christian Ethical Activities 4) Giving Christian social ethics. It is expected that when the above 4 things are done by teachers of Christian Religious Education: specifically in the educational process of the Christian religious institute, through teaching and learning process can instill an increase in the nation's ethical intelligence in values Christian ethics and belief in students and are related to issues of ethical growth and intelligence development of Christian children, namely the physical, psychological, intellectual, social, and mental-ethical aspects. In this paper, it will be explained that the improvement of Christian Religious Education teachers must have a strategic increase that is in accordance with the will and as an increase in the intelligence formation of ethics in order to increase the excitement in the process of forming intelligence and increase the improvement of students' achievements and provide encouragement and potential owned by students so as to grow his ability or confidence and understand the goals to be achieved in the future in the millennial era


Conclusions

The formation of Christian Ethics in elementary school students by Christian Religious Education teachers is emphasized in the process of changing Christian Ethics and the development of efficacy from previously unethical to ethical conditions, especially Christian Ethics. If this is done then the responsibility of Christian Religious Education teachers is maximized.

1 .
1TEACHERS Christian Religious Education becomes a facilitator to help students work on good habits and instill good character. 2. TEACHERS Christian Religious Education contributes to shaping Christian Ethics in the lives of students in society. 3. TEACHERS of Christian Religious Education become facilitators to train students in acquiring skills such as reading, writing, counting, drawing etc. in the corridor of ownership of Christian EthicsSo a Christian Religious Education Teacher can improve the ability to educate ethics because it is part of the national education goals to intellectualize the ethics of the nation's children and must be preparedAdvances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 414 


. Suyadi, Implementing Character Education. Suyadi, Implementing Character Education, (Yogyakarta: Mentari Reader, 2010)

R C Rev, Sproul, Ph.D, Christian Ethics and Attitudes (Gandum Mas. MalangRev. R. C. Sproul, Ph.D, Christian Ethics and Attitudes (Gandum Mas, Malang 2015)

Dr, M Samuel Kusuma, Th, Ethics of Christian theology. Hansei University, South KoreaDr. Samuel Kusuma, M. Th, Ethics of Christian theology (Hansei University, South Korea, 2017)

Kompas, pg 12 Water Eyes Teachers Unload Cheating UN Medan Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research. 414Kompas, Friday 27 April 2007. pg 12 Water Eyes Teachers Unload Cheating UN Medan Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 414