(c) At five weeks the organoids contain multiple pseudo-stratified VZ-like progenitor zones whose apical surfaces are identified by N-CADHERIN expression.

Each zone expresses dorsal telencephalic marker PAX6 in a broad VZ-like region, and is surrounded by a very narrow band of DCX-positive neurons that also express the deep layer subcortical projection neuron marker CTIP2. This patterning is consistent between "sister" organoids from a given differentiation experiment.

(d) At ten weeks of differentiation, cortical organoids from all 3 lines begin to express the intermediate progenitor cell (IPC) marker TBR2.


showing the length of individual NE and RG cells as well as the position of their nuclei. We used Imaris software to measure cell lengths. The length of the cell was defined as the distance between the point of apical contact of the cell and the tip of its basal process. The nucleus position was the maximum distance traveled by the nucleus along the length of the cell. For this value, we measured the distance Subramanian et al., 2016 between the point of apical contact of the cell and the farthest position of the nucleus on its basal side during interkinetic nuclear migration using Imaris software. (a) Scatter plots showing the length of individual NE cells as well as the position of their nuclei. Individual dots represent cell length of each of 38 cells and the position of their nuclei from 3 independent samples. Most of the nuclei travel almost the entire length of the NE cell during inter-kinetic nuclear migration. The mean cell length for NE cells was 70.95+10 um (S.D.) while the mean nucleus position for the NE cells was 51.26+13 um (S.D.). The error bars on the graph represent the S.E.M. (b) Scatter plots showing the length of individual RG cells as well as the position of their nuclei. Individual dots represent cell length of each of 12 cells and the position of their nuclei from 5 independent samples. The nuclei of RG cells only move a short distance from the apical surface during inter-kinetic nuclear migration. The mean cell length for RG cells was 156.6+32 um (S.D.) while the mean nucleus position for the NE cells was 58.82+19 um (S.D.). The error bars on the graph represent the S.E.M. Subramanian et al., 2016 Subramanian et al., 2016 Supplementary Figure 4: Characterization of cortical patterning in organoids (a) Cerebral organoids were generated from WT iPSCs derived from 3 healthy individuals. After five or ten weeks of differentiation, 10-20 organoids from each individual were sectioned and stained. This was repeated in 4-6 independent differentiation experiments for each line to determine the efficiency of differentiation (b).