Revisiting the Stratigraphy and Structure of the Faroe Islands Flood Basalts for Large-Scale CO 2 Storage in Basalt Reservoirs


Maria Ingunardóttir Rakul 0000-0002-8087-428X
Faroe Islandsin

Faroe Islandsin

Johannesen 
Faroe Islandsin

Faroe Islandsin

Jana Ólavsdóttir 
Faroe Islandsin

Lars Ole Boldreel 
Faroe Islandsin

| Óluva Eidesgaard 
Faroe Islandsin

| Kim Senger 
Faroe Islandsin

| Olivier Galland 
Faroe Islandsin

Revisiting the Stratigraphy and Structure of the Faroe Islands Flood Basalts for Large-Scale CO 2 Storage in Basalt Reservoirs
1A70CCD9E77AAF8719C4E19F3D4A08B010.1111/bre.70032Received: 18 October 2024 | Revised: 3 April 2025 | Accepted: 17 April 2025carbon capture and storagedata integrationFaroe Islands basalt groupgeological mappingNorth Atlantic Igneous Province
Comprehensive mapping of the stratigraphy and structures is essential when exploring basaltic reservoirs for CO 2 storage.A major task in analysing the storage potential of the reservoir is to bring all relevant geological data within a single framework for integration and joint interpretation.In this study, we illustrate how data integration facilitates an improved understanding of the geological evolution of the Faroe Islands, the North Atlantic Igneous Province, and how the data integration forms a foundation for future carbon capture and storage campaigns.We have integrated new and existing data including geological field observations, digital elevation models, digital outcrop models, lithological logs, seismic profiles, and bathymetry in a single, consistent, and quality-controlled toolbox.Two key findings are that (a) we have mapped stratigraphic markers in the central Faroe Islands across the islands, and there is no indication of large-scale strike-slip faults that offset the volcanic stratigraphy; (b) our analysis provides no clear onshore evidence of transfer zones in the Faroe Islands.We show that a high density of data and integration of data types across different vertical and horizontal scales is crucial for mapping the highly heterogeneous basaltic reservoir.

| Introduction

Carbon capture and storage (CCS) is crucial for reaching the climate goals of limiting global warming to 1.5°C compared to the pre-industrial level (Bui et al. 2018;IPCC 2023).In the pioneering Sleipner and Snøhvit CCS projects offshore Norway, CO 2 is injected into sandstone aquifers (e.g., Eiken et al. 2011).In such environments, the CO 2 reacts with the sandstone at time scales of hundreds to thousands of years before the carbon is trapped permanently in mineral form (Metz et al. 2005).A novel alternative is CCS in mafic (e.g., basalt; e.g., Matter et al. 2016;McGrail et al. 2011;Snaebjörnsdóttir et al. 2020) to ultramafic (e.g., peridotite (e.g., Kelemen and Matter 2008)) rocks, where CO 2 reacts with the mafic minerals and precipitates into carbonates at much shorter time scales (Oelkers et al. 2008).Recent results from the CarbFix pilot project in Iceland show promising results of injecting CO 2 into young basaltic rocks at relatively high temperatures, leading to carbonate precipitation within a month to years (Snaebjörnsdóttir et al. 2020).A key question is whether the promising results from the CarbFix project can be applied in other older basaltic formations worldwide.These often have lower porosity, a different chemical composition, and lower temperatures.Should this be the case, large basaltic geological provinces worldwide for example, North Atlantic Igneous Province (NAIP), Parana-Etendeka, Columbia River Basalt Group, Siberian Traps or the Deccan Traps, may become key sites for CCS, and so for global climate mitigation strategy (Millett et al. 2024;Self et al. 2014).

A large part of the North Atlantic Ocean hosts thick packages of basaltic rocks of the NAIP, emplaced in Palaeocene-Early Eocene during the opening of the northeast Atlantic (Saunders et al. 1997).The Faroe Islands are one of the very few locations where NAIP exposures are accessible onshore.They are collectively termed the Faroe Islands Basalt Group (FIBG) (Passey and Jolley 2009;Rasmussen andNoe-Nygaard 1969, 1970).The Faroe Islands are thus an ideal onshore laboratory for understanding the development of the NAIP, as well as its potential for storing CO 2 (Eidesgaard et al. 2023;Rosenqvist et al. 2023Rosenqvist et al. , 2024;;Walker, Holdsworth, Imber, et al. 2013).

Basalts are not conventional reservoir rocks, as their porosity and permeability distribution, and their reservoir potential are complex and often poorly constrained.However, recent studies have highlighted that many ancient volcanic rocks can make good reservoirs (e.g., Marins et al. 2022;Millett, Jerram, Manton, et al. 2021;Millett, Jerram, Planke, et al. 2021;Millett et al. 2024).Jerram (2002), Nelson et al. (2009) and recently Rosenqvist et al. (2023) identified several facies in the FIBG with contrasting reservoir properties.Additionally, Walker, Holdsworth, Imber, et al. (2013), Walker, Holdsworth, Armitage, et al. (2013) and Bamberg et al. (2023Bamberg et al. ( , 2022) ) have shown the impact of fault distribution and fault zone architecture on the porosity and permeability within the FIBG.Overall, studies have highlighted that the porosity and permeability of basalts are largely controlled by vesicle, fracture and fault, secondary mineralisation, the key types of volcanic facies and internal intrafacies variations (Jerram 2002;Millett et al. 2024;Rosenqvist et al. 2024;Single and Jerram 2004;Smeraglia et al. 2024;Walker, Holdsworth, Imber, et al. 2013).If such distributions can be mapped out at the reservoir scale, then a critical assessment of such units for CCS becomes viable.

Previous studies of the FIBG show variations in mapping the basalt stratigraphy, which result in disagreements on the stratigraphic and structural distributions of facies and fractures (Passey 2009;Passey and Jolley 2009;Rasmussen and Noe-Nygaard 1969).This has led to large uncertainties about the stratigraphic and structural framework of the Faroes archipelago.One example is the debated presence of a large-scale strikeslip fault in the fjord of Skopunarfjørður, which would vertically offset the stratigraphy by a few hundred meters (Passey 2009).The relevance of such a fault would have significant implications for the distribution of stratigraphic units and predicting the integrity of the sequences for CO 2 sequestration.Such a debate arises from the challenge of correlating basalt sequences across fjords (Passey 2009;Rasmussen and Noe-Nygaard 1969).Studies of the volcanic facies and architecture have played a key role in mapping and correlating basaltic sequences for the last two decades (Jerram 2002), and more recently 3D mapping (e.g., photogrammetric digital outcrop models) has proven to be an essential tool in volcanic settings (e.g., Greenfield et al. 2020;Rosenqvist et al. 2024;Vosgerau et al. 2016).

Our aim is to characterise the stratigraphic sequences and structural elements of the FIBG to constrain the distribution of potential reservoir zones.To improve the lateral correlation of basalt sequences across the archipelago, we created a novel 3-dimensional digital toolbox that integrates multiscale data, such as digitised geological maps, lithological logs acquired over more than 60 years combined with elevation data, digital outcrop models from photogrammetry, depth-converted seismic profiles, bathymetric data, and recent fieldwork observations in a single spatially coherent toolbox.Firstly, we illustrate the key relevance of the new multiscale 3D data toolbox for confident stratigraphic correlation of basalt sequences.Secondly, we revisit the stratigraphic and structural interpretations proposed in former work, with significant implications on the feasibility of the FIBG as a potential CO 2 reservoir.


| Geological Setting


| Regional Volcanic Stratigraphy

The FIBG is a > 6.5 km thick succession of subaerially extruded basaltic lava, covering almost the entire Faroese continental margin (e.g., Ólavsdóttir et al. 2015;Passey and Jolley 2009; Figure 1).The basalt erupted in the Palaeocene-Early Eocene as the northeast Atlantic Ocean opened.The FIBG is an important element of the extensive NAIP (e.g., Ólavsdóttir et al. 2019;Saunders et al. 1997; Figure 1A).

The FIBG includes seven formations which can be divided into two main sequences, pre-and syn-breakup.The pre-breakup sequence (Lopra and Beinisvørð formations) is related to basin development settings, while the syn-breakup sequence (Prestfjall-, Hvannhagi-, Sneis-, Malinstindur-and Enni formations) is more like mid-ocean ridge basalt (MORB), representing a new eruption event with more advanced lithospheric thinning (Larsen et al. 1999;Waagstein 1988).

The Lopra Formation (Figure 2) is a ~1.1 km thick unit dominated by hyaloclastites and volcaniclastic sandstones, which later have been intruded by basaltic sills or invasive lava (Ellis et al. 2002).The overlying Beinisvørð Formation (Figure 2) is 3250 m thick, consisting of laterally extensive sheet lobes, with interbedded volcanoclastic lithologies (Rasmussen and Noe-Nygaard 1969; Figure 1B).The top of the Beinisvørð


Summary

• A 3D toolbox including multiscale data has been developed, and proved vital for revising previous geological settings.

• Advanced correlation discards the presence of a major fault across Skopunarfjørður.

• Malinstindur-and Enni Formation have been affected by two inverted basins NE and SW of the archipelago.

• The study questions onshore evidence of NW-SE striking transfer zones.

• The stratigraphic and structural revision is crucial when identifying and evaluating potential CO 2 reservoirs.

Formation marks a hiatus in the volcanic activity, and this unconformity is referred to both as the A-horizon (Ólavsdóttir et al. 2021;Rasmussen and Noe-Nygaard 1969) and as the Beinisvørð Prestfjall Unconformity (BPU; Figure 2   often in sequences of flows up to 20 m thick.The stratigraphic marker Kvívík Beds, consisting of 0.5-1.5 m thick sandstone and conglomeratic beds, is found within the Malinstindur Formation, around 780 m above its base (Passey and Jolley 2009; Figure 2B).

The Sneis Formation, consisting of sandstone and conglomerate, lies on top of the Malinstindur Formation.The lowermost part of the Sneis Formation is characterised by a < 1 m thick volcaniclastic bed called the Sund Bed.The boundary between the Malinstindur Formation and the Sneis Formation (i.e., the Sund Bed) marks a disconformity named Malinstindur-Sneis Unconformity (MSU; Passey and Jolley 2009).The stratigraphic marker of MSU (Passey and Jolley 2009) is very similar to the C-horizon defined earlier by Rasmussen and Noe-Nygaard (1969).Passey and Jolley (2009) define the MSU at the base of the volcaniclastic Sund Bed, whereas Rasmussen and Noe-Nygaard (1969) define their C-horizon at the base of the aphyric lava flow overlying the Sund Bed.This means that the difference between the two stratigraphic markers should correspond to the thickness of the Sund Bed, which is less than a meter.

The Enni Formation has a presently exposed thickness that exceeds 900 m, but around 1 km has most likely been eroded from the top of the formation (Andersen et al. 2002;Jørgensen 2006;Waagstein et al. 2002) where the eroded material is seen as Pliocene to recent prograding system on the Faroese shelf area (Andersen et al. 2000;Ólavsdóttir et al. 2013;Ólavsdóttir and Ziska 2009).The flows are a mixture of compound-and simple flows (Passey and Bell 2007).Within the Enni Formation, the Argir Beds are a characteristic sedimentary sequence found on average 250 m above the base of the Enni Formation (between 180 and 320 m above; Passey and Jolley 2009; Figure 2).The thickness of the Argir Beds varies from 1 to 13 m, with an average thickness of 4 m (Ólavsdóttir et al. 2015;Passey 2009;Passey and Jolley 2009).


| Structural Setting

The morphology of the Faroe Platform is complex with three different highs: the Iceland-Faroe Ridge in the NW, the Fugloy Ridge in the NE, and the Munkagrunnur Ridge in the south (Ólavsdóttir et al. 2021;Walker et al. 2012;Waagstein 1988; Figure 3).The Fugloy Ridge and Munkagrunnur Ridge are antiformal folds related to tectonic compression active after emplacement of the FIBG (Boldreel and Andersen 1998).

In addition, two domal structures are located W and S of the Faroe Islands.Those two domal structures are inverted basins, the Beinta (W) and Kerstin (S) basins, inverted during the Miocene and Pliocene (Ólavsdóttir et al. 2021), respectively.These domal structures affect the modern geometry of the FIBG, resulting in a northeasterly dip in the south, an easterly dip in the central part, and a south-easterly dip in the northern part of the islands.The exposed parts of the FIBG have a dip varying from 1° to 20° (Rasmussen and Noe-Nygaard 1969), with the dip increasing toward the center of both the Beinta and Kerstin domal structures (Figure 3).

Southeast of the Faroe Islands lies the Faroe-Shetland Basin (Figure 3).Tectonic activity before, during, and after the opening of the NE Atlantic has resulted in NE-SW orientated basins and highs in the Faroe-Shetland Basin, disrupted by NW-SE trending lineaments (Ellis et al. 2002;Rumph et al. 1993).The nature and existence of those lineaments is a matter of discussion; one hypothesis interprets them as transfer zones defined as large linear features linked to deep crustal fractures, influencing the sediment distribution within the basin (Ellis et al. 2002(Ellis et al. , 2009;;Rumph et al. 1993).In contrast, Moy and Imber (2009) suggest that those lineaments are igneous intrusions, hydrothermal vent complexes, and/or faults related to the NE-SW orientated rift segments, but no large-scale tectonic structures.Assessing the presence, or not, of such structural lineaments is key for constraining the structure of the basalt sequence in the FIBG.

Onshore evidence of tectonic activity can be recognised in features like dykes, fractures and faults crosscutting the lava flows, where most of them are vertical to sub-vertical features (Bamberg et al. 2023;Rasmussen and Noe-Nygaard 1970;Walker, Holdsworth, Imber, et al. 2013;Walker et al. 2011).

The vertical displacement of the faults varies from less than 1 m to several meters, very few exceeding 20 m.The horizontal displacement of the faults varies from < 1 m up to 100 m (Rasmussen and Noe-Nygaard 1969;Walker et al. 2011).However, two faults have been interpreted to have horizontal displacements of up to 2.1 and 6.2 km, respectively (Bamberg et al. 2022;Passey 2009).


| Data and Methods


| Data Types

Data on various scales (cm to km) and with various resolutions were gathered, where necessary digitised and georeferenced to confidently map geological features of importance for evaluating a CO 2 reservoir.For this study, we have integrated digital elevation models (DEM), bathymetric data, 2D seismic reflection data, digital outcrop models, well data and xyz points of stratigraphic markers from previous reports and publications (Table 1; Figure 4).Each of those data types gives insights into different aspects when assessing a CO 2 reservoir, for example, the DEM allows us to do regional geological mapping and evaluate thicknesses, the DOM for meso-scale mapping of lava architecture and wells for detailed properties along 1D transects (Rosenqvist et al. 2024;Vosgerau et al. 2016).By integrating all these data in one 3D project within the Petrel data integration software, we get a suite of data overlapping and supplementing in resolution and coverage (Figure 5) forming the foundation of this multiscale structural and stratigraphical analysis of the geology of FIBG (Figure 1C).


| Digital Elevation Model

The DEM covers the topographic variations onshore and is computed from satellite data, the DEM offers a horizontal and vertical resolution of < 4 m (Table 1, Figure 4A; Faroese Environment Agency 2017).With the DEM we can follow the topographic features associated with the outcropping benches of lava flows.Benches are possible to follow along the islands, and allow mapping the lateral extent and geometry of the different lava flows (Figure 4A).They vary in exposure due to different levels of erosion, scree, and soil cover.


| Bathymetric Data

The bathymetric data cover the variations in depth to the seabed (Figure 4B) and are based on the interpolation of several single-beam measurements acquired by the Faroese research vessel Magnus Heinason.The bathymetric data have a maximum depth of 110 m and a horizontal resolution of approximately 100 m, depending on the coverage of the single-beam measurements.The data allow correlating the lava flows close to sea level from one island to the seabed and then onshore to another island.


| Seismic Reflection Data

The toolbox includes five high-resolution 2D seismic profiles (SAT2007-01 to −05) in Skopunarfjørður, totaling approximately 42 km length (Figure 1C), imaging the uppermost 300 m of the subsurface (Figure 4D).The seismic data were acquired in 2007 on behalf of Landsverk as part of the planning of a subsea tunnel between Streymoy and Sandoy.The data were acquired with a Sercel GI Gun as a seismic energy source and a 600 m long Hydroscience SeaMux streamer (Neish 2007).The data were later re-processed by applying a velocity model including the heterogeneity of the volcanic units (Petersen 2015).Since all data are spatially aligned in one single toolbox, depthconverted seismic profiles are used.All the seismic profiles show a strong reflector between 200 and 500 m below seabed, which is interpreted as a multiple of the seabed.Due to the depth conversion of the profiles, the multiple does not purely reflect the seabed geometry as it is seen in the time-domain profile (Petersen 2015).We use the seismic profiles to map the basaltic flows in the subsurface and their outcrop location at sea floor (Figure 4D).With the data integration of seismic data in m, bathymetric data, and the DEM, it is possible to connect the seismic interpretations of the subsurface to the interpretations of the bathymetric data and then to the DEM.


| Digital Outcrop Models

For the steep cliffs, we constructed DOMs using structure-frommotion photogrammetry (Figure 4C) using helicopter photos acquired by GEUS as input (DOM: Hesur and Sandoy; Vosgerau et al. 2011;Vosgerau et al. 2016) and images collected in the field with a DJI Mavic 2 pro drone (DOM: Kirkjubøður and Rókin).

The georeferenced DOMs are built in the Agisoft Metashape software (Metashape 2023) and interpreted using Lime software (Buckley et al. 2019;Senger et al. 2022).The detailed processing report of the DOMs including information about for example, number of images used, pixel size, location error and processing parameters, can be found in the Supporting Information S1.These DOMs have a ground point resolution from 1.3 to 15.4 cm/pixel (Table 1) and give detailed information of the vertical variation of flows as well as their lateral variation.The DOMs cannot be visualised within Petrel, but the interpretations of the flow boundaries are integrated into the Petrel toolbox.DOMs are a crucial tool to link high-resolution log data with highcoverage seismic data (Senger et al. 2022; Figure 5).


| Well Data

The position of the wells, well trajectories, and lithological well logs are imported into the toolbox, adding high-resolution data to the interpretations (Figure 1C).The ST1-7 wells were drilled as part of a recent tunnel project (Sandoy Subsea Tunnel project, between Streymoy and Sandoy), the first three in 2005 (ST1-3; Ólavstóttir 2005), the next three in 2007 (ST4-6; Højgaard 2007) and the last one in 2008 (ST-7; Heinesen et al. 2016).The eighth well is a 700 m deep scientific well (Glyvursnes-1 (GL-1)), which aimed to obtain better stratigraphic and petrophysical control of the upper part of FIBG (Japsen et al. 2005).


| Field Mapping From Previous Studies

We imported coordinates (xyz) of the different marker horizons, A, B, and C (Figure 4E; Rasmussen and Noe-Nygaard 1969) and Kvívík Beds, MSU and Argir Beds (Figure 4F; Passey and Jolley 2010) to the toolbox, and visualised these together with the DEM.In this way, we compared the different interpretations of the surfaces, considering the different definitions of the horizons.


| Petrel Toolbox and Data Integration

The data have been gathered into a single toolbox using Schlumberger's Petrel software (version 2019.1),where we can jointly visualise many data sets across a wide span of resolution.

The toolbox is in 3D and therefore ideal for obtaining a good  spatial and geometric impression of the data (Table 1; see also Video S1).All data are spatially aligned to WGS84 UTM 29 N.This makes it possible to conduct interpretations of the geological features across data types and scales.

We divide the data integration workflow into four steps:

1. Data gathering and, if necessary, digitising and georeferencing of the data.

2. All the different types of data are spatially integrated into the toolbox software such that they can be compared at the correct scale at different resolutions of inspection.

3. Interpretation of the data, and correlating interpretations across the data types for key surfaces.

4. Generation of results based on the interpretations, for example, interpolating maps of surfaces, calculating thickness or volume maps, building 3D geological models for visualisations and quantitative analyses.


| Mapping Within the Digital Toolbox

We mapped the basaltic units in two focus areas.In the Skopunarfjørður study area, the mapping is more focused and detailed than in the regional study area, where the mapping is broader and coarser (Figure 1).The purpose of the Skopunarfjørður study was to evaluate whether the integration of multiple data types across different scales improved the geological mapping, especially when working in combined onshore-offshore settings.To quantify the lateral extent of the basaltic units, seven stratigraphic markers (Horizon 1-5, MSU and Argir Beds) are defined (Table 2) and mapped in the study areas, of which MSU and Argir Beds are defined in previous literature (Passey and Jolley 2009) and Horizon 1 to 5 are used as reference horizons for this study only.In Figure 6 we describe the thickness and expression of the markers, and which data the mapping is based on.In the entire Skopunarfjørður study area, the surfaces of Argir Beds, Horizon 5, and MSU can be mapped and therefore they are key stratigraphic markers.

In the regional study area, we focused on the geometry of the MSU and the Argir Beds on a larger scale.The mapping of the MSU (corresponding to the previously called C-horizon; see Geological Settings for description) builds on xyz points collected in the field by Rasmussen and Noe-Nygaard (1969) and later digitised (Figure 4E).The mapping of the Argir Beds builds on xyz points gathered by Passey and Jolley (2010) (Figure 4F).The horizons between the xyz field points are mapped on the DEM, where the same horizon is followed along the terrain.This method offers the advantage of mapping the surfaces as polylines, which results in larger data amounts, less interpolation, and thereby more accurate surfaces instead of points as done in previous studies (Passey 2009;Passey and Varming 2010).Based on the mapped polylines, surfaces are generated with convergent normal interpolation, and when extrapolating surfaces, the convergent extrapolation trend is used.


| Results

This section presents data from two focus areas of the Faroe Islands: the detailed Skopunarfjørður study area and the broader regional study area (Figure 1B).


| Skopunarfjørður Study Area


| Key Stratigraphic Markers

Argir Beds: The type locality of Argir Beds is in Argir (Passey and Jolley 2009; Figure 1).From here, we can follow the Argir Beds north and south.The xyz points from Passey and Jolley (2010) are used as reference points on Streymoy (Figure 4F).The Argir Beds can be mapped as the base of a prominent outcropping lava flow in the DEM over large areas of Streymoy (Figures 7B  and 8).The extrapolation of the Argir Beds on the SW shore of Streymoy coincides offshore with a prominent feature in the bathymetric data in the seabed (Figure 7B).This feature, which is interpreted as an outcropping lava flow, is continuous across Skopunarfjørður.At the northeastern coast of Sandoy, the extrapolation of this bathymetric feature coincides with a volcaniclastic layer underlying a thick aphyric simple flow.This is similar to what we find in Kirkjubøður on Streymoy where the Argir Beds meet the shore (Figure 9), which is traced onshore and mapped on the DEM (Figure 7).The good correlation between the different data across the fjord strongly suggests that the Argir Beds are continuous from Streymoy to Sandoy (Figures 7 and 8).By correlating with the geometry of Horizon 2 situated lower in the stratigraphy, the Argir Beds horizon is traced on Sandoy on both sides of a north-south oriented valley, south of Skopun (Figure 8).On the SW-facing outcrop on Hestur, the Argir Beds are found between 340 and 360 m above the MSU (Figure 6A,C).

Horizon 5: Horizon 5 is close to the Argir Beds, and its mapping follows a very similar strategy to that of the mapping of the Argir Beds.On Streymoy, we mapped Horizon 5 on the DEM from the Kaldbaksbotnur area, Norðradalur area and toward the south along the southwestern shore of Streymoy (Figure 8), where it appears as a continuous outcropping lava flow in the steep topographic data (Figure 6I-K).Its southward extrapolation coincides with a bathymetric feature in Skopunarfjørður; note that this bathymetric feature is parallel to the bathymetric feature interpreted as corresponding to the Argir Beds, and is interpreted as an outcropping lava flow (Figure 7B).The bathymetric feature is intersected by two seismic profiles (SAT2007-04 and SAT2007-05).At the intersection points, between the seismic profiles (04 and 05 in Figure 1D) and the bathymetric feature (Figure 8), the seismic data exhibit reflectors gently dipping approximately NE (Figure 7D).Based on the interpretation of Horizon 5 on the DEM from Streymoy, the bathymetry and the seismic profiles in Skopunarfjørður, Horizon 5 is extrapolated to Hestur (Figure 7).The MSU horizon is found across the whole Skopunarfjørður study area, as well as in the regional study area (Figure 1).In Kaldbaksbotnur, an around 20 m thick prominent basalt flow defines the overlying unit of the unconformity, previously referred to as C-horizon flow (Rasmussen and Noe-Nygaard 1969).This aphyric lava flow has been interpreted as shallow intrusive by Passey and Jolley (2009).However, our field investigations show an irregular vesicular base, cooking a paleosoil, and no signs of columnar jointing or crosscutting relation even though it is exposed over a large distance (> 10 km), indicating that it is rather a typical simple flow (Figure 2D and Figure 6I).This laterally extensive and prominent lava flow facilitates surface mapping of the MSU around the northern part of the Skopunarfjørður study area on the DEM, but as previously described (Passey and Jolley 2009;Rasmussen and Noe-Nygaard 1969) it changes character to a less prominent flow as we move south from Kaldbaksbotnur, and thereby becomes more challenging to follow on the DEM.By extrapolation of the mapped horizon in and north of Kaldbaksbotnur, we estimate where the same horizon in Norðradalur is to be expected (Figure 10, Profile 1).The horizon is interpreted to be on a level of 95 m above sea level (m.a.s.l.) in  Norðradalur (Figure 6J), where we find from the base, aphyric vesicular basalt flow, a 25 cm thick volcaniclastic sediment bed and a plagioclase-phyric basalt flow.This interpretation is supported by the continuity of the upper marker horizons, Horizons 3 and 4 (Figure 10, Profile 1).

From Norðradalur, it is difficult to follow the MSU southward on the west coast of southern Streymoy.The more prominent Horizon 3 (Figure 6J), 75 m higher in the stratigraphy, is used to extrapolate the MSU south until it reaches the location of seismic profile SAT2007-02 (Figures 4D and 8).Note that even though those flows can be followed over large distances, there are lateral variations in their geometries that might impact log correlations and reservoir heterogeneity.

Given that we have constrained the surface of MSU based on seismic and bathymetry data from Skopunarfjørður, and DEM and DOM from Hestur and Streymoy, the 3-dimensional extrapolation of MSU to Sandoy allows us to define which flow MSU


| Horizons 1 to 4

Horizon 1: This horizon is expressed on the DOM on Hestur as the top surface of an eroded terrace (Figure 6B).This surface is eroded into the outcrop, likely an easily erodible volcaniclastic unit.The eroded unit is overlain by thin compound flow lobes of various thicknesses and lateral extents (Figure 6B).

The surface of Horizon 1 can be extended offshore to the bathymetric data, where we see a prominent, continuous bench across the fjord from Hestur to Sandoy (Figure 7B).It can be extended further onshore Sandoy and the SW-facing cliff on the DOM (Figure 6F), where it shows similar characteristics as on Hestur.In the NW part of the Sandoy outcrop, it is expressed as an eroded surface, underlaying compound flows of 2 to 4 m thickness and various lateral extents (Figure 6F).When moving further south on the Sandoy outcrop, the overlaying flow changes characteristics to a 10 m thick simple flow.

Horizon 2: This horizon is only found onshore Sandoy (Figure 6G).It is an easily erodible volcaniclastic bed, overlain by a basaltic flow with variable thickness.On the DOM, the flow overlying Horizon 2 has an undulating base and a relatively flat top, causing a thickness variation in the overlying flow from 13 m to 18 m (Figure 6G).We do not see any systematic thickness variation along the outcrop.Horizon 2 is one of the very few horizons that are visible on both sides of the north-south oriented valley south of Skopun (Figure 7B; Figure 8), which makes it very useful in order to map the geometry of the flow and surfaces from the western to the eastern side of the island.Horizon 2 is not visible on the bathymetric data and therefore it is not possible to trace it across the fjord of Skopunarfjørður to Hestur and Streymoy.

Horizon 3: This horizon is mapped on Streymoy, where it is wellexposed and laterally extensive, and easy to map on the DEM.It is located 70 to 80 m above MSU (Figure 6I,J).It is partly visible on the bathymetric data, outside of the village of Velbastaður (Figure 7A), but cannot be traced all across the fjords; therefore, it is not mapped on Hestur and Sandoy.

Horizon 4: Horizon 4 is an easy mappable surface found in the northern part of the Skopunarfjørður study area.It is found between 160 and 200 m above the MSU (Figure 6I).This horizon is well-exposed in and north of Kaldbaksbotnur; however, it is difficult to map in Norðradalur and southward (Figures 6J and 8).


| Log Correlation

Compared to previous studies, where the correlation of the lithological logs from wells was used to define the lateral extent of the stratigraphic markers, we now use the surface of the mapped stratigraphic marker (based on DEM, DOM, bathymetry and seismic) to correlate the wells.We correlate the four wells (ST-2, ST-4, ST-5 and GL-1) crossing Skopunarfjørður (Figures 5 and 11).The four wells were chosen as they are intersecting the same profile, and to avoid visual bias, field logs are excluded.The wells are flattened at the level of the mapped MSU from the present study.Thus, it shows how the lithology of the basalt flows corresponds to the mapped stratigraphic markers.The log correlation does not show any clear pattern of the lithology across the profile.This corresponds to the lateral variation we see in the DOM, where the basalt flows go from being compound flows to simple flows within the same outcrop.This indicates the high heterogeneity within volcanic regions, which complicates the prediction of, for instance, fluid flow and reservoir capacity, implying that multiscale data sets are essential in basaltic settings.


| Geological Map

The 3D continuous onshore-offshore geological map (Figure 12) is a result of the data integration of multiple datasets, and subsequent geological mapping of the stratigraphic markers.The map does not include the Skopunarfjørður Fault and the stratigraphic discontinuity across the fjord of Skopunarfjørður, which is in contrast to previous studies (Millett et al. 2017;Passey 2009).This means that the same stratigraphic level south of the fjord is now interpreted to be 200-300 m higher compared to previous studies (Millett et al. 2017;Passey 2009).This implies that the Malinstindur Formation has a larger degree of exposure onshore on Sandoy than previously thought, and the formations exposed on Sandoy have been buried deeper than previously suggested (Figure 12).Note that the new geological map corresponds very well to the one by Rasmussen andNoe-Nygaard (1969, 1970), as they did not interpret any fault in the fjord between Hestur and Sandoy.


| Regional Study Area


| MSU

Based on mapping in the regional study area (Figure 13A), we construct a surface of the MSU.The surface appears quite continuous across the area; the overall surface of MSU exhibits a dip direction varying from ENE on Sandoy, ESE in Kaldbaksbotnur, SE in Rituvík, and E on Viðoy (Figure 13B), with a general dip varying from 0° to 4° with a mean dip of 1.7°.No steps potentially associated with fault offsets are visible.


| Argir Beds

The surface of the base of Argir Beds shows similar trends of variation in dip direction and dip as the MSU surface (Figure 13B,C), varying from 0° to 4.5° with a mean dip of 1.9°.This surface is higher in the stratigraphy than the MSU; thus it is not as well-exposed and not present at all the same location as the MSU.This creates a gap in data points on northern Streymoy and Eysturoy (Figure 13A).Similarly to the surface of MSU, the surface of base Argir Beds appears continuous across the study area without significant stepping (Figure 13C).


| Thickness Map Between MSU and Argir Beds

The thickness map of MSU and Argir Beds shows thicknesses varying from 98 to 388 m with an average thickness of 262 m (Figure 13D) being thickest in the southwestern part of Streymoy and thinnest on Borðoy and Kunoy in the northeastern part of the study area.The thinnest part in the northeastern islands seems to have a slight N-S orientation, relatable to the fjord between Viðoy and Borðoy (Figures 1 and 13).


| Discussion


| Relevance of Multiscale Data Integration in the Context of CO 2 Storage in Basalts

The interpretation of the geological mapping described in this study would not be possible without data integration.For example, relevant well correlation between the mapped horizons across Skopunarfjørður would be highly challenging, if not impossible, without integrating both onshore (field, DEM and DOM) and offshore (bathymetry, seismic) data.The continuity The stratigraphic level of the mapped surface of Argir Beds (present study) is marked with an orange line.The level of the horizon at GL-1 is based on extrapolation of the surfaces since this is outside of the area with hard data.See details of the data on Table 1.

of these horizons would have been highly speculative, but the data integration provides solid evidence that these horizons are continuous.One example is the mapping of the MSU and Argir Beds in the regional study area section.The integration of field observations with continuous DEM onshore allowed considerably expanding the amount of data available for mapping these surfaces, leading to improved constrained interpolation of the thickness of the sequence between MSU and Argir Beds.

The correlation of the key MSU horizon across Skopunarfjørður in this study differs from that of Passey (2009), where the horizon correlation was based on lithological field logs, well logs, and field mapping.In the Passey ( 2009) study, characteristic lava flows and volcaniclastic beds were mapped out, especially focusing on correlating the volcaniclastic beds across the fjords.The present study benefits from access to a number of data sets with a greater spatial coverage (e.g., Figure 5), and additional information covering the fjords themselves, for example seismic and bathymetric data.This highlights the challenge of correlating logs over large stratigraphic coverage areas when such data is not available at the time.

Using this upscaling of data and coverage, the present study has helped to revise the mapping of these key horizons with a number of findings;

(1) we identified several volcaniclastic levels in the stratigraphy that can be potentially misinterpreted/correlated, (2) the new correlation shows that well ST-2 is below the MSU, and that well ST-5 is above the MSU (Figure 11), (3) it can be shown that some volcaniclastic layers can be laterally variable, and even discontinuous.Note that in the multiscale geological mapping, a volcaniclastic layer in well GL-1 coincides nicely with the NE extrapolation of the MSU (Figure 11), which helps to support this interpretation.This analysis shows the challenge of correlating somewhat isolated well data in large-scale volcanic terrains, without additional data to help constrain the interpretation.

The toolbox is an iterative tool for geological mapping in many different disciplines, and it can be further developed by doing lava flow characterisation on an even smaller scale, including faults, fractures, and dykes, as well as chemical data that can be integrated too.In addition to the integrated lithological logs, it is possible to integrate other already existing geophysical logs (Japsen et al. 2005) and for example, fracture frequency logs, which are of importance for evaluating parameters like porosity and permeability.Further, it can be used for reservoir modelling to, for instance, calculate the volume of the reservoir and understand the fluid migration of either supercritical CO 2 or CO 2 dissolved in water.


| New Constraints on Stratigraphy and Geological Structures


| The MSU on Streymoy

By mapping the lateral extensive horizons on this wide span of data, it is possible to trace paleo-surfaces and their geometry across fjords and valleys (Figure 13).We acknowledge that previous studies state the challenges in mapping the MSU or C-horizon on the SW coast of Streymoy (Rasmussen and Noe-Nygaard 1969).However, the digital 3D toolbox allows us to extrapolate and do structural measurements to evaluate the field observations.MSU, Horizons 3 and 4 interpreted from this study are compared to the former interpretation of the Chorizon of Rasmussen and Noe-Nygaard (1969) and the MSU of Passey (2009) (Profile 1, Figure 10).Arguments to support our distinct interpretation of the MSU horizon are the following.First, the Horizons 3 and 4, confidently mapped across valleys and hills from the DEM, indicate a relatively constant dip of 1.2° to 2.5° towards SE and even thickness.It is thus unlikely that the MSU, located slightly lower in the stratigraphy than Horizons 3 and 4, exhibits significant dip variations of 3.6° to 5.1° towards NE as inferred by Passey and Jolley (2010) in the area between Kaldbaksbotnur and Norðradalur (Profile 1 Figure 10).Thus, we suggest that the volcaniclastic layer interpreted as the MSU by Passey and Jolley (2010) corresponds to the Horizon 3 (Figure 6J).

The new interpretation of MSU is based on the mapping of the flow boundary in Kaldbaksbotnur and in Kollafjørður and this is then extrapolated southward to Norðradalur, where the interpreted MSU horizon reaches an elevation of 92 m.a.s.l.At around this altitude (99 m.a.s.l.; Figure 6J), we indeed found a volcaniclastic sandstone overlying an aphyric sheet lobe and underlying a plagioclase-phyric compound flow.Note that this is not the characteristic facies of the units under-and overlying MSU nor the C-horizon, which in Kaldbaksbotnur is defined as plagioclase-phyric basalt, volcanoclastic sandstone (Sund Bed) and an aphyric sheet lobe on the top (Passey and Jolley 2009;Rasmussen and Noe-Nygaard 1969).We suggest that differences in lithology from Kaldbaksbotnur to Norðradalur are due to lateral variations in the extent of the lava flows (Rosenqvist et al. 2024), which we also see in the DOMs, and potentially also different lava sources (Millett et al. 2017).


| The Skopunarfjørður "Fault"

The mapping using multiple data shows that the three main marker horizons (MSU, Horizon 5 and Argir Beds) have been mapped across the Skopunarfjørður study area (Figure 8).We see that the horizons are relatively continuous across the whole area including on the bathymetric data in the fjord of Skopunarfjørður.

Our bathymetric data show how the outcropping benches are continuous across those bathymetric lows, which contradicts Passey (2009) who suggested the fault to follow the bathymetric low in between Hestur and Sandoy.The tilt of the horizons in this region produces a bend in the horizons in Figure 7B, as they extend down to the base of the fjord and we thus infer that there is no dextral strike-slip fault as previously suggested by Passey (2009).Something that is supported by the lack of evidence of faulting in the seismic data across Skopunarfjørður.This conclusion implies that there is no vertical offset of 200-300 m on both sides of Skopunarfjørður, which changes the stratigraphic level of the units present to the south of the Skopunarfjørður fjord.

The Skopunarfjørður Fault presented by Passey (2009) has previously been described as a dextral strike-slip fault with a lateral offset of 4.2-6.2km.However, we see no signs of faulting neither in our seismic profiles nor in the bathymetric data.This is consistent with observations from magnetic data by Ziska et al. (2019), where no horizontal displacement of the magnetic anomalies is seen south of Vágoy and Mykines, where the Skopunarfjørður Fault also is proposed to be present (Passey 2009;Ziska et al. 2019).The possibility of a dextral displacement in the fjord was earlier questioned by Walker et al. (2011) since all faults with the same ESE-WNW orientations in the area are sinistral.In addition, Walker et al. (2011) observed that the maximum lateral displacement observed onshore is 80-100 m, which is very limited and also argues against a fault accommodating up to 6.2 km of lateral displacement.


| Regional Implications of the Method

The surface maps of MSU and Argir Beds show the same structures as the surface of the A-horizon mapped by Ólavsdóttir et al. (2021) based on seismic data over a much broader area than the study areas presented in this study.The dip and dip direction we computed in our study suggest that the surface of MSU and Argir Beds also are affected by the Beinta Dome W of the Faroe Islands and Kerstin Dome S of Suðuroy (Figure 13B,C) in a similar manner as the A-horizon (Ólavsdóttir et al. 2021).

Transfer zones offshore in the North Atlantic have previously been described (Ellis et al. 2002;Lamers and Carmichael 1999;Moy and Imber 2009;Rumph et al. 1993) and since then the question has been whether those zones are also present onshore Faroe Islands.Transfer zones are described as large linear features linked to deep crustal fractures (Lamers and Carmichael 1999;Rumph et al. 1993) and according to Ellis et al. (2009) they have an NW-SE orientation in the Faroe-Shetland area.Based on mapping of the stratigraphic thickness of the units onshore from lithological logs, Ellis et al. (2009) suggested that those transfer zones were present following the NW-SE trending fjords.Subsequently, Passey and Varming (2010) presented isopach maps of the thickness of the sequence between the surface of MSU and the Argir Beds.Their interpolated thickness map exhibited sharp thickness jumps, suggesting onshore evidence of influence by transfer zones.In contrast, the thickness map produced from our analysis does not display any thickening of the sequence just NE of the presented location of the transfer zone (Figure 13D), nor a NW-SE oriented minimal thickness running through the fjord between Streymoy and Eysturoy or Eysturoy and Kunoy (Figure 13D).This does not imply that internal volcaniclastic beds or lava flows have various thicknesses, but the full sequence between MSU and Argir Beds does not show signs of transfer zones.However, we see a thickness difference of more than 150 m in the central part of the study area compared to the islands in the NE.This can be due to the presence of the Streymoy Sill in this area, the intruding magma leading to the thickening of the sequences.Another reason can be that this part is closer to the source of the lava and therefore thicker; however, this needs to be studied further (Figure 13D).

There might be several reasons for these differing interpretations.To test this hypothesis, we calculated interpolated thickness maps of two surfaces of MSU, and after downsampling of observation points in one of the surfaces, the interpolated maps indeed display high variability.Finally, the lack of data offshore in the fjord compared to the data onshore leads to a strongly heterogeneous data distribution, which likely affects the interpolated maps too.

Furthermore, in the present study, the MSU and Argir Beds surfaces are based on polylines with a relatively evenly distributed amount of data points (Figure 13A).The thickness map produced from the two surfaces, MSU and Argir Beds (Figure 13D) does not show any clear evidence that the transfer zones are detectable onshore in the Faroe Islands.This highlights the relevance of the high density of data for robust calculation of interpolated maps.


| Implications for CO 2 Sequestration

The new mapping of the stratigraphy is in many aspects vital for investigations of potential carbon reservoirs.The ideal basaltic reservoir for CCS must fulfil several important criteria related to porosity, permeability, and chemistry (Snaebjörnsdóttir et al. 2020 and reference therin).It is crucial to have a solid base of the stratigraphy and structural mapping to evaluate those criteria in terms of knowing which formation and basalt flow to target, at which location and depth.

The exclusion of the Skopunarfjørður Fault largely impacts the evaluation of a potential large-scale CO 2 reservoir, as faults can either act as a permeable pathway increasing the injectivity and reservoir capacity (Ratouis et al. 2022;Snaebjörnsdóttir et al. 2018), or as a barrier for fluid flow; however, this is dependent on the fault zone architecture (Bense et al. 2013;Caine et al. 1996;Smeraglia et al. 2024;Walker, Holdsworth, Armitage, et al. 2013).In addition, the exclusion of the fault, which also excludes the vertical offset, implies that the units south of the previous strike-slip fault have been buried more than previously thought, also meaning that those units might be more altered, and therefore likely less reactive with CO 2 (Rosenqvist et al. 2023).

The study shows that the Beinta and Kersti domes have impacted the geometry of the entire FIBG.Therefore, it is possible to interpolate the geometry in the subsurface onshore and nearshore Faroe Islands when targeting potential reservoir zones.

In addition, the overall geometry (strike/dip) of the formations is expected to play a role in predicting the flow path of a CO 2 plume.The lithological units have different properties, like porosity and permeability, meaning that some units will act as a barrier and some as conduits (Eidesgaard et al. 2023;Millett et al. 2024;Rosenqvist et al. 2023Rosenqvist et al. , 2024)).This is expected to result in vertical anisotropy and a higher flow on the horizontal axes.When injecting a mixture of CO 2 and water, as they do in the CarbFix pilot, the difference in buoyancy will make the CO 2 plume sink (Ratouis et al. 2022).As the basaltic and volcaniclastic units are laterally extensive, we will expect the CO 2 plume to migrate down dip following the geometry of the formations (Figure 13B,C).To accurately assess the impact of the geological structures and geometry, actual injection tests and fluid simulations are required.


| Conclusions

In this study we focus on the Faroe Islands (part of the NAIP) and describe a toolbox that integrates new and old geological data from the Faroe Islands.This integration of a multiscale dataset in one consistent 3-dimensional toolbox allows for improving the stratigraphical and structural constraints on the Faroe Islands and this paper documents the added value of integrating geological and geophysical data to improve our geological understanding of regions, and the implications for CO 2 sequestration.The main conclusions of this study are the following:

-The multiscale data integration allowed significant revisions of previous interpretations based on one or two data types.This implies that using only one data source may be insufficient for sound geological interpretation and correlations.In particular, we show that the correlation between logs is extremely challenging without complementary data with wide coverage.

-The new toolbox allowed new structural interpretations in the Faroese Archipelago.We demonstrate that marker horizons appear continuous where large strike-slip faults were previously interpreted in Skopunarfjørður, strongly suggesting that this fault does not exist.

-We mapped the stratigraphic markers MSU and Argir Beds at higher resolution than previously undertaken, and the interpolated surfaces do not show linear NW-SE structures, questioning the evidence of the influence of the transfer zones on the geology onshore.This mapping also questions the presence of large transfer zones offshore along the fjords.

-The interpolated surfaces of the MSU and Argir Beds show the same structural features as those of the Ahorizon mapped on seismic and onshore data (Ólavsdóttir et al. 2021), which supports the relevance of our analysis, suggesting that the Malinstindur and Enni Formation have also been affected by the inversion of the Beinta and Kerstin Basin, NW and SW of the archipelago.

-The toolbox leads us to revise the local stratigraphy.In Norðradalur, the level of MSU is found at a lower level than the latest published literature, whereas on Sandoy, the MSU and Argir Beds are found at a higher level with respect to the latest published literature.

-The revision of the stratigraphy and structural aspects of the FIBG is crucial when exploring future reservoirs for CO 2 sequestration.

In conclusion, our study shows that multiscale data integration provides more robust geological interpretations and needs to be systematically considered when data are available.

FIGURE 1 |
1
FIGURE 1 | Location and geological setting of the Faroe Islands study area.(A) Outline of the North Atlantic Igneous Province (NAIP; modified from (Horni et al. 2017)).(B) Geological map of the Faroe Islands, also indicating the two study areas.(C) Overview of the different data sources included in this study.The seismic profiles are from the SAT2007 survey, with 5 profiles from SAT2007-01 to SAT2007-05.GL-1 = Glyvursnes-1.SeeTable 1 for data sources.


FIGURE 2 |
2
FIGURE 2 | Stratigraphic column and overall tectonic evolution of the study area.(A) The stratigraphic column from Rasmussen and Noe-Nygaard (1969).(B) The stratigraphic column by Passey and Jolley (2009).(C) Stratigraphic column of the mapped markers in the present study (not for scale).(D) Image of an outcrop at Kalbaksbotnur, showing the difference in the definition of the C-horizon relative to MSU (BPU = Beinisvørð Prestfjall Unconformity, Fm = Formation, HMU = Hvannhagi Malinstindur Unconformity, MSU = Malinstindur Sneis Unconformity, SEU = Sneis Enni Unconformity).


FIGURE 3 |
3
FIGURE 3 | Geological map of the Faroe Platform area and the Faroe-Shetland Basin (Source: Ellis et al. 2009; Ólavsdóttir et al. 2021; Ritchie et al. 2011).


FIGURE 4 |FIGURE 5 |
45
FIGURE 4 | Examples of the different types of data that are integrated in the digital toolbox used in this study, see Figure 1C for location of the data.(A) shows an example of the mapped outcropping lava flows on the DEM.(B) shows mapped outcropping lava flows on the seabed.(C) show an example of a DOM of a vertical cliff.(D) shows an example of a seismic line.(E, F) show previously gathered xyz-data.




On the DOM on Hestur, the thickness of the lava flow overlying Horizon 5 varies from 10 m in the SE part of the outcrop and up to around 30 m in the NW part (Figure6C,D).Horizon 5 is found 220 m above MSU on the NW part of the Hestur outcrop, and up to 240 m above the MSU in the SW part of the outcrop (Figure6C,D), which corresponds to the thickness increase of the flow overlaying MSU.On Sandoy, the flow overlying Horizon 5 varies in thickness between 5 and 10 m and is found around 180 m above MSU (Figure6G,H).Both the Argir Beds and Horizon 5 are very important key stratigraphic markers, as they show clear continuity across the fjord of Skopunarfjørður on the bathymetric data.Malinstindur Sneis Unconformity (MSU):




FIGURE 6 | Legend on next page.


FIGURE 6 |
6
FIGURE 6 | Examples of how the seven horizons are expressed on the DOM, DEM and in the field.The elevation of the horizons is annotated in metres above sea level.A, B, C, and D show the mapped horizons on cliffs of Hestur, while E, F, G, H show the mapped horizons on the cliffs of Sandoy.I and J are field photos showing the mapped horizons, and K showing the same horizons on the DEM.


FIGURE 7 |
7
FIGURE 7 | Integration of data and data interpretations.(A) Bathymetric data of Skopunarfjørður together with the DEM.(B) Interpretations of the bathymetric data and DEM.(C) Seismic profile SAT2007-04 and (D) Seismic profile including the interpretation of three of the marker horizons.


FIGURE 8 |
8
FIGURE 8 | Mapped horizons in the Skopunarfjørður study area.Profile 1-4 refers to profiles shown in Figures 10 and 11.


FIGURE 9 |
9
FIGURE 9 | DOMs showing how the Argir Beds looks at each side of the Skopunarfjørður fjord.(A, B) shows the sequence of Argir Beds, overlayed by a simple flow and a volcaniclastic bed on top, north of the Skopunarfjørður fjord.(C, D) show the corresponding sequence south of the fjord.See Figure 8 for locations of the DOMs.


FIGURE 10 |
10
FIGURE 10 | Three cross-sections within the Skopunarfjørður study area (Figrue 1) showing the stratigraphic markers of the present study as well as previous literature.The location of the profiles is shown in Figure 8. See Figure 13B,C for map view of MSU and Argir Beds, respectively.


FIGURE 11 |
11
FIGURE 11 | Log correlation of well logs across the Skopunarfjørður fjord.The logs are flattened at the mapped surface of MSU (present study) light blue line.The stratigraphic level of the mapped surface of Argir Beds (present study) is marked with an orange line.The level of the horizon at GL-1 is based on extrapolation of the surfaces since this is outside of the area with hard data.See details of the data on Table1.


FIGURE 12 |
12
FIGURE 12 | Three-dimensional geological map of the Skopunarfjørður study area.The flows are divided into units, based on the interpretation of the three main horizons, MSU, Horizon 5 and Argir Beds.Green arrow points to the north in the 3D plots.


FIGURE 13 |
13
FIGURE 13 | Maps of the two surfaces showing the geometry.(A) The polylines that the surfaces of MSU and Argir Beds are based on.(B) Surface map of MSU.(C) Surface map of Argir Beds.(D) Calculated thickness between MSU and Argir Beds, including previously interpreted transfer zones and faults (colour scale from Crameri et al. (2020); Transfer Zones from Ellis et al. (2009)).


TABLE 2 |
2
Definition of horizons.The colors on the left are used to identify the horizons throughout the study.The three key stratigraphic markers are shaded in grey.
Purpose• To correlate flows between Streymoy, seabed and Sandoy• Used as a regional marker all over study area• To correlate flows between Kaldbaksbotnur and westCoverageMappable in all types of data (DEM,DOM, bathymetry, seismic, wells)Mappable on DEM, DOM,bathymetry and seismicType localityArgirHesturDefinition• Base of the unit of Argir Bed• Base of a well-exposed basalt flow• Variable thickness of lava flow (10-30 m)HorizonArgir BedsHorizon 5



(Passey and Varming 2010).(2009)isbased on one profile of 29 lithological logs.The present study has demonstrated that correlation only based on logs can be questionable, due to locally emplaced lava flows and volcaniclastic sediment beds.Passey and Varming (2010)based the interpretations of transfer zones on NW-SE trending linear thinning in the isopach maps.However, the surface of MSU(Passey and Varming 2010)is based on 180 xyz points; the surface of Argir Beds(Passey and Varming 2010)is based on only 26 xyz points This large difference in the number of points makes it difficult to produce a reliable thickness map, and this might result in thinning only because of the difference in the number of points.Therefore, the interpolation of the surface in between the points might be biased.

AcknowledgementsData Availability StatementMost of the data will be made available on request from the corresponding author.The bathymetric data and seismic data are in the custody of the Faroese Environment Agency and Landsverk, respectively, and need additional requests for availability.This work was supported by Faroese Research Council (grant number 0461); Betri Stuðulgrunnur, Faroe Islands; and Føroyagrunnurin, Faroe Islands.This research has been supported by Faroese Research Council (grant number 0461); Betri Stuðulgrunnur, Faroe Islands; and Føroyagrunnurin, Faroe Islands.We acknowledge Schlumberger for an academic licence for the Petrel E&P Software suite.We acknowledge the SINDRI group and GEUS for collecting helicopter images of the digital outcrop models on which this research is based.We also acknowledge the Faroe Marine Research Institute and Faroese Environment Agency for giving access to bathymetric and digital elevation data, as well as Landsverk for access to well and seismic data.We would also like to thank Turid Hátún Madsen for fruitful discussions throughout the study.The manuscript greatly benefited from thorough and constructive reviews by Dougal Jerram and two anonymous reviewers.Atle Rotevatn is thanked for editorial handling of the manuscript.Conflicts of InterestThe authors declare no conflicts of interest.Peer ReviewThe peer review history for this article is available at https:// www.webof scien ce.com/ api/ gatew ay/ wos/ peer-review/ 10. 1111/ bre.70032 .Supporting InformationAdditional supporting information can be found online in the Supporting Information section.
Cenozoic Sediment Distribution and Tectonic Movements in the Faroe Region. M S Andersen, T Nielsen, A B Sørensen, L O Boldreel, A Kuijpers, 10.1016/S0921-8181(00)00011-4Global and Planetary Change. 243-42000

Cenozoic Evolution of the Faroe Platform: Comparing Denudation and Deposition. M S Andersen, A B Sørensen, L O Boldreel, T Nielsen, 10.1144/GSL.SP.2002.196.01.16Geological Society. 19612002Special Publications

Petrological Evolution and Mass Redistribution in Basaltic Fault Zones: An Example From the Faroe Islands, North Atlantic Igneous Province. B Bamberg, M K Reichow, R J Walker, A Ougier-Simonin, Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems. 24122023

Fluid-Driven Cyclic Reorganization in Shallow Basaltic Fault Zones. B Bamberg, R Walker, M Reichow, A Ougier-Simonin, Geosphere. 1852022

Fault Zone Hydrogeology. V Bense, T Gleeson, S Loveless, O Bour, J Scibek, 10.1016/j.earscirev.2013.09.008Earth-Science Reviews. 1272013

Tertiary Compressional Structures on the Faroe-Rockall Plateau in Relation to Northeast Atlantic Ridge-Push and Alpine Foreland Stresses. L Boldreel, M Andersen, 10.1016/S0040-1951(98)00231-5Tectonophysics. 3001-41998

LIME: Software for 3-D Visualization, Interpretation, and Communication of Virtual Geoscience Models. S J Buckley, K Ringdal, N Naumann, 10.1130/GES02002.1Geosphere. 1512019

Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS): The Way Forward. M Bui, C S Adjiman, A Bardow, Energy & Environmental Science. 1152018

Fault Zone Architecture and Permeability Structure. J S Caine, J P Evans, C B Forster, 10.1130/0091-7613(1996)024%3C1025:FZAAPS%3E2.3.CO;2024< 1025: FZAAP S> 2.3Geology. 24111996. 1996

The Misuse of Colour in Science Communication. F Crameri, G E Shephard, P J Heron, 10.1038/s41467-020-19160-7Nature Communications. 11154442020

Hydrocarbon-Bearing Volcanic Lava Deltas as Potential Reservoirs: A Case Study From the North Atlantic Igneous Province, Faroe-Shetland Basin. O R Eidesgaard, L O Boldreel, N H Schovsbo, J Olavsdottir, 10.1306/06272321031AAPG Bulletin. 107103210312023

Lessons Learned From 14 Years of CCS Operations: Sleipner, in Salah and Snøhvit. O Eiken, P Ringrose, C Hermanrud, B Nazarian, T A Torp, L Høier, 10.1016/j.egypro.2011.02.541Energy Procedia. 42011

The Stratigraphy, Environment of Eruption and Age of the Faroes Lava Group, NE Atlantic Ocean. D Ellis, B R Bell, D W Jolley, M O'callaghan, Geological Society. 19712002Special Publications

Transfer Zones: The Application of New Geological Information From the Faroe Islands Applied to the Offshore Exploration of Intra and Sub-Basalt Strata. D Ellis, S R Passey, D W Jolley, B R Bell, 10.1144/GSL.SP.2002.197.01.10Faroe Islands Exploration Conference: Proceedings of the 2nd Conference. 2009

FO_DSM_2017_FOTM_2M. Faroese Environment, Agency , 2017

The 3D Facies Architecture and Petrophysical Properties of Hyaloclastite Delta Deposits: An Integrated Photogrammetry and Petrophysical Study From Southern Iceland. L Greenfield, J M Millett, J Howell, Basin Research. 3252020

M V Heinesen, B Højgaard, U K Petersen, Sandoyartunnilin Composite Geological Report. 2016

The Sandoy Tunnel Core Descriptions. B Højgaard, 2007Faroese Geological SurveyCores 4-6

Regional Distribution of Volcanism Within the North Atlantic Igneous Province. J Á Horni, J R Hopper, A Blischke, 10.1144/SP447.18Geological Society. 44712017Special Publications

The Application of Outcrop Analogues in Geological Modelling: A Review, Present Status and Future Outlook. J A Howell, A W Martinius, T R Good, 10.1017/9781009157896Geological Society Special Publication. 38712014Cambridge University PressClimate Change 2021-The Physical Science Basis: Working Group I. to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

Preliminary Results From Investigations of Seismic and Petrophysical Properties of Faroes Basalts in the SeiFaBa Project. P Japsen, C Andersen, H L Andersen, 10.1144/0061461Petroleum Geology Conference Series. 612005Geological Society

The Regional Distribution of Zeolites in the Basalts of the Faroe Islands and the Significance of Zeolites as Palaeotemperature Indicators. D A Jerram, 10.34194/geusb.v9.4865GEUS Bulletin. 92002. 2006Volcanology and Facies Architecture of Flood Basalts

The Paleocene Deepwater Sandstone Play West of Shetland. P B Kelemen, J Matter, E Lamers, S Carmichael, 10.1144/0050645Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences-PNAS 105. the National Academy of Sciences-PNAS 105London2008. 199917Geological Society

Trans-Atlantic Correlation of the Palaeogene Volcanic Successions in the Faeroe Islands and East Greenland. L M Larsen, R Waagstein, A K Pedersen, M Storey ; Marins, G M , Y Parizek-Silva, J M Millett, 10.1144/gsjgs.156.6.1081Journal of the Geological Society. 15669501999. 2022Marine and Petroleum Geology

Rapid Carbon Mineralization for Permanent Disposal of Anthropogenic Carbon Dioxide Emissions. J M Matter, M Stute, S Ó Snaebjörnsdottir, 10.1126/science.aad8132Science. 35262912016

The Wallula Basalt Sequestration Pilot Project. B Mcgrail, F Spane, E Sullivan, D Bacon, G Hund, 10.1016/j.egypro.2011.02.557Energy Procedia. 42011

B Metz, O Davidson, H De Coninck, M Loos, L Meyer, IPCC Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage. Cambridge University Press2005

Geochemical Stratigraphy and Correlation Within Large Igneous Provinces: The Final Preserved Stages of the Faroe Islands Basalt Group. J Millett, M Hole, D Jolley, S Passey, 10.1016/j.lithos.2017.05.011Lithos. 2862017

The Rosebank Field, NE Atlantic: Volcanic Characterisation of an Inter-Lava Hydrocarbon Discovery. J M Millett, D A Jerram, B Manton, Basin Research. 3362021

Volcanic Facies Architecture of Early Bimodal Volcanism of the NW Deccan Traps: Volcanic Reservoirs of the Raageshwari Deep Gas Field. J M Millett, D A Jerram, S Planke, Basin Research. 3362021

Lava Flow-Hosted Reservoirs: A Review. J M Millett, L Rossetti, A Bischoff, 10.1144/SP547-2023-102Geological Society. 54712024Special Publications

A Critical Analysis of the Structure and Tectonic Significance of Rift-Oblique Lineaments ('Transfer Zones') in the Mesozoic-Cenozoic Succession of the Faroe-Shetland Basin, NE Atlantic Margin. D Moy, J Imber, 10.1144/0016-76492009-010Journal of the Geological Society. 16652009

Flood Basalt Facies from Borehole Data: Implications for Prospectivity and Volcanology in Volcanic Rifted Margins. J K Neish, C E Nelson, D A Jerram, R W Hobbs, Petroleum Geoscience. 1542007. 2009The Sandoy High Resolution Marine Seismic Survey

Mineral Carbonation of CO 2. E H Oelkers, S R Gislason, J Matter, 10.2113/gselements.4.5.333Elements. 452008

Seismic Stratigraphic Analysis of the Cenozoic Sediments in the NW Faroe Shetland Basin-Implications for Inherited Structural Control of Sediment Distribution. J Ólavsdóttir, M S Andersen, L O Boldreel, 10.1016/j.marpetgeo.2013.05.012Marine and Petroleum Geology. 462013

Reservoir Quality of Intrabasalt Volcaniclastic Units Onshore Faroe Islands, North Atlantic Igneous Province, Northeast Atlantic. J Ólavsdóttir, M S Andersen, L O Boldreel, 10.1306/08061412084AAPG Bulletin. 9932015

Seismic-Stratigraphic Constraints on the Age of the Faroe Islands Basalt Group, Faroe-Shetland Region, Northeast Atlantic Ocean. J Ólavsdóttir, M S Stoker, L O Boldreel, M S Andersen, Ó R Eidesgaard, 10.1111/bre.12348Basin Research. 3152019

Discovery of Two Sub-Volcanic Basins Below the North Atlantic Igneous Province (NAIP), Faroe Platform, NE Atlantic Ocean. J Ólavsdóttir, M S Stoker, M Riishuus, Ó R Eidesgaard, 10.1029/2020TC006589Tectonics. 4042021

Reservoir Quality Assessment of the Volcaniclastic Post-Basalt Sediments in the Faroese Area of the Faroe-Shetland Basin. J Ólavsdóttir, H Ziska, Faroe Islands Exploration Conference, Proceedings of the 2nd Conference. 2009

Recognition of a Faulted Basalt Lava Flow Sequence Through the Correlation of Stratigraphic Marker Units, Skopunarfjørður, Faroe Islands. J Ólavstóttir, S R Passey, Faroe Islands Exploration Conference: Proceedings of the 2nd Conference. Tórshavn2005. 2009Kjarnulýsingar í Samand við Møguliga Gerð av Undirsjóvartunli til Sandoyar (Jarðfeingi to Landsverk), Issue

Morphologies and Emplacement Mechanisms of the Lava Flows of the Faroe Islands Basalt Group. S R Passey, B R Bell, 10.1007/s00445-007-0125-6200770Faroe Islands, NE Atlantic OceanBulletin of Volcanology

A Revised Lithostratigraphic Nomenclature for the Palaeogene Faroe Islands Basalt Group, NE Atlantic Ocean. S R Passey, D W Jolley, Earth and Environmental Science Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. 993-42009

Surface Interpolation Within a Continental Flood Basalt Province: An Example From the Palaeogene Faroe Islands Basalt Group. S R Passey, D W Jolley ; Passey, S R , T Varming, 10.1016/j.jsg.2010.04.016Journal of Structural Geology. 3252010. 2010Volcaniclastic Deposits: Implications for Hydrocarbon Exploration-Final Report (SINDRI PROJECT: C46-39-01), Issue

U K Petersen, The Sandoy Subsea Tunnel: Seismic Processing Report. 2015

Beskrivelse til Geologisk Kort Over Faerøerne i Målestok 1: 50.000. J Rasmussen, A Noe-Nygaard, 10.34194/raekke1.v24.6778Danmarks Geologiske Undersøgelse I. Raekke. 241969

Geology of the Faeroe Islands (Pre-Quaternary). J Rasmussen, A Noe-Nygaard, 10.34194/raekke1.v25.6780Danmarks Geologiske Undersøgelse I. Raekke. 251970

Carbfix 2: A Transport Model of Long-Term CO 2 and H2S Injection Into Basaltic Rocks at Hellisheidi, SW-Iceland. T M Ratouis, S Ó Snaebjörnsdóttir, M J Voigt, 10.1016/j.ijggc.2022.103586International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control. 1142022

. J Ritchie, H Ziska, H Johnson, D Evans, RR/11/01Geology of the Faroe-Shetland Basin and Adjacent Areas BGS Research Report. 2011

Reservoir Properties and Reactivity of the Faroe Islands Basalt Group: Investigating the Potential for CO 2 Storage in the North Atlantic Igneous Province. M P Rosenqvist, M W Meakins, S Planke, 10.1016/j.ijggc.2023.103838RR/11/01International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control. 1232023Jarðfeingi Research Report

The Architecture of Basalt Reservoirs in the North Atlantic Igneous Province With Implications for Basalt Carbon Sequestration. M P Rosenqvist, J M Millett, S Planke, 10.1144/SP547-2023-96Geological Society. 54712024Special Publications

Structuring and Transfer Zones in the Faeroe Basin in a Regional Tectonic Context. Petroleum. B Rumph, C Reaves, V Orange, D Robinson, 10.1144/0040999Geology Conference Series. 41993Geological Society

Emplacement Characteristics, Time Scales, and Volcanic Gas Release Rates of Continental Flood Basalt Eruptions on Earth. A Saunders, J Fitton, A C Kerr, M Norry, R Kent ; Self, S , A Schmidt, T A Mather, 10.1130/2014.2505(16)Volcanism, Impacts, and Mass Extinctions: Causes and Effects. American Geophysical Union1997. 2014100The North Atlantic Igneous Province

The 3D Facies Architecture of Flood Basalt Provinces and Their Internal Heterogeneity: Examples From the Palaeogene Skye Lava Field. K Senger, P Betlem, T Birchall, 10.3997/1365-2397.fb2022021Journal of the Geological Society. 4032022. 2004Digitising Svalbard's Geology: The Festningen Digital Outcrop Model

Normal Fault Architecture, Evolution, and Deformation Mechanisms in Basalts, Húsavik, Iceland: Impact on Fluid Flow in Geothermal Reservoirs and Seismicity. L Smeraglia, A Billi, E Carminati, Journal of Structural Geology. 1882024

Carbon Dioxide Storage Through Mineral Carbonation. S Ó Snaebjörnsdóttir, B Sigfússon, C Marieni, D Goldberg, S R Gislason, E H Oelkers, 10.1038/s43017-019-0011-8Nature Reviews Earth and Environment. 122020

Palaeogene Volcaniclastic Sedimentary Units Interbedded With Basalt Lava Flows-A 3-D Photogeological Study of Cliff Sections From the Faroe Islands. S Ó Snaebjörnsdóttir, S Tómasdóttir, B Sigfússon, 10.1016/j.egypro.2018.07.019C46-55-01Energy Procedia. 1462018. 2011SINDRI ReportsThe Geology and Hydrology of the CarbFix2 Site, SW-Iceland

K/Ar and 39Ar/40Ar Whole-Rock Dating of Zeolite Facies Metamorphosed Flood Basalts: The Upper Paleocene Basalts of the Faroe Islands, NE Atlantic. H Vosgerau, S R Passey, K Svennevig, M N Strunck, D W Jolley ; Waagstein, R , P Guise, D Rex, R Walker, R E Holdsworth, J Imber, D R Faulkner, P J Armitage ; Walker, R J , R Holdsworth, J Imber, D Ellis, 10.1016/j.jsg.2013.03.00410. 1144/ GSL. SP. 2002. 197. 01. 09Greenland and the Faeroe Islands. London; LondonSpecial Publications2016. 2002. 2013. 2011436Journal of Structural Geology

Fault-Zone Evolution in Layered Basalt Sequences: A Case Study From the Faroe Islands, NE Atlantic Margin. R J Walker, R E Holdsworth, P J Armitage, D R Faulkner, R J Walker, R E Holdsworth, J Imber, D Ellis, 10.1130/B30512.1Bulletin. 4112013. 2012Geology

How Natural Remanent Magnetization of Basaltic Units Can Dominate the Reduced to Pole Magnetic Value: A Case Study From the Faroe Islands. H Ziska, P Williamson, Ó R Eidesgaard, 10.1111/1365-2478.12834Geophysical Prospecting. 6782019