Self-Realization of Risk of HIV Infection Among Young Men-Who-Have-Sex-with-Men in the Miami-Dade Area


BS; SamirHampton Ocon 
MD; Sabbag 

University of Miami Miller School of Medicine
MiamiFlorida


National Public Health Organization
AthensAttikiGreece


National Public Health Organization
AthensAttikiGreece


Athens Medical School, National and Kapodistrian
Byung Chul Chun, MD
University of Athens
AthensAttikiKorea


University College of Medicine
SeoulSeoul-t'ukpyolsiRepublic of Korea

Self-Realization of Risk of HIV Infection Among Young Men-Who-Have-Sex-with-Men in the Miami-Dade Area
Poster Abstracts • OFID 2019:6 (Suppl 2) • S595 Disclosures. All authors: No reported disclosures. 1630. Voluntary HIV Testing and Session: 163. Public Health Friday, October 4, 2019: 12:15 PM


Background. Vector-borne diseases are a public health problem in Colombia, an area that has become hyperendemic for dengue virus. This situation has been aggravated by the introduction of other arboviruses such as chikungunya and Zika in the last 3 years. Mobile health (mHealth) offers new strategies for strengthening healthcare and surveillance systems. A large number of mHealth tools are available; however, very few have been evaluated regarding usability and acceptability. This study aimed to evaluate the usability and acceptability of a mobile application, FeverDX, as a support tool in the management of patients with febrile syndrome and suspected vector-borne infection by general practitioners from Colombia.

Methods. The usability and acceptability of FeverDX were evaluated using the modified version of the Mobile Application Rating Scale (uMARS). The evaluation included aspects of content, user engagement, functionality, user-interface design, impact, and subjective quality.

Results. Between December 2016 and January 2017, a total of 20 general practitioners evaluated FeverDX. Seventy-five percent of the evaluators reported being aware of the Colombian Ministry of Health guidelines for diagnosis and management of arboviruses. 80% of evaluators partially or completely agreed the application information agreed with management guidelines. On uMARS scale, FeverDX excelled regarding impact (median = 5/5, IQR = 5-5); functionality (5/5, 4.8-5); and information and scientific basis (4/5, 4-4). FeverDX scored well regarding user feedback (median = 4/5, IQR = 4-4.5); design and esthetics (4/5, 4-4.3); and subjective assessment of quality (4.5/5, 4.3-4.8).

Conclusion. Despite a large number of mHealth tools available, the literature lacks evaluated and evidence-based mobile technology. Applying Information and Communications Technologies in health areas can strengthen care processes and facilitate the detection and reporting of reportable surveillance diseases. Assess the usability and acceptability of mobile health applications increases the reliability of these technologies. The mobile app, FeverDx, can improve adherence to guidelines for management and prevention of prevalent diseases.

Disclosures. All authors: No reported disclosures.
 Analysis of Antibiotic-RelatedBackground. The threat of medical liability can influence physician behavior and lead to the practice of "defensive medicine. " Concern for malpractice liability has been cited as a cause of inappropriate antibiotic prescribing. Data on malpractice claims related to antibiotic use (AU) are lacking. The objectives of this analysis were to describe malpractice claims associated with AU.Methods. We conducted a retrospective analysis of pooled closed antibiotic-related claims from a malpractice carrier representing 30% of US malpractice cases from January, 2007 to December, 2016. We described antibiotic-related, malpractice claims, patient demographics, amount of indemnity paid, clinical severity, settings, responsible services, initial diagnoses, drug classes, and causes of allegation.Results. From 2007 to 2016, 767 antibiotic-related claims were identified and represented less than 1% of overall claims. A total of $123 million were paid for antibiotic-related claims. Claims classified as medium to high clinical severity constituted 97% of all claims, with 35% having permanent injury and 24% leading to death. Of all patients, 56% were female, 8% were < 20 years of age, and 32% were ≥ 60 years old. Most claims (51%) were associated with outpatient settings, 37% with inpatient, and 11% with emergency department settings. Responsible services with the highest number of claims were medicine (44%), surgery (27%) and the emergency medicine (9%). The most common infection cited as an initial diagnosis was respiratory (10%), followed by urinary (7%) and skin and soft-tissue infections (6%). The most common class cited was β-lactams (19%), followed by fluoroquinolones (14%) and sulfa-drugs (11%). Allegations associated with antibiotic administration and management constituted 62% of all claims, 19% were related to failure or delay in diagnosis or treatment, and 19% were due to other causes.Conclusion. Claims related to AU were not a common cause of malpractice claims in these data source. Antibiotic administration and management was more commonly associated with malpractice claims than failure or delay in AU. A better understanding of malpractice claims associated with AU can help guide messaging on improving antibiotic prescribing.Disclosures. All authors: No reported disclosures.