A type-5 metabotropic glutamate receptor-perineuronal net axis shapes the function of cortical GABAergic interneurons in chronic pain


Giada Mascio giada.mascio@neuromed.it 
Ferdinando Nicoletti 
Giuseppe Battaglia 
Serena Notartomaso 
A type-5 metabotropic glutamate receptor-perineuronal net axis shapes the function of cortical GABAergic interneurons in chronic pain
9AB500E10AAC149F6458B5DF2276EAC910.1186/s44158-025-00228-zReceived: 26 July 2024 Accepted: 31 January 2025PainPerineuronal netsMetabotropic glutamate receptors 5
Parvalbumin-positive (PV + ) interneurons (basket and chandelier cells) regulate the firing rate of pyramidal neurons in the cerebral cortex and play a key role in the generation of network oscillations in the cerebral cortex.A growing body of evidence suggest that cortical PV + interneurons become overactive in chronic pain and contribute to nociceptive sensitization by inhibiting a top-down analgesic pathway.Here, we provide further support to this hypothesis showing that intracortical infusion of the GABA A receptor antagonist, bicuculline, caused analgesia in a mouse model of chronic inflammatory pain, although it reduced pain thresholds in healthy mice.We propose that mGlu5 metabotropic glutamate receptors and perineuronal nets (PNNs) shape the activity of PV + interneurons in chronic pain, generating a form of maladaptive plasticity that enhances behavioural pain responses.mGlu5 receptors might be locally targeted by drugs activated by light delivered in cortical regions of the pain matrix, whereas the density of PNNs enwrapping PV + interneurons might be reduced by local activation of PNN-degrading enzyme, such as type-9 matrix metalloproteinase.These strategies, which may require invasive treatments, might be beneficial in the management of severe pain which is refractory to conventional pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions.

Introduction

Nociceptive sensitization reflects the development of a maladaptive form of neuronal plasticity occurring in all stations of the pain neuraxis and results into increasing pain sensation and behavioural reactivity in response to sustained painful stimuli [1][2][3][4][5].The study of the mechanisms underlying nociceptive sensitization is moving from single synapses to neuronal circuits connecting the regions of the pain matrix.Alterations of functional connectivity involving the salience network and the default mode network underlie suffering and embodiment of pain [6], which severely compromise the quality of life of patients with chronic inflammatory and neuropathic pain.Unravelling the mechanisms underlying abnormalities in network activity and functional connectivity may gain new insights into the pathophysiology of nociceptive sensitization and lay the groundwork for the design of novel therapeutic strategies in chronic pain.Besides their established role in pain perception and the emotional aspects of pain, the somatosensory cortex and the medial prefrontal cortex are involved in the regulation of pain thresholds by influencing the activity of brainstem nuclei that mediate the top-down control of pain [7].

Cortical network oscillations are generated and tuned by inhibitory GABAergic interneurons, which account for approximately 15% of the whole neuronal population in the cerebral cortex.There are different types of cortical interneurons, differentiated by their shape, location in the cortical layers, firing rate, and protein/peptide markers.Parvalbumin-positive (PV + ) interneurons (basket and chandelier cells) and somatostatin-positive (SSt + ) interneurons (Martinotti and non-Martinotti cells) originate from the medial ganglionic eminences and account for 70% of all interneurons, whereas the remaining interneurons originate from the caudal ganglionic eminences [8,9].Abnormalities of GABAergic interneurons have been described in models of chronic pain.For example, neuropathic pain is associated with an increased activity of PV + interneurons and a reduced activity of SSt + interneurons and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)-expressing interneurons in the medial prefrontal cortex [10][11][12], whereas activation of SSt + interneurons in the somatosensory cortex prevents the development of neuropathic pain [13].Here, we focus on PV + interneurons, which are fast-spiking, make synapses with the cell body and axon initial segment of pyramidal neurons, and play a key role in the regulation of network oscillations [14].We discuss how type-5 metabotropic glutamate (mGlu5) receptors and perineuronal nets (PNNs) shape the activity of PV + interneurons and might contribute to nociceptive sensitization in chronic inflammatory and neuropathic pain.mGlu5 receptors and chronic pain mGlu5 receptors are coupled to G q/11 , and their activation stimulates polyphosphoinositide (PI) hydrolysis with ensuing formation of inositol-1,4-5-trisphosphate and diacylglycerol [15].mGlu5 receptors are expressed in most regions of the pain neuraxis, from peripheral nociceptors to the regions of the pain matrix encoding the sensory, affective, and emotional aspects of pain, and contribute to the development of nociceptive sensitization through a plethora of CNS region-specific mechanisms.For example, activation of mGlu5 receptors in nociceptors enhances the activity of peripheral pain transducers (i.e.TrpV1 receptors) through a chain of reactions that involve intracellular calcium release, activation of cyclooxygenase, formation of prostaglandins, autocrine/paracrine activation of prostaglandin receptors, stimulation of cAMP formation, activation of protein kinase A, and TrpV1 phosphorylation [16].mGlu5 receptors are highly expressed by second-order sensory neurons in the dorsal horns of the spinal cord, where their activation enhances neuronal responsiveness to synaptic inputs [17][18][19].In their pioneer study, Robert Gereau 4th and his associates have found that activation of mGlu5 receptors in dorsal horn sensory neurons induces nociceptive sensitization through a mechanism involving activation of the extracellular-regulated kinase pathway and inhibition of K v 4.2 potassium channels [20].Interestingly, membrane recycling of mGlu5 receptors in dorsal horn neurons mediated by interaction with vacuolar protein sorting-associated protein 26 (VPS26) and sorting nexin 27 (SNX27) has been implicated in the development of neuropathic pain in rats [21].Chronic pain is also associated with changes in the expression and/or function of mGlu5 receptors in supraspinal centres of the pain pathway.Positive emission tomography studies with the mGlu5 tracer, [ 11 C]ABP688, in rats have shown that spinal nerve injury caused an upregulation of mGlu5 receptors in the prelimbic region of the medial prefrontal cortex, and pharmacological blockade of mGlu5 receptors in the prelimbic cortex attenuated neuropathic pain and associated negative mood symptoms [22].Volker Neugebauer and his associates have shown that arthritic pain disrupts the ability of mGlu5 receptors to engage endocannabinoid signaling and restrain synaptic inhibition in layer-5 pyramidal neurons of the infralimbic cortex.This maladaptive form of synaptic plasticity prevents mGlu5 receptors from activating an output pathway that attenuates pain behaviours and cognitive deficits [23].Changes in mGlu5 receptor signaling have been found in regions of the pain matrix in response to unilateral chronic constriction injury (CCI) of the sciatic nerve, with mGlu5-mediated PI hydrolysis being upregulated in the contralateral prelimbic, infralimbic and cingulate cortices, and basolteral amygdala [24].mGlu5 receptors functionally interact with CB1 cannabinoid receptors in the periaqueductal grey and rostral ventromedial medulla, the two main brainstem centres involved in the top-down control of pain [25,26].In addition, Binn and Salt explored the possible role of mGlu5 in thalamic nociceptive responses [27,28], also showing EEG effects of the mGlu5 blocker, 2-methyl-6-(phenylethynyl)pyridine (MPEP), in addition to activity on thalamic responses.

The role of mGlu5 receptors in the regulation of pain thresholds has been extensively studied using selective mGlu5-negative allosteric modulators (NAMs), which inhibit receptor activity regardless of the ambient concentrations of glutamate and are systemically active owing to their high hydrofobicity.mGlu5 receptor NAMs have consistently shown robust analgesic activity in models of inflammatory or neuropathic pain [24,[29][30][31][32][33][34][35][36][37][38][39][40][41][42][43][44].However, preclinical to clinical translation of mGlu5 receptor NAMs has been disappointing [45], suggesting that the effect of these drugs in the various stations of the pain neuraxis is not homogenous.

Light-sensitive mGlu5 receptor NAMs have provided a powerful tool for the identification of brain regions that are sufficient and/or necessary for the induction of analgesia induced by systemic mGlu5 receptor blockade.Light-induced activation of a caged derivative of the mGlu5 receptor NAM, raseglurant (compound JF-NP-26), in the thalamus caused analgesia in the chronic constriction injury (CCI) model of neuropathic pain and in a mouse model of cancer breakthrough pain [24,43,44].Transcutaneous illumination of JN-NP-26 also caused analgesia in both phases of the formalin test in mice [43].As opposed to JF-NP-26, which is activated by light [43], the mGlu5 receptor NAM alloswitch-1 is active on its own and is inactivated by light at 405 nm [46].The use of these two compounds allowed to establish that mGlu5 receptor blockade in the thalamus and medial prefrontal cortex is both necessary and sufficient for the induction of analgesia in response to systemic mGlu5 receptor NAMs, whereas receptor blockade in the basolateral amygdala enhanced pain responses in neuropathic mice [24].

What is particularly relevant for this viewpoint is that mGlu5 receptors are highly expressed by PV + GABAergic interneurons [47] and are involved in mechanisms of activity-dependent synaptic plasticity in cortical fastspiking of PV + interneurons [48].

Cell-specific deletion of mGlu5 receptors in PV + interneurons reduced inhibitory currents and impaired cortical network oscillations activity [49].mGlu5 receptors are also involved in the development PV + interneurons, as shown by a reduced expression of PV in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus of mGlu5 receptor knockout mice [50].Interestingly, mGlu5 receptors are co-expressed and interact with NMDA receptors [51,52], which support the activity of PV + interneurons [53].We suggest that cortical mGlu5 receptors contribute to the development of nociceptive sensitization by supporting the activity of PV + interneurons, which, in turn, negatively regulate a top-down analgesic pathway originating from layer-5 pyramidal neurons (Fig. 1).


PNNs and maladaptive plasticity of cortical interneurons in chronic pain

PNNs, which are condensed structures of the extracellular matrix formed by chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans linked to hyaluronic acid and tenascin-R, surround PV + interneurons and other types of GABAergic interneurons, in the cerebral cortex and other CNS regions.Their formation coincides with the closure of temporal windows of cortical plasticity during postnatal development [54][55][56], and this isolates PV + interneurons from the action of trophic factors, which might have detrimental effects on their function and plasticity.However, PNNs are dynamic structures, which may disassemble and assemble in response to stress or during learning [57,58].[59].We found recently that chronic inflammatory pain in mice induced by unilateral injection of complete Freund adjuvant (CFA) in the hind paw was associated with an increased density of PNNs labelled with the lectin, Wisteria floribunda (WFA), in the contralateral somatosensory cortex, medial prefrontal cortex (e.g.anterior cingulate, prelimbic, and infralimbic cortices), and reticular thalamic nuclei [60] (Fig. 2).


Dysfunction in PV/PNNs interneurons in thalamus and cortex has been implicated in a number of other conditions in psychiatry and neurology

Increases in PNN density were also found in different regions of the pain matrix after induction of neuropathic pain (Mascio et al., under revision).In mice with chronic inflammatory pain, local enzymatic degradation of PNNs in the somatosensory cortex caused analgesia and corrected the enhanced inhibitory transmission at the synapses between interneurons and layer-5 pyramidal neurons associated with chronic pain [60].This discloses a novel form of maladaptive plasticity in which an increased formation of PNNs stabilizes excitatory inputs of PV + interneurons [61], which become overactive and restrain the activity of a descending analgesic pathway.This hypothesis was supported by experiments in which the GABA A receptor antagonist, bicuculline, was injected in the mouse somatosensory cortex.In control mice, GABA A receptor blockade in the somatosensory cortex reduced pain thresholds, as expected.Opposite effects were seen in mice with chronic inflammatory pain, in which GABA A receptor blockade in the somatosensory cortex caused analgesia (Fig. 3, unpublished data, methods and statistics are reported in the figure legend).

Activation of mGlu5 receptors and enhanced formation/reduced degradation of PNNs may converge to increase the activity of PV + interneurons, which, in turn, inhibit a descending analgesic pathway, as outlined above.What remains to be established is whether these two phenomena, i.e. activation of mGlu5 receptors and the build-up of PNNs enwrapping GABAergic interneurons associated with chronic pain, are interconnected.This question has not been addressed in models of chronic pain.However, we found that mGlu5 receptors are key regulators of PNN formation during the first 16 days of postnatal development, when genetic deletion or pharmacological blockade of mGlu5 receptors substantially enhance the density of PNNs in the Fig. 2 Increased density of WFA + PNNs in the SSCtx of mice developing chronic inflammatory pain.Representative images showing the increased density of WFA + PNNs (green) and PV + neurons (red) in the contralateral SSCtx associated with chronic inflammatory pain (Mascio et al., [60]).Scale bar 100 µm Fig. 3 Effect of intracortical infusion of bicuculline on pain thresholds in mice injected with CFA or vehicle.Mice were anaesthesized with isoflurane and stereotaxically implanted with a 27-gauge injection cannula in the SCCtx (AP: 0, L: 3, DV 2.2 mm), fixed with acrylic cement.Three days later, mice were injected with CFA or vehicle in the hindlimb contralateral to the injection cannula.Bicuculline (Tocris Cookson Ltd., Bristol, UK) was dissolved into saline and infused in the SSCtx contralateral to CFA or vehicle with a 5-µl Hamilton syringe connected by a catheter to the injection cannula.Mice were infused with 0.5 µl of bicuculline solution (20 ng/µl) or saline in 90 s.Mechanical thresholds were measured 1 h prior to and 5 min after intracortical infusions.Values are means ± SEM of 4-6 mice per group.*Significantly different vs. the respective values obtained 1 h prior to bicuculline infusion.The experimental protocol was approved by the Italian Ministry of Health, 1135/2020-PR somatosensory cortex.This effect was associated with an increased expression of genes encoding structural components of PNNs and a reduced activity of the PNN-degrading enzyme, type-9 matrix metalloproteinase (MMP-9) [62].In addition, mGlu5 receptors shaped the PNN response to sensory stimulation or deprivation in the first 2 weeks of postnatal life [62].Interestingly, mGlu5 receptors are highly expressed and functional in the first 2 weeks of postnatal life, when mGlu5 receptormediated PI response is remarkable [63][64][65][66][67].

Although the density of PNNs in the adult somatosensory cortex did not differ between wild-type and mGlu5 knockout mice [62], we cannot exclude that the control of mGlu5 receptors on PNN formation is restored within the context of nociceptive sensitization and perhaps in an opposite direction with respect to early postnatal development.It will be interesting to examine whether the build-up of PNNs associated with chronic pain in difference regions of the pain matrix is affected by treatment with drugs that either activate or inhibit mGlu5 receptors.


Concluding remarks

In spite of the multiple classes of analgesic agents, the treatment of chronic pain is still suboptimal, and some types of pain, e.g.neuropathic pain, are highly resistant to medication [68,69].The social and economic burden is enormous considering that 15 − 20% of visits at physicians are caused by chronic pain [68].Novel treatments are urgently needed, and the use of drugs targeting specific cell types of the pain matrix regulating pain perception and motor and affective responses to pain is a path to follow.The use of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is a remarkable example of a brain region-specific approach in the treatment of refractory pain [70][71][72].Interestingly, modulation of GABAergic transmission has been proposed as one of the mechanisms by which repetitive TMS is beneficial in the treatment of pain [73].

Here, we propose a novel mechanism of nociceptive sensitization based on structural and functional changes in PV + interneurons in different regions of the pain matrix.mGlu5 receptors, which become highly functional in response to pain (see above), might synergize with NMDA receptors in activating PV + interneurons, thus disrupting a defensive mechanism against pathological pain.In addition, activation of mGlu5 might drive a chain of intracellular reactions that either enhance the formation or reduce degradation of PNNs, which would stabilize the activity of PV + interneurons.While the causal relationship between PNNs and behavioural responses to chronic inflammatory or neuropathic pain has been established ( [60], Mascio et al., under revision], the link between mGlu5 receptors and PNNs is still speculative and remains to be demonstrated.What makes this mechanism attractive is that it can be targeted by therapeutic intervention according to the principle of precision medicine.The use of mGlu5 receptor NAMs in the treatment of chronic pain could be optimized if these drugs are specifically directed towards regions of the pain matrix where receptor blockade is sufficient and necessary to cause analgesia.This could be achieved by lightsensitive drugs, which can be activated in a specific brain region with high spatio-temporal resolution [43,44].This intervention requires the implantation of LEDs in the brain parenchyma and, therefore, might be restricted to severe types of pain that are refractory to medication.

Targeting PNNs in the treatment of pain is a more difficult task for two reasons: (i) it requires the local injection of chondroitinase or other PNN-degrading enzyme in the somatosensory cortex, which is not practical from a therapeutic standpoint, and (ii) this intervention might disrupt the physiological function of the extracellular matrix, and, therefore, disrupt an important mechanism in the regulation of synaptic function.It may be interesting, however, to examine whether, and to what extent, different classes of analgesic drugs affect the activity of enzymes that regulate the turnover rate of PNNs, such as MMP-9.These drugs might be locally delivered (or activated by light) to limit the build-up of PNNs associated with chronic pain.

Fig. 1
1
Fig. 1 Activation of mGlu5 receptors and formation of PNNs may caused a novel activity of PV + interneurons, which in turn inhibit a top-down analgesic pathway originated from layer 5 of SSCtx.The interconnection between activation of mGlu5 receptors and formations of PNNs remains to be elucidated

IRCCS Neuromed, Pozzilli, Italy
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy
Data availabilityNo datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.AbbreviationsDeclarationsCompeting interestsThe authors declare no competing interests.Publisher's NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Common patterns of plasticity contributing to nociceptive sensitization in mammals and aplysia. C J Woolf, E T Walters, Trends Neurosci. 141991

A new strategy for the treatment of inflammatory pain. Prevention or elimination of central sensitization. C J Woolf, Drugs. 471994Suppl

Central sensitization: a generator of pain hypersensitivity by central neural plasticity. A Latremoliere, C J Woolf, J Pain. 102009

Neuronal plasticity: increasing the gain in pain. C J Woolf, M W Salter, Science. 2882000

Central sensitization: implications for the diagnosis and treatment of pain. C J Woolf, Pain. 1522011

Pain and the triple network model. D De Ridder, S Vanneste, M Smith, D Adhia, Front Neurol. 137572412022

Top-down cortical control of acute and chronic pain. L Urien, J Wang, Psychosom Med. 8192019

New insights into the classification and nomenclature of cortical GABAergic interneurons. J De Felipe, P L López-Cruz, R Benavides-Piccione, C Bielza, P Larrañaga, S Anderson, A Burkhalter, B Cauli, A Fairén, D Feldmeyer, G Fishell, D Fitzpatrick, T F Freund, G González-Burgos, S Hestrin, S Hill, P R Hof, J Huang, E G Jones, Y Kawaguchi, … Ascoli, G A , Nature reviews. Neuroscience. 1432013

Cellular and molecular mechanisms controlling the migration of neocortical interneurons. O Marín, Eur J Neurosci. 3812013

Sex-specific disruption of distinct mPFC inhibitory neurons in spared-nerve injury model of neuropathic pain. A F Jones, P L Sheets, Cell Rep. 31101077292020

Identifying local and descending inputs for primary sensory neurons. Y Zhang, S Zhao, E Rodriguez, J Takatoh, B X Han, X Zhou, F Wang, J Clin Invest. 125102015

Activation of VIP interneurons in the prefrontal cortex ameliorates neuropathic pain aversiveness. M Li, H Zhou, S Teng, G Yang, Cell Rep. 40111113332022

Activation of cortical somatostatin interneurons prevents the development of neuropathic pain. J Cichon, Tjj Blanck, W B Gan, G Yang, Nat Neurosci. 2082017

Mechanisms of gamma oscillations. G Buzsáki, X J Wang, 10.1146/annurev-neuro-062111-150444Annu Rev Neurosci. 20122012

Metabotropic glutamate receptors: from the workbench to the bedside. F Nicoletti, J Bockaert, G L Collingridge, P J Conn, F Ferraguti, D D Schoepp, J T Wroblewski, J P Pin, Neuropharmacology. 607-82011

Prostaglandin and protein kinase A-dependent modulation of vanilloid receptor function by metabotropic glutamate receptor 5: potential mechanism for thermal hyperalgesia. H J Hu, G Bhave, R W Gereau, J Neurosci. 22172002

Differential distribution of metabotropic glutamate receptors 1a, 1b, and 5 in the rat spinal cord. F J Alvarez, R M Villalba, P A Carr, P Grandes, P M Somohano, J Comp Neurol. 4222000

Metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 upregulation in A-fibers after spinal nerve injury: 2-methyl-6-(phenylethynyl)-pyridine (MPEP) reverses the induced thermal hyperalgesia. L J Hudson, S Bevan, K Mcnair, C Gentry, A Fox, R Kuhn, J Winter, J Neurosci. 222002

Presynaptic mGluR5 receptor controls glutamatergic input through protein kinase C-NMDA receptors in paclitaxelinduced neuropathic pain. J D Xie, S R Chen, H L Pan, J Biol Chem. 2922017

Metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 modulates nociceptive plasticity via extracellular signal-regulated kinase-Kv4.2 signaling in spinal cord dorsal horn neurons. H J Hu, B J Alter, Y Carrasquillo, C S Qiu, J Neurosci. 27482007Gereau RW 4th

VPS26A-SNX27 interaction-dependent mGluR5 recycling in dorsal horn neurons mediates neuropathic pain in rats. T B Lin, C Y Lai, M C Hsieh, H H Wang, J K Cheng, Y P Chau, G D Chen, H Y Peng, J Neurosci. 35442015

Upregulation of prefrontal metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 mediates neuropathic pain and negative mood symptoms after spinal nerve injury in rats. G Chung, C Y Kim, Y C Yun, S H Yoon, M H Kim, Y K Kim, S J Kim, Sci Rep. 7197432017

Rescue of impaired mGluR5-driven endocannabinoid signaling restores prefrontal cortical output to inhibit pain in arthritic rats. T Kiritoshi, G Ji, V Neugebauer, J Neurosci. 3632016

A "double-edged" role for type-5 metabotropic glutamate receptors in pain disclosed by light-sensitive drugs. bioRxiv : the preprint server for biology. S Notartomaso, N Antenucci, M Mazzitelli, X Rovira, S Boccella, F Ricciardi, F Liberatore, X Gomez-Santacana, T Imbriglio, M Cannella, C Zussy, L Luongo, S Maione, C Goudet, G Battaglia, A Llebaria, F Nicoletti, V Neugebauer, 10.1101/2024.01.02.5739452024.01.02.5739452024

Periaqueductal grey CB1 cannabinoid and metabotropic glutamate subtype 5 receptors modulate changes in rostral ventromedial medulla neuronal activities induced by subcutaneous formalin in the rat. V De Novellis, L Mariani, E Palazzo, D Vita, I Marabese, M Scafuro, F Rossi, S Maione, Neuroscience. 13412005

Changes in cannabinoid receptor subtype 1 activity and interaction with metabotropic glutamate subtype 5 receptors in the periaqueductal gray-rostral ventromedial medulla pathway in a rodent neuropathic pain model. E Palazzo, L Luongo, G Bellini, F Guida, I Marabese, S Boccella, F Rossi, S Maione, V De Novellis, CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 1122012

Actions of the systemically active metabotropic glutamate antagonist MPEP on sensory responses of thalamic neurones. K E Binns, T E Salt, Neuropharmacology. 402001

Contributions of mGlu1 and mGlu5 receptors to interactions with N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-mediated responses and nociceptive sensory responses of rat thalamic neurones. T E Salt, K E Binns, Neuroscience. 1002000

Peripheral group I metabotropic glutamate receptors modulate nociception in mice. G Bhave, F Karim, S M Carlton, R W Gereau, Nat Neurosci. 42001

Metabotropic glutamate receptor subtypes 1 and 5 are activators of extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling required for inflammatory pain in mice. F Karim, C C Wang, Gereau RW 4th. 200121

Metabotropic glutamate receptor involvement in models of acute and persistent pain: prospects for the development of novel analgesics. M A Varney, R W Gereau, 4th, Curr Drug Targets CNS Neurol Disord. 132002

The mGluR5 selective antagonist 6-methyl-2-(phenylethynyl)-pyridine reduces the spinal neuron painrelated activity in mononeuropathic rats. M L Sotgiu, P Bellomi, G E Biella, Neurosci Lett. 3422003

Block of NMDA and non-NMDA receptor activation results in reduced background and evoked activity of central amygdala neurons in a model of arthritic pain. W Li, V Neugebauer, Pain. 1102004

mGluR1 and mGluR5 antagonists in the amygdala inhibit different components of audible and ultrasonic vocalizations in a model of arthritic pain. J S Han, V Neugebauer, Pain. 1131-22005

Randomised, double-blind, clinical trial comparing the efficacy of nimesulide, celecoxib and rofecoxib in osteoarthritis of the knee. M Bianchi, M A Broggini, Drugs. 6312003Suppl

Blockade of metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 activation inhibits mechanical hypersensitivity following abdominal surgery. S Dolan, A M Nolan, Eur J Pain. 1162007

Group I metabotropic glutamate receptors modulate glutamate and γ-aminobutyric acid release in the periaqueductal grey of rats. V De Novellis, I Marabese, E Palazzo, F Rossi, L Berrino, L Rodella, R Bianchi, F Rossi, S Maione, Eur J Pharmacol. 4621-32003

Analgesic effects of mGlu1 and mGlu5 receptor antagonists in the rat formalin test. N Sevostianova, W Danysz, Neuropharmacology. 5132006

Enhanced pronociception by amygdaloid group I metabotropic glutamate receptors in nerve-injured animals. O B Ansah, L Gonçalves, A Almeida, A Pertovaara, Exp Neurol. 21612009

The metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype 5 antagonist fenobam is analgesic and has improved in vivo selectivity compared with the prototypical antagonist 2-methyl-6-(phenylethynyl)-pyridine. M C Montana, L F Cavallone, K K Stubbert, A D Stefanescu, E D Kharasch, J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 432009Gereau RW

Regulation of increased glutamatergic input to spinal dorsal horn neurons by mGluR5 in diabetic neuropathic pain. J Q Li, S R Chen, H Chen, Y Q Cai, H L Pan, J Neurochem. 11212010

Cerebral cortex modulation of pain. Y F Xie, F Q Huo, J S Tang, 10.1038/aps.2008.14Acta Pharmacol Sin. 3012009

Optical control of pain in vivo with a photoactive mGlu5 receptor negative allosteric modulator. J Font, M López-Cano, S Notartomaso, P Scarselli, Di Pietro, P Bresolí-Obach, R Battaglia, G Malhaire, F Rovira, X Catena, J , Giraldo J Pin, J P Fernández-Dueñas, V Goudet, C Nonell, S Nicoletti, F Llebaria, A Ciruela, F , 2017Elife6e23545

Lightinduced activation of a specific type-5 metabotropic glutamate receptor antagonist in the ventrobasal thalamus causes analgesia in a mouse model of breakthrough cancer pain. S Notartomaso, N Antenucci, F Liberatore, G Mascio, S V Boccadamopompili, J Font, M Scioli, L Luongo, A Arcella, R Gradini, Int J Mol Sci. 2380182022

Gereau RW 4th (2020) The metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 negative allosteric modulator fenobam: pharmacokinetics, side effects, and analgesic effects in healthy human subjects. L F Cavallone, M C Montana, K Frey, D Kallogjeri, J M Wages, T L Rodebaugh, T Doshi, E D Kharasch, Pain. 1611

An allosteric modulator to control endogenous G protein-coupled receptors with light. S Pittolo, X Gómez-Santacana, K Eckelt, X Rovira, J Dalton, C Goudet, J P Pin, A Llobet, J Giraldo, A Llebaria, P Gorostiza, Nat Chem Biol. 10102014

Differential expression of group I metabotropic glutamate receptors in functionally distinct hippocampal interneurons. J A Van Hooft, R Giuffrida, M Blatow, H Monyer, J Neurosci. 20102000

Metabotropic glutamate receptor type 5-dependent long-term potentiation of excitatory synapses on fast-spiking GABAergic neurons in mouse visual cortex. A Sarihi, B Jiang, A Komaki, K Sohya, Y Yanagawa, T Tsumoto, J Neurosci. 2852008

S A Barnes, A Pinto-Duarte, A Kappe, A Zembrzycki, A Metzler, E A Mukamel, J Lucero, X Wang, T J Sejnowski, A Markou, M M Behrens, Disruption of mGluR5 in parvalbumin-positive interneurons induces core features of neurodevelopmental disorders. 201520

Altered expression of schizophrenia-related genes in mice lacking mGlu5 receptors. A Luoni, P Gass, P Brambilla, M Ruggeri, M A Riva, D Inta, Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 26812018

RS)-2-chloro-5-hydroxyphenylglycine (CHPG) activates mGlu5, but not mGlu1, receptors expressed in CHO cells and potentiates NMDA responses in the hippocampus. J Doherty, M J Palmer, J M Henley, G L Collingridge, Jane De, Neuropharmacology. 3621997

Activation of metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 has direct excitatory effects and potentiates NMDA receptor currents in neurons of the subthalamic nucleus. H Awad, G W Hubert, Y Smith, A I Levey, P J Conn, J Neurosci. 20212000

From revolution to evolution: the glutamate hypothesis of schizophrenia and its implication for treatment. B Moghaddam, D Javitt, Neuropsychopharmacology. 3712012

Characterization of an activity-dependent, neuronal surface proteoglycan identified with monoclonal antibody Cat-301. S Zaremba, A Guimaraes, R G Kalb, S Hockfield, Neuron. 21989

The perineuronal net: a weapon for a challenge. R Spreafico, De Biasi, S Vitellaro-Zuccarello, L , J Hist Neurosci. 81999

Reactivation of ocular dominance plasticity in the adult visual cortex. T Pizzorusso, P Medini, N Berardi, S Chierzi, J W Fawcett, L Maffei, Science. 29855962002

Otx2 binding to perineuronal nets persistently regulates plasticity in the mature visual cortex. M Beurdeley, J Spatazza, H H Lee, S Sugiyama, C Bernard, Di Nardo, A A Hensch, T K Prochiantz, A , J Neurosci. 32272012

Casting a wide net: role of perineuronal nets in neural plasticity. B A Sorg, S Berretta, J M Blacktop, J W Fawcett, H Kitagawa, J C Kwok, M Miquel, J Neurosci. 36452016

The thalamic reticular nucleus in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder: role of parvalbuminexpressing neuron networks and oxidative stress. P Steullet, J H Cabungcal, S A Bukhari, Mol Psychiatry. 232018

Progressive build-up of perineuronal nets in the somatosensory cortex is associated with the development of chronic pain in mice. G Mascio, S Notartomaso, K Martinello, F Liberatore, D Bucci, T Imbriglio, M Cannella, N Antenucci, P Scarselli, R Lattanzi, V Bruno, F Nicoletti, S Fucile, G A Battaglia, J Neurosci. 42142022

An extracellular perspective on CNS maturation: perineuronal nets and the control of plasticity. D Carulli, J Verhaagen, Int J Mol Sci. 22524342021

Perineuronal nets are under the control of type-5 metabotropic glutamate receptors in the developing somatosensory cortex. G Mascio, D Bucci, S Notartomaso, F Liberatore, N Antenucci, P Scarselli, T Imbriglio, S Caruso, R Gradini, M Cannella, Di Menna, L Bruno, V Battaglia, G Nicoletti, F , Transl Psychiatry. 1111092021

Excitatory amino acid recognition sites coupled with inositol phospholipid metabolism: developmental changes and interaction with alpha 1-adrenoceptors. F Nicoletti, M J Iadarola, J T Wroblewski, E Costa, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 831986

Desensitization of metabotropic glutamate receptors in neuronal cultures. M V Catania, E Aronica, M A Sortino, P L Canonico, F Nicoletti, J Neurochem. 561991

Metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 is a disulfide-linked dimer. C Romano, W-L Yang, O Malley, K L , J Biol Chem. 2711996

Expression and coupling to polyphosphoinositide hydrolysis of group I metabotropic glutamate receptors in early postnatal and adult rat brain. G Casabona, T Knöpfel, R Kuhn, F Gasparini, P Baumann, M A Sortino, A Copani, F Nicoletti, Eur J Neurosci. 911997

Functional partnership between mGlu3 and mGlu5 metabotropic glutamate receptors in the central nervous system. Di Menna, L Joffe, M E Iacovelli, L Orlando, R Lindsley, C W Mairesse, J Gressèns, P Cannella, M Caraci, F Copani, A Bruno, V Battaglia, G Conn, P J Nicoletti, F , Neuropharmacology. 1282018

Possible neuropathic pain in clinical practice-review on selected diagnostic tools and its further challenges. A K Szewczyk, A Jamroz-Wiśniewska, K Rejdak, Diagnostics (Basel). 1311082022

Chronic pain. A M Dydyk, T Conermann, 31971706StatPearls. StatPearls Publishing. 2024. 2024

Evidence-based guidelines on the therapeutic use of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS): an update. J P Lefaucheur, A Aleman, C Baeken, D H Benninger, J Brunelin, Di Lazzaro, V Filipović, S R Grefkes, C Hasan, A Hummel, F C Jääskeläinen, S K Langguth, B Leocani, L Londero, A Nardone, R Nguyen, J P Nyffeler, T Oliveira-Maia, A J Oliviero, A Padberg, F Palm, U Paulus, W Poulet, E Quartarone, A Rachid, F Rektorová, I Rossi, S Sahlsten, H Schecklmann, M Szekely, D Ziemann, U , Clin Neurophysiol. 13122020. 2014-2018

Noninvasive transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) in chronic refractory pain: a systematic review. P Hamid, B H Malik, M L Hussain, Cureus. 1110e60192019

Multimodal non-invasive non-pharmacological therapies for chronic pain: mechanisms and progress. Y Shi, W Wu, BMC Med. 2113722023

American College of Critical Care Medicine. Clinical practice guidelines for the management of pain, agitation, and delirium in adult patients in the intensive care unit. J Barr, G L Fraser, K Puntillo, E W Ely, C Gélinas, J F Dasta, J E Davidson, J W Devlin, J P Kress, A M Joffe, D B Coursin, D L Herr, A Tung, B R Robinson, D K Fontaine, M A Ramsay, R R Riker, C N Sessler, B Pun, Y Skrobik, R Jaeschke, Crit Care Med. 4112013