PS1-45: Get Smart: Finding Structured Data Using SmartTools in Clarity
September

Sharon Fuller 
Group Health Research Institute


Group Health Research Institute


PS1-45: Get Smart: Finding Structured Data Using SmartTools in Clarity

CM&R
2014September95 HMORN 2014 -Selected AbstractsNatural language processing; De-identification
Results: MIST's precision was 0.93 and recall was 0.77. MIST left 13 leaks and incorrectly identified two instances of blood pressure numbers as dates. We can reduce 3 out of 13 leaks using structured data obtained for that visit note. The remaining leaks are: 3 locations, 1 age which belonged to the patient's child, 1 visit date pre-EHR system, 3 pieces of historical visit data, and 2 mentions of 'sheriff' because the chart abstractor determined it to be an "other" PII type. Conclusions: Our results show that combining structured data with MIST can potentially improve de-identification of Group Health clinical text. Future work is to build an automated system that include historical visit data, use gender, race, and language to create more realistic surrogates and to evaluate the loss of important clinical information in de-identified documents.

PS1-13: Probabilistic Linkage (Also Known as "Fuzzy Matching"): the Theoretical Foundations of Modern Record Linkage

Christopher Mack 1 1 Group Health Research Institute Background/Aims: Data joins have historically been done using deterministic linkage techniques which require exact data matches to succeed. For data extracted from disparate sources, requiring an exact match may be too limiting. Probability-based linkage techniques have gone from an arcane art involving expensive third-party software to having multiple free and commercial options available for use. We will walk through the theoretical underpinnings of the probability-based linkage theory used by many record linkage applications today. Methods: Describe the history of record linkage, the cause of linkage errors, the need for probability-based techniques for match assessment and the mathematical framework of probabilistic linkage. Discuss matching best practices and limitations in matching ability and match assessment. Results: The audience will better understand how to choose linking variables, ways to limit the search space for comparisons, and the importance of pre-processing linkage variables, including comparison by permutation of variables, phonetic codes and editbased measures. Conclusions: The audience will be able to better evaluate, and to use more successfully, the available freeware and commercial linkage software given a better understanding of their inner workings, limitations and potential pitfalls. An advanced audience will be in a better position to create their own probabilistic matching algorithms. Health (GH) adopted Epic's electronic medical record system. In this poster, we investigate Clarity, Epic's reporting database, to determine its usefulness as a source of structured pregnancy data. Methods: We examined all OB episodes of care at GH clinics that included any part of 2012. We also examined records of all completed visits in 2012 with an encounter type of OB Visit. Results: Almost all OB visits recorded in Epic at GH are part of an OB episode and pregnancy dating information is almost universally recorded. OB episodes assemble a large amount of useful data, with more variables anticipated following the recent implementation of Epic 2012 at GH. It remains to be seen how many of these will be populated, and if any will be backfilled from other sources. Although prenatal episode data are quite complete, parity, delivery and outcomes information at GH require more complex querying and result in less definitive data. Nor are episode data available for patients who obtain prenatal care outside of the GH network of clinics. Episodes may also be useful for examining the overall care picture for other health conditions. Conclusions: OB episodes in Clarity can be a rich source of structured data for current and past pregnancies, although implementations of Epic and Clarity at different sites may vary in the specific data elements captured. 


Pregnancy Data in Clarity -Stay Tuned for Our Next Episode Background/Aims: For a condition that is so easily defined, pregnancy can be remarkably difficult to locate with any precision in existing structured data sources, especially while a woman is still pregnant.Keywords: Linkage; Matching 
doi:10.3121/cmr.2014.1250.ps1-13 

PS1-14: 
Sharon Fuller 1 

1 

Group Health Research Institute 

Researchers may 
require pregnancy information: (a) to avoid recruiting pregnant women to 
clinical studies; (b) to recruit women in a certain trimester or meeting certain 
pregnancy-related criteria; (c) to exclude measures taken during pregnancy; 
(d) to evaluate prenatal care across populations; (e) to provide conditional 
variables for other analyses, including neonatal outcomes. In 2004, Group 



Background/Aims: Information in breast MRI reports is valuable for breast cancer research, but these data are only available in free-text reports and require resource-intensive manual abstraction. We developed and tested a Natural Language Processing (NLP) algorithm to extract information and pre-fill abstraction form from free-text breast MRI reports. Methods: We identified 465 reports for women receiving breast MRI at Group Health between 2010-2012.We developed an NLP algorithm in SAS v9.2. The algorithm extracts information of reading radiologist, laterality, parenchymal enhancement, whether computer-aided technique is used, comparison exams, clinical indications and assessment from breast MRI reports. The NLP results are compared with manual abstraction from an experienced abstractor. Results: The algorithm correctly extracts reading radiologist, laterality and whether computer-aided technique for all 465 breast MRI reports, except 1Keywords: Pregnancy; Clarity 
doi:10.3121/cmr.2014.1250.ps1-14 

PS1-15: 
Pre-filling Breast MRI Abstraction Forms Using Natural Language 
Processing 

Hongyuan Gao 1 ; Karen Wernli 1 

1 

Group Health Research Institute