Effects of Progressive Muscular Relaxation Combined With Aerobic Continuous Training on Exercise Tolerance, Hemodynamics, and Life Quality in Patients with Chronic Heart Failure Which Pain Rehabilitation Programme Should Patients With Chronic Back Pain Attend? -A Practical Example of a Service Evaluation Based Upon Implementing Research Findings into Clinical Practice
2015

Franchini Alessio 
Murugesan Jeganath 
Cioffi Veronica 
Caminiti Giuseppe 
Karen L Barker 
Leila Heelas 
Elaine Buchanan 
Fran Toye 
Effects of Progressive Muscular Relaxation Combined With Aerobic Continuous Training on Exercise Tolerance, Hemodynamics, and Life Quality in Patients with Chronic Heart Failure Which Pain Rehabilitation Programme Should Patients With Chronic Back Pain Attend? -A Practical Example of a Service Evaluation Based Upon Implementing Research Findings into Clinical Practice
12015In this issue Research Article Open Access Research Article PTZAID:JNPPR-1-109 | Pages: 049 -052 Open Access Research Article PTZAID:JNPPR-1-107
Purpose: To assess if the addiction of progressive muscular relaxation (PMR) to aerobic continuous training (ACT) is more effective than ACT alone in order to improve exercise tolerance of patients with chronic heart failure (CHF).Methods: Thirty CHF patients, age 67±6 years; ejection fraction 34±2. NYHA II-III was enrolled. Fifteen patients were randomized to gro ...Abstract View Full Article ViewBackground: To evaluate a service reconfiguration of pain rehabilitation programmes for chronic back pain using three programmes of differing intensity and duration and a clinical algorithm. ...Abstract View Full Article ViewBackground: High loads on an anterior spinal implant can cause an implant to subside into the vertebral body. ...Abstract View Full Article ViewBackground: Loss of functional ability and motor control following stroke appears to affect women more severely than men in general. However, little attention has been paid specifically to the upper extremity. ...Abstract View Full Article ViewPurpose: To examine whether a subjective measure of moderate-intensity exercise (12-13 on Borg's ratings of perceived exertion scale; RPE) corresponds to the target heart rate for moderate-intensity exercise (40-59% heart rate reserve;%HRR) and to determine the characteristics of those for whom RPE does not appropriately estimate exercise intensity. ...Abstract View Full Article ViewThe authors present a technique paper on the utilization of both ultrasound and fluoroscopy guidance for injections about the hip joint. ...Abstract View Full Article ViewPain is a global phenomenon in which it has been estimated that 20% of adults and 8% of children suffer from at any one time of whom 10% suffer chronic pain [1,2]. ...Abstract View Full Article View