Structural basis for isoform-specific kinesin-1 recognition of Y-acidic cargo adaptors


Stefano Pernigo 
Randall Centre of Cell and Molecular Biophysics
Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine
King's College London
SE1 1ULLondonUK

Magda Chegkazi 
Randall Centre of Cell and Molecular Biophysics
Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine
King's College London
SE1 1ULLondonUK

Yan Y Yip 
Randall Centre of Cell and Molecular Biophysics
Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine
King's College London
SE1 1ULLondonUK

Conor Treacy 
Randall Centre of Cell and Molecular Biophysics
Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine
King's College London
SE1 1ULLondonUK

Giulia Glorani 
Randall Centre of Cell and Molecular Biophysics
Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine
King's College London
SE1 1ULLondonUK

Kjetil Hansen 
Department of Chemistry
King's College London
Britannia House 7 Trinity StreetSE1 1DBLondonUK

Argyris Politis 
Department of Chemistry
King's College London
Britannia House 7 Trinity StreetSE1 1DBLondonUK

Mark P Dodding mark.dodding@bristol.ac.uk2 
Randall Centre of Cell and Molecular Biophysics
Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine
King's College London
SE1 1ULLondonUK

current address School of Biochemistry
Faculty of Biomedical Sciences *Correspondence
University of Bristol
University Walk
BS8 1TDBristol

Roberto A Steiner roberto.steiner@kcl.ac.uk 
Randall Centre of Cell and Molecular Biophysics
Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine
King's College London
SE1 1ULLondonUK

Structural basis for isoform-specific kinesin-1 recognition of Y-acidic cargo adaptors
1
The light chains (KLCs) of the heterotetrameric microtubule motor kinesin-1, that bind to cargo adaptor proteins and regulate its activity, have a capacity to recognize short peptides via their tetratricopeptide repeat domains (KLC TPR ). Here, using X-ray crystallography, we show how kinesin-1 recognizes a novel class of adaptor motifs that we call 'Y-acidic' (tyrosine flanked by acidic residues), in a KLC-isoform specific manner. Binding specificities of Y-acidic motifs (present in JIP1 and in TorsinA) to KLC1 TPR are distinct from those utilized for the recognition of W-acidic motifs found in adaptors that are KLCisoform non-selective. However, a partial overlap on their receptor binding sites implies that adaptors relying on Y-acidic and W-acidic motifs must act independently. We propose a model to explain why these two classes of motifs that bind to the concave surface of KLC TPR with similar low micromolar affinity can exhibit different capacities to promote kinesin-1 activity.(147 words)

Introduction

Transport of cellular components along microtubules (MTs) is important in virtually all cell types and required for normal cellular activities. For neuronal function, MT-based transport is particularly critical due to the long distances that need to be travelled and strong links exist between intracellular transport and the pathogenesis of neurological diseases (Chevalier-Larsen and Holzbaur, 2006;Franker and Hoogenraad, 2013). The kinesin-1 motor, is responsible for the anterograde (plus-end directed) transport along MTs of a wide range of cargoes such as protein complexes, ribonuclear protein assemblies, vesicles, and organelles (Hirokawa et al., 2009). Defects in kinesin-1-mediated transport have been linked to various neurodegenerative diseases including Parkinson's, Huntington's, Alzheimer's, and hereditary spastic paraplegia (Mandelkow and Mandelkow, 2002;Morfini et al., 2016;Morihara et al., 2014).

At the molecular level kinesin-1 is a tetramer consisting of two ATP-dependent motor-bearing heavy chains (KHCs) and two light chains (KLCs) that in mammalian cells are encoded by three (Kif5A-C) and four (KLC1-4) closely related genes, respectively, with distinct cell and tissue expression profiles. When not engaged in active transport, kinesin-1 is maintained in an autoinhibited state resulting from an intramolecular interaction in which the C-terminus of a single KHC tail binds at the N-terminal motor dimer interface preventing the structural transition required for ADP release (Kaan et al., 2011). Regulatory KLCs interact with KHCs using their N-terminal coiled-coil (CC) region that precedes an unstructured region followed by a cargo-anchoring tetratricopeptide repeat domain (TPR) and a disordered C-terminal region that varies considerably between isoforms ( Figure 1A).

The unstructured region N-terminal to KLC TPR (TPR domain of KLC) features a leucinephenylalanine-proline (LFP) triplet followed by Asn/Ser and flanked by negatively charged Asp/Glu residues that is highly conserved in all KLCs isoforms. We have shown that this 'LFP-acidic' region engages in cis with KLC TPR contributing to the maintenance of the autoinhibited state, and is likely important in cargo-driven activation (Yip et al., 2016).

The process of motor activation in response to cargo recognition occurs via molecular mechanisms that are incompletely understood. However, adaptor (or scaffolding) proteins that provide a molecular link between kinesin-1 and its cargoes play a clear role in coordinating motor's activity and driving transport (Fu and Holzbaur, 2014). While vesicular cargoes interact with adaptors that can bind to multiple sites on both KHCs and KLCs, diversity of recognition is often mediated by the interaction of the KLC TPR domain with short disordered peptide sequences on the adaptors. One important class of such peptides features a tryptophan residue flanked by aspartic or glutamic acid residues (for example, EWD). Experimentally validated 'W-acidic' recognition motifs are found in a growing list of adaptors including the SifA-kinesin interacting protein (SKIP), a critical host determinant in Salmonella pathogenesis and a regulator of lysosomal positioning, the neuronal protein calsyntenin-1 (CSTN-1), dynein intermediate chain (DIC), nesprin-2, gadkin, and cayman ataxia protein (BNIP-H) (Aoyama et al., 2009;Araki et al., 2007;Dodding et al., 2011;Kawano et al., 2012;Konecna et al., 2006;Ligon et al., 2004;McGuire et al., 2006;Schmidt et al., 2009;Wilson and Holzbaur, 2015). Remarkably, Wacidic motifs have an intrinsic capacity to promote kinesin-1 activity (Dodding et al., 2011;Farias et al., 2015;Kawano et al., 2012;Pu et al., 2015). We have solved the X-ray structure of KLC2 TPR in complex with the W-acidic peptide of SKIP (SKIP WD , sequence TNLEWDDSAI) thus deciphering the structural basis for the recognition of this important class of adaptor peptides by kinesin-1 (Pernigo et al., 2013).

Despite the importance of W-acidic motifs, cargo adaptors exist that do not feature this type of recognition sequence. A prominent example is the c-Jun NH 2 -terminal kinase (JNK)-interacting-interacting protein 1 (JIP1) that is involved in the anterograde transport of the amyloid precursor protein (APP), a key determinant in Alzheimer's disease (Matsuda et al., 2001;Scheinfeld et al., 2002). The most C-terminal region of JIP1 (sequence YTCPTEDIYLE, JIP1 C-term ) has been shown to be necessary and sufficient for binding and, in contrast to W-acidic sequences, JIP1 C-term has a strong preference for the KLC1 isoform, rather than KLC2 (Kawano et al., 2012;Verhey et al., 2001;Zhu et al., 2012). Interestingly, JIP1 C-term binding to KLC1 TPR is not sufficient to promote kinesin-1 activity (Kawano et al., 2012). Indeed, KHC binding by JIP1 as well as the cooperation of additional proteins, like FEZ1 or JIP3, is required for cargo transport (Blasius et al., 2007;Holzbaur, 2013, 2014;Hammond et al., 2008;Satake et al., 2013;Sun et al., 2017).

Using a structural approach we show here how kinesin-1 selects adaptors, like JIP1, that rely on an alternative 'Y-acidic' (tyrosine-acidic) motif for recognition. We also show how the solenoid-shaped KLC TPR domains utilize distinct, yet partly overlapping, portions of their concave surface to select between W-acidic and Y-acidic motifs in an isoformspecific manner following a general 'induced-fit' principle. Our work helps understanding the versatility and complexity of cargo recognition mediated by KLC TPR domains that depends on their unanticipated remarkable plasticity. We propose a model to explain why W-acidic and Y-acidic motifs that bind to the concave groove of KLC TPR with similar low micromolar affinity exhibit different capacities to promote kinesin-1 activity.


Results


Y-acidic C-terminal motifs bind to KLC1 TPR with low micromolar affinity

JIP1 is an important adaptor protein that can couple kinesin-1 to several cargoes thus enabling their transport along MTs ( Figure 1B, left-hand side). While its JNK binding domain (JBD) is required for interaction with JNK, its PTB domain binds several proteins, including APP, apolipoprotein E receptor 2 (ApoER2), p190RhoGEF, dual leucine zipper bearing kinase (DLK), and JIP3 (JSAP1). The JIP1 C-term that binds to KLC1 TPR is highly conserved and characterized by a low theoretical pI value of 4.57 due to the presence of multiple acidic amino acids ( Figure 1C, top). The most C-terminal tyrosine (Y709 in 6 human JIP1) is particularly important for the interaction and its replacement by an alanine has been shown to result in loss of KLC1 binding in immunoprecipitation experiments (Verhey et al., 2001). As Y709 is embedded within the acidic patch we refer to this region as the Y-acidic core ( Figure 1C). To further validate this interaction we employed an in vitro fluorescence polarization (FP) assay. We first measured the affinity between TAMRA-labelled JIP1 C-term and the highly homologous KLC1 TPR and KLC2 TPR domains.

We find that TAMRA-JIP1 C-term binds to KLC1 TPR with a K D of 0.95 µM whilst its affinity for KLC2 TPR is significantly lower (K D > 94 µM, Figure 1D). This is consistent with the previously reported specificity of JIP1 C-term for KLC1 TPR (Zhu et al., 2012).

Another protein that has also been shown to bind to KLC1 in co-IP experiments is TorsinA, a constitutively inactive AAA+ (ATPases associated with a variety of cellular activities) protein whose gene is linked to early-onset dystonia type 1 (DYT1) (Kamm et al., 2004) ( Figure 1B, right-hand side). As gene deletions revealed that its last ~80 amino acids are sufficient for the interaction, we inspected the primary structure for this region and noticed that its C-terminus shares similarities with JIP1 C-term , particularly, with respect to the conservation of a Y-acidic core ( Figure 1C, bottom). We thus hypothesised that this region might be responsible for KLC1 binding. Similarly to JIP1 we find that a TAMRAlabelled peptide encompassing the last twelve amino acids of mouse TorsinA (TAMRA-TorsinA C-term ) binds with K D values of 1.7 µM and >24 µM to KLC1 TPR and KLC2 TPR , respectively ( Figure 1E). Overall, Y-acidic motifs bind to KLC1 TPR with low micromolar affinity and may provide a common mechanism for distinguishing between isoforms with preference for KLC1 over KLC2.

Strategy employed for the structural elucidation of KLC1 TPR -specific Y-acidic peptide complexes To elucidate how the well-established JIP1 cargo adaptor is recognized by KLC1 TPR we pursued a crystallographic approach. We were previously successful in obtaining diffracting crystals of KLC2 TPR in complex with the cognate SKIP WD W-acidic peptide by engineering a chimeric construct in which the peptide was fused N-terminal to KLC2 TPR via a flexible (TGS) 4 linker (Pernigo et al., 2013). Here, we used a similar approach. However, as JIP1 binds to KLC1 TPR using its C-terminus we hypothesized that a free carboxyl group might be important for the interaction. We therefore fused JIP1 C-term downstream of KLC1 TPR via a flexible (TGS) 10 linker. Crystals of the chimera grew readily in a variety of conditions. However, they exhibited very limited diffraction (worse than 15 Å resolution) or, more often, no diffraction at all. To improve crystal quality we decided to employ Nanobodies (Nbs) as crystallization chaperones (Pardon et al., 2014). Using the chimera as an antigen, a pool of 29 high-affinity Nbs was generated and a subset later employed in crystallization trials following purification of each individual Nb:chimera complex. Nbmediated crystallization dramatically improved crystal quality and allowed us to collect Xray data for the complex to 2.7 Å resolution using synchrotron radiation. We also sought to obtain structural information on TorsinA binding. To this end we replaced the JIP1 C-term sequence with that of TorsinA C-term and produced crystals that diffracted X-rays at 2.3 Å resolution. A summary of data collection statistics is given in Table 1.

Overall structure of KLC1 TPR in complex with Y-acidic peptides and conformational transition upon their recognition KLC1 TPR consists of six TPR repeats (TPR1 to TPR6), each contributed by a classical helix-turn-helix structural motif arranged in a right-handed super-helical conformation, with an additional non-TPR helix (αN) positioned between TPR5 and TPR6. The structures of the complexes reveal that the C-terminal peptides bind in an extended conformation straddling across the KLC1 TPR concave surface with a direction opposite to that of superhelical coiling (Figure 2). The epitope recognized by the Nb used as crystallization chaperone is totally distinct from the peptide-binding region and maps on the outer surface with contributions from residues on TPR4(α8) and TPR5. The KLC1 TPR domain is typically very well defined in both structures. However, most of the stretch connecting the single non-TPR αN helix to α11 of TPR6 (residues 437-459) could not be modeled due to flexibility. Also, electron density for helix (α1) of TPR1 is of significantly poorer quality compared to all other TPR helices indicating that this region is more disordered ( Figure S1).

Indeed, this helix appears to display an unusual degree of plasticity (Nguyen et al., 2017).

For JIP1 C-term , electron density is observed for the last eight residues of the 11-aa long peptide (Figure 2A,B) whilst for TorsinA C-term we could model all but the first residue of the 12-aa long peptide ( Figure 2C,D). The engineered (TGS) 10 linker connecting the TPR domain to the Y-acidic cargo adaptor peptides is not visible in electron density maps suggesting that this region is flexible and does not interfere with binding.

A comparison between the structures of KLC1 TPR in the unbound (Zhu et al., 2012) and Y-acidic peptide-loaded states reveals dramatic conformational differences whereby peptide recognition induces an 'open'-to-'closed' transition in its solenoid structure ( Figure   2E, Movie M1). While the KLC1 TPR domains are essentially identical in both Y-acidic peptide-bound structures (rmsd = 0.75 Å over 259 equivalent Cα atoms), a similar global superposition between the peptide-free ('open', PDB code 3NF1) and the TorsinA C-termbound ('closed') structures gives a rmsd of ∼4.1 Å for 253 equivalent Cα atoms. An analysis using the DynDom algorithm (Poornam et al., 2009) indicates that peptide recognition elicits a conformational transition that is best described by a ∼30° rotation of an N-terminal domain with respect to a hinge region largely contributed by residues belonging to second-half and first-half of TPR3(α6) and TPR4(α8) (residues 323-329, 348-350, 353-358), respectively, while the C-terminal region (second-half of α8 to α12) is fixed. As a result, the TPR1(α1) helix axis undergoes a lateral displaced of over 16 Å. Each individual domain behaves essentially as a rigid-unit (rmsd N-terminal moving domains = 1.06 Å over 117 equivalent Cα atoms -rmsd C-terminal fixed domains = 0.88 Å over 131 equivalent Cα atoms). Overall, this highlights a significant degree of plasticity of the KLC1 TPR domain that is used to accommodate the Y-acidic peptides by an 'induced fit' mechanism.

KLC1 TPR -Y-acidic peptide interface JIP1 C-term and TorsinA C-term peptides are recognized by their KLC1 TPR receptor using a common binding mode. An analysis performed with the Protein Interfaces, Surfaces and Assemblies (PISA) algorithm (Krissinel and Henrick, 2007) indicates that ~75% of the surface atoms of the bound peptides form an extensive interface that is stabilized by residues contributed by the first helices of TPR2-6 (α3, α5, α7, α9, α11) whilst fewer residues on α4, α6, α8, α10 make secondary contacts ( Figure 3A). Overall, the interface area is ~710 Å 2 and ~887 Å 2 for the KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term and KLC1 TPR -TorsinA C-term complexes, respectively. The larger surface area for the latter complex reflects the longer TorsinA peptide bound to KLC1 TPR . As JIP1 is one of the most important and extensively validated cargo adaptors we will discuss general principles for Y-acidic peptide binding using the KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term complex as a reference.

The structure shows that the recognition peptide binds in an extended conformation to the positively charged inner surface of the TPR solenoid structure ( Figure 3B) with the conserved tyrosine within the Y-acidic core (Y709, referred to as position 0, p 0 ) hosted by a 'made-to-measure' cavity (highlighted by a white dotted line in Figure 3B). The cavity stabilizing the side-chain of (p 0 )Y709, located between TPR3(α5/α6) and TPR4(α7), is lined by V305, K309, Y313, N344, L347, L348, N351 with the amide group of the latter residue participating in a H-bond with (p -2 )D707(Oδ2) ( Figure 3C). Two asparagine pairs (N386/N343 and N301/N344) also engage in hydrogen bonds the main chain atoms of (p -1 )I708 and (p +1 )L710, respectively, while the C-terminal glutamate at position (p +2 ) is locked in place by a salt bridge with R266 and K340. Virtually all key interactions observed in the KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term structure also stabilize the bound TorsinA C-term peptide ( Figure S2). As TorsinA C-term features an additional p +3 position, this extra residue is hosted by a cavity (highlighted by a cyan dotted line in Figure 3B) lined partly by yet another asparagine pair (N259/N302) that together with the side-chains of R327 and K340 stabilize the doubly negatively charged C-terminal aspartate residue. While JIP1 C-term and TorsinA C-term peptides display a virtually identical main-chain trace for their Y-acidic core, conformational variability is observed for their N-terminal portion that is not conserved ( Figure S3). Overall, a combination of electrostatics, specific interactions often mediated by receptor asparagine residues, and the intrinsically malleable nature of the cargo adaptor peptides, plays a main role in the recognition process.


Cellular validation of the KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term interface and molecular determinants of


KLC1 specificity

To validate the KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term interface and to rationalize the strong preference of this cargo adaptor for KLC1 TPR over the highly homologous KLC2 TPR observed in FP measurements we employed immunoprecipitation in HeLa cells in combination with structure-guided mutagenesis. Cells were co-transfected with wild-type and mutant constructs expressing hemagglutinin (HA)-KLC1 TPR and FLAG-JIP1 ( Figure 3D). For mutagenesis, key KLC1 TPR interface residues R266, N343, N386, N469 were substituted with a serine to alter their salt bridge/H-bonding capabilities while V305 was replaced with a threonine to generate an isosteric change with altered polarity. Overall, we find that all amino acid substitutions tested substantially reduce the affinity between KLC1 TPR and JIP1 with residual binding quantified ranging from ∼15% to ∼35% compared to wild-type ( Figure 3E). In particular, a very strong effect is observed for the R266S replacement that prevents the formation of a salt bridge with the (p +2 ) acidic side-chain and a similar nearabrogation of binding is engendered by an increase in polarity (V305T) within the receptor cavity surface that interacts 'face-on' with the aromatic ring of (p 0 ) tyrosine ( Figure 4C).

The N343S and N469S substitutions are particularly informative with respect to the specificity of Y-acidic peptides for the KLC1 isoform over KLC2. A sequence comparison between KLC1 TPR and KLC2 TPR highlights that the only two interface residues that differ between these isoform domains are KLC1 N343 and N469. These are naturally present as serine residues in KLC2 ( Figure 3A). The structure shows that asparagines at these topological positions play a key role in maintaining the stability of the complex via H-bond interactions at positions p -5 and p -1 of the main chain cargo peptide. Our co-IP experiment shows that a substitution at either of these positions by a serine, thus imparting KLC2 TPRlike properties, negatively affects the stability of the complex thus explaining isoformspecificity.


Y-acidic and W-acidic motifs bind at partly overlapping sites on KLC TPR and are differentially affected by the presence of the LFP-acidic intramolecular region

We have previously solved the X-ray structure of KLC2 TPR in complex with the SKIP WD W-acidic peptide, thus providing a structural basis for the recognition of this widespread adaptor motif (Pernigo et al., 2013). A comparative analysis with the structures presented here reveals that Y-acidic and W-acidic motifs are recognized by partly overlapping binding sites that are shifted with respect to each other along the inner channel generated by the TPR right-handed super-helical arrangement ( Figure 4A). The W-acidic motif binds toward the N-terminal end of the channel with its critical tryptophan residue sandwiched between TPR2 and TPR3 while the Y-acidic motif is positioned more C-terminally with its key tyrosine residue stabilized by the interface between TPR3 and TPR4 approximately at the same location occupied by the SKIP WD leucine at (p -2 ). Although W-acidic binding also occurs by an 'induced fit' mechanism, it elicits a more restrained closure of the receptor compared to Y-acidic binding, defined by smaller rotation (∼20.0°) with respect to an alternative, more N-terminal, hinge axis ( Figure S4). Despite these differences W-acidic and Y-acidic binding sites partly overlap and in agreement with this we find that an unlabelled SKIP WD peptide is able to specifically compete TAMRA-JIP1 C-term binding in a concentration dependent manner in our FP assay ( Figure 4B). The functional implication of this is that a single KLC1 TPR is not expected to simultaneously engage both types of cargo adaptors. The partial separation of Y-acidic and W-acidic binding sites on KLC TPR has also a possible important functional consequence. We have solved previously the 4 Å-resolution structure of KLC2 extTPR , an extended TPR featuring the conserved LFP-acidic region Nterminal to the KLC TPR domain that contributes to kinesin-1 inhibition ( Figure 1A) (Yip et al., 2016). In this structure the KLC2 TPR domain is in its 'open' (ligand-free) conformation and we could model a stretch five poly-Ala residues between helices α1, α3, α5 that likely defines the general location of the intramolecular LFP-acidic region. The poly-Ala peptide partly overlaps with the SKIP WD binding site ( Figure 4C) and consistent with this we found that a TAMRA-SKIP WD peptide binds in an FP assay with lower affinity to KLC2 extTPR compared to KLC2 TPR due to the inhibitory effect of the intramolecular LFP-acidic stretch (Yip et al., 2016). We have now also measured the affinity of TAMRA-SKIP WD for KLC1 extTPR and KLC1 TPR and, like for KLC2, the presence of the LFP-acidic region significantly inhibits binding, in this case, by more than one order of magnitude (K D from 0.64 ± 0.02 µM to 8.20 ± 0.37 µM, Figure 4D). In contrast, TAMRA-JIP1 C-term binds with a similar affinity to either KLC1 extTPR (K D = 2.21 ± 0.06 µM) or KLC1 TPR (K D = 0.95 ± 0.09 µM) ( Figure 4F) (Yip et al., 2016). A structural superposition between KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term and KLC2 extTPR allows to rationalize the minimal impact that the LFP-acidic extension has on JIP1 C-term binding. We observe that the KLC1 TPR N-terminal domain rotation elicited by JIP1 C-term binding is compatible with the presence of the poly-Ala peptide as no clashes are observed ( Figure 4E). This is largely due to the more advanced position along the inner KLC TPR cavity of this adaptor peptide compared to SKIP WD . Thus, although with the obvious limitation imposed by a poly-Ala model that does not allow to reveal the full range of possible intermolecular interactions, we suggest that while an intramolecular interaction with the LFP-acidic region is not compatible with SKIP WD binding, this might be of little or no interference with JIP1 C-term loading. This is in agreement with FP data ( Figure 4F).


JIP1 C-term loading does not affect the affinity of JIP3 LZ2 for KLC1 TPR

Various studies have shown that JIP1 and JIP3 act co-operatively in kinesin-1-mediated transport (Hammond et al., 2008;Satake et al., 2013;Sun et al., 2017). Like JIP1, JIP3 belongs to the JIP family of adaptor proteins that in mammals is composed of four members (Whitmarsh, 2006). The N-terminal region of JIP3/4 features several leucine zipper segments, the second of which (JIP3 LZ2 ), has been found to mediate interaction with KLC1 TPR (Bowman et al., 2000;Kelkar et al., 2005;Nguyen et al., 2005). To probe the effect of JIP1 C-term loading on the interaction between KLC1 TPR and JIP3 LZ2 we employed isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) ( Table 2). Binding of GST-JIP3 LZ2 to His 6 -KLC1 extTPR is an enthalpy-driven process with a dissociation constant K D of ~3 µM ( Figure   5A) and no significant changes in K D are observed when His 6 -KLC1 extTPR is replaced by His 6 -KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term ( Figure 5B). This indicates that binding of JIP3 LZ2 to KLC1 TPR is independent of JIP1 C-term and of the conformational change it elicits. Also, it does not require the presence of the LFP-acidic region. ITC data suggest a stoichiometry for the complex that consistent with two TPR domains bound to a JIP3 LZ2 coiled-coil dimer. We further confirmed this by native mass spectrometry (MS) ( Figure 5C) (Hall et al., 2012;Hernandez and Robinson, 2007). Using an untagged SEC-purified KLC1 TPR -JIP1 Cterm :JIP3 LZ2 complex assembled using a slight molar excess (1.5) of KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term over the JIP3 LZ2 dimer we find a mixture of KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term monomers and dimers both in isolation and bound to JIP3 LZ2 indicating that up to two KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term molecules can bind to the coiled-coil. The intrinsic mobility of the TPR1(α1) ( Figure S1) and its stabilization by other helices as often observed in various crystal structures (Nguyen et al., 2017) suggest that this KLC1 TPR region might be involved in the interaction with JIP3 LZ2 and possibly its dimerization.


Discussion

For many cargo types anchoring to the kinesin-1 motor is not direct but mediated by adaptor or scaffolding proteins that provide a molecular and mechanistic link for kinesindriven intracellular transport (Fu and Holzbaur, 2014). An important region on the regulatory light chains that is often engaged by adaptors is their KLC TPR domain. TPR domains are found in a wide range of proteins and represent common platforms for proteinprotein interactions (D'Andrea and Regan, 2003;Zeytuni and Zarivach, 2012). Like some other repeat-containing proteins, such as leucine-rich-repeats and WD40s, TPR domains have been traditionally considered fairly rigid docking platforms that respond with limited conformational alterations to ligand binding, thus lending support to the view that they are essentially pre-organized architectures onto which specific ligand-binding residues are 'grafted' (Cortajarena and Regan, 2006). Such a static view has been more recently mitigated by examples of TPR domains that undergo some conformational changes in response to protein-protein interactions. For example, a reduction of the solenoid superhelical pitch has been observed in the TPR domain of the Pex5p receptor in response to loading the peroxisomal targeting signal type 1 (PTS1) (Stanley et al., 2006). Also, in the magnetosome-associated protein, MamA the N-terminal portion of its TPR domain undergoes a radial movement of ∼3° upon binding of a putative ligand imitator (Zeytuni et al., 2011). Our crystallographic analysis of the recognition mechanism of Y-acidic motifs by KLC1 TPR that extends our previous work on the recognition of W-acidic motifs (Pernigo et al., 2013), strongly challenges the view of TPR motifs as rigid scaffolds. Instead it portrays their strongly adaptive nature as binding of these motifs involves rotations of the N-terminal portion of the molecule of up to ∼30° with respect to alternative hinge axes.

Overall, KLC TPR domains display the remarkable ability to employ inter-TPR repeats as separate 'compartments' to stabilize different peptide types in an isoform-specific manner. It is tempting to speculate that this Y-acidic recognition mechanism could be employed more broadly. Indeed, the C-terminal pentapeptide of Salmonella effector PipB2 that is required for kinesin-1 binding (Henry et al., 2006) also shares a sequence that matches the Y-acidic core of JIP1 and TorsinA (PipB2 C-term , LFNEFYSENI).

While JIP1 is one of the best-established and most studied adaptors, the role for TorsinA in the context of kinesin-1-based transport is less clear. TorsinA, the founding member of the Torsin family, is a constitutively inactive AAA+ protein of medical importance as a three-base pair (ΔGAG) deletion that removes one of a pair of glutamic acid residues (Glu-302/303) in proximity of its C-terminus is linked to DYT1, a neurological disorder that leads to uncontrollable muscular movements (Ozelius et al., 1997). In cells TorsinA is predominantly localized in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or nuclear envelope ( However, the exact biological function of TorsinA and other family members is at present uncertain although they clearly play a role in the integrity of the NE (Laudermilch and Schlieker, 2016). Interestingly, wild-type TorsinA expressed in brain CAD cells has been found co-localized with endogenous KLC1 TPR at the distal end of processes, whereas mutant TorsinA ΔGAG remained confined to the cell body thus opening the possibility that the wild-type protein undergoes anterograde transport along MTs possibly acting as a molecular chaperone regulating kinesin-1 activity and/or cargo binding (Kamm et al., 2004).

This intriguing function would imply the existence of an endogenous TorsinA cytosolic pool that might be available to interact with kinesin-1. Indeed, the literature suggests that oxidative or heat-shock stresses can induce TorsinA translocation from the ER to the cytosol (Adam et al., 2017;Hewett et al., 2003). Our structural study shows that the Cterminus of TorsinA binds, like JIP1, preferentially to KLC1 TPR with a similar low micromolar dissociation constant. In addition to the interaction with the Y-acidic core, KCL1 TPR appears also perfectly poised to stabilize the additional negatively charged residue at position p +3 as well as the more divergent peptide region N-terminal of the Yacidic core. These interactions define a rather robust molecular interface that, on the basis of structural considerations, warrants a deeper analysis of a possible functional role of TorsinA as a kinesin-1 adaptor/cargo. Interestingly, a comparison of the KLC1 TPR -TorsinA C-term structure with that of the recently solved complex between the TorsinA AAA+ domain and its LULL1 activator reveals that the TorsinA C-term region can undergo a dramatic structural transition. The TorsinA C-term segment that is part of the TorsinA AAA+ domain folds into a α-helix in the complex with LULL1 playing a role in its stabilization (Demircioglu et al., 2016). On the other hand, TorsinA C-term assumes a completely extended conformation when in complex with KLC1 TPR (Figure 2C,D). This change in secondary structure is reminiscent of that undergone by the C-terminal domain (CTD) of the tubulinlike FtsZ upon binding to different regulatory proteins where the CTD folds into a α-helix when bound to the E. coli FtsZ-binding domain of ZipA and Thermotoga maritima FtsA (Mosyak et al., 2000;Szwedziak et al., 2012) while it takes an extended conformation when bound to SlmA from E. coli, Vibrio cholera, and Klebsiella pneumonia (Schumacher and Zeng, 2016). This plasticity has been suggested to be important for the versatile recognition of different regulators (Schumacher and Zeng, 2016). Similarly, it could be a mechanism utilized by TorsinA to select different partners, in this case, in alternative subcellular locations.

The role of cargo adaptors in kinesin-1 motor activation is a complex and an incompletely understood one. Remarkably, adaptors' featuring W-acidic motifs appear to encode both motor recognition (via KLC TPR binding) and activation capacities. For example, an artificial transmembrane protein containing either of the two cytosolic W-acidic motifs of calsyntenin was shown to induce kinesin-1's vesicular association and anterograde transport in a KLC-dependent manner (Kawano et al., 2012). Moreover, these motifs can also functionally substitute for homologous regions within the vaccinia virus KLC binding protein A36 and activate transport (Dodding et al., 2011) or when fused to LAMP1, promote lysosome transport (Pu et al., 2015). Differently, while the C-terminal Y-acidic region of JIP1 is sufficient to recruit KLC1 to vesicles, it is not able to activate transport (Kawano et al., 2012). Indeed, JIP1 requires interactions with the coiled-coil region of KHC and the KHC-tail binding protein FEZ1, or JIP3, a separate member of the JIP family, for full activity (Blasius et al., 2007;Fu and Holzbaur, 2014;Hammond et al., 2008;Satake et al., 2013). Recently, a clear cooperative role of JIP1 and JIP3 has been identified for the anterograde axonal transport of TrkB receptors (Sun et al., 2017), further supporting previous results that indicated that JIP1 and JIP3 are co-transported in neuronal cells (Hammond et al., 2008). The structural results presented here in conjunction with our previous studies allow us to formulate some hypotheses as to why Y-acidic and W-acidic motifs induce different functional responses. Our previous work has demonstrated that binding of W-acidic motifs displaces an intramolecular interaction between the KLC TPR and the LFP-acidic region (Yip et al., 2016). Moreover, binding of W-acidic motifs or disruption of the LFP-acidic intramolecular interaction triggers global changes in the KLC conformation, promotes kinesin-1 activity and results in an additional binding site on KHCtail becoming accessible (Sanger et al., 2017;Yip et al., 2016). A key piece of data supporting this model is the observation that inclusion of the inhibitory LFP-containing sequence on KLC1/2 TPR substantially reduces its affinity for W-acidic peptides. On the other hand, inclusion of the LFP-acidic sequence has very little effect on KLC1 TPR affinity for the JIP1 C-term Y-acidic peptide. This suggests that Y-acidic binding might co-exist with LFP-acidic binding and therefore cannot alone initiate this activation pathway. Two possibilities then present themselves -firstly, cooperative interactions with JIP3 serve to displace the LFP-acidic linker, driving the same activation pathway. Our ITC and mass spectrometry data suggest the possibility that could be driven by steric effects resulting from the JIP3 LZ2 -mediated dimerization of KLC1 TPR within the kinesin-1 tetramer.

Alternatively, the LFP-acidic linker remains bound and there is an as yet uncharacterized activation pathway triggered by JIP3 binding that is more reliant on the additional direct adaptor interactions with KHC. Structural insight into KLC1-JIP1-JIP3 complexes and the tetrameric kinesin-1 tail region will be required to address this question.


Materials and methods


Cloning

Codon-optimized DNA sequences encoding the TPR domain of mouse KLC1 (residues 205-496, Uniprot Q5UE59, KLC1 TPR ) fused either to the C-terminal eleven amino acids of human JIP1 (residues 701-711, Uniprot Q9UQF2, JIP1 C-term ) or the C-terminal twelve amino acids of mouse TorsinA (residues 322-333, Uniprot Q9ER39, TorsinA C-term ) linked via a (Thr-Gly-Ser) 5 or 10 flexible connector were purchased from Genscript and subcloned between the NdeI/XhoI sites of a pET28 vector (Novagen). This strategy allows for the expression of chimeric proteins that will be identified as KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term and KLC1 TPR -TorsinA C-term , respectively, bearing a thrombin-cleavable N-terminal hexa-histidine tag.

Nanobodies were generated by the VIB Nanobody Service Facility of Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) following the immunization of a llama with purified KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term according to published protocols. Out of a panel of 36 antigen-specific Nanobodies supplied in a pMECS vector, we sub-cloned a subset representing the most divergent amino acidic sequences between the PstI/BstEII sites of a pHEN6c vector. This allowed the expression of C-terminally His 6 -tagged Nanobodies in the periplasmic space of E.coli.


Protein expression and purification

Chimeric proteins were expressed in the E.coli BL21(DE3) strain. Briefly, single colonies were picked and grown at 37 °C overnight. Small-scale overnight bacterial cultures grown at 28 °C was used to inoculate 8x0.5L cultures that were incubated at 37 °C until they reached an OD600 of 0.4-0.6. The temperature was then lowered to 18 °C and protein synthesis was induced by the addition of 500 µM isopropyl b-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) for 16 hours. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 5000 g for 15 minutes at 4 °C and resuspended in 50mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) buffer at pH 7.5, 500mM NaCl, 5mM β-mercaptoethanol supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 5U/mL of Benzonase endonuclease (Merck). Cell lysis was accomplished by sonication. Insoluble material was sedimented by centrifugation at 16500g for 1 hour at 4 °C and the supernatant microfiltered using a 0.22 µm pore size filter prior to loading on a HisTrap column (GE Healthcare) pre-equilibrated with lysis buffer for immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC). Proteins were eluted with an imidazole gradient and fractions containing the target protein collected and dialysed overnight at 4 °C against imidazole-free lysis buffer. The purification tag was cleaved by incubating the dialysed sample for approximately 5 h in the presence of thrombin protease covalently bound to agarose beads (Thrombin CleanCleave Kit, Sigma). Beads were removed by filtration over a gravitational column and the eluate further microfiltered using 0.22 µm pore size filter prior to loading it on a HisTrap column (GE Healthcare) preequilibrated with lysis buffer. Untagged material present in the flow-through fraction was collected, concentrated, and further purified by size exclusion chromatography (SEC) on a 16⁄60 HiLoad Superdex 75 column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated with 25 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 5mM β-mercaptoethanol.

Nanobodies were expressed in E.coli WK6 cells. Protein expression in TB medium was induced by addition of 1 mM IPTG at an OD600 of 0.9-1.0, and cells were grown overnight at 28°C. The periplasm fraction was harvested by osmotic shock, and Nanobodies were purified by IMAC and SEC using a HiLoad Superdex 75 column (GE Healthcare). The Nb:KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term and Nb:KLC1 TPR -torsinA C-term complexes used for crystallization were obtained by mixing the individual components with a 1∶1 molar ratio and allowing incubation on ice for 30 min. The complexes were further purified by SEC on a 16⁄60 HiLoad Superdex 75 column (GE Healthcare).


Crystallization

All crystallization experiments were performed using the vapor diffusion setup at 18 °C and a 1:1 protein:precipitant ratio in 400-nl sitting drops dispensed with the aid of Mosquito crystallization robot (TTP LabTech). Crystals of the Nb:KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term complex grew from a protein solution concentrated at ~10 mg/ml in the presence of a non-buffered reservoir solution containing 0.04 M potassium phosphate monobasic, 16% polyethylene glycol (PEG) 8000 and 20% glycerol. For Nb:KLC1 TPR -torsinA C-term , the complex was also concentrated at ~10 mg/ml and crystals were obtained in the presence of 0.1 M HEPES pH 7.5, 10% propan-2-ol, 20% PEG 4000. For cryoprotection, the latter crystals were briefly transferred to a reservoir solution in which the propan-2-ol concentration was increased to 30%.


X-ray data collection, processing and structure solution

Datasets at the 2.7-Å and 2.3-Å resolution were measured at the P14 beam line of Petra III (Hamburg, Germany) and at the I04 beam line of Diamond Light Source (Didcot, United Kingdom) for Nb:KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term and Nb:KLC1 TPR -TorsinA C-term , respectively.

Although the growth conditions are different both complexes crystallize in the monoclinic space group C2 and display similar cell dimensions (Table 1). Data were processed using the xia2 pipeline (Kabsch, 2010;Waterman et al., 2016;Winter et al., 2013) and the structures were solved by the molecular replacement (MR) technique using the software package Phaser (McCoy et al., 2007). Model building and crystallographic refinement was performed using COOT (Emsley and Cowtan, 2004) and BUSTER (Bricogne et al., 2017), respectively. A summary of data collection and refinement statistics are shown in Table 1.

Structural images were prepared with PyMol (Schrödinger).


Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC)

Samples for ITC measurements were extensively dialyzed in buffer composed of 25 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol. ITC experiments were conducted on a MicroCal ITC (MicroCal Inc.) instrument at a temperature of 20 °C. GST-JIP3 LZ2 (550 µM) was loaded in the syringe and used as titrant while either His 6 -KLC1 extTPR or His 6 -KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term were loaded in the cell and employed as analytes at the final concentration of 25 µM. Data were corrected for heats of dilution of the protein solution.

Binding constants and other thermodynamic parameters were calculated by fitting the integrated titration data assuming a single set of binding sites using the Origin software package (OriginLab).


Fluorescence polarization (FP)

N-terminal TAMRA-conjugated peptides and non-conjugated peptides used for FP and competition measurements were supplied by Bio-Synthesis. Sequences were as follows: JIP1 C-term , YTCPTEDIYLE; TorsinA C-term TVFTKLDYYLDD; SKIP WD , STNLEWDDSAI.

Measurements were performed on a BMG Labtech PolarStar Omega plate reader at 20 °C by incubating 300 nM TAMRA-labeled peptides with the indicated protein at increasing concentrations in 25 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol.

Estimation of the equilibrium dissociation constant (K D ) for the different peptides was performed assuming a one-site specific-binding model. For competition experiments, a mixture of TAMRA-JIP1 C-term and KLC1 TPR at 300 nM and 2 µM, respectively, was incubated with increasing concentrations of unlabeled SKIP WD peptide in buffer supplemented by 5% (v/v) DMSO. The concentration-dependent decrease in FP signal was fitted to a sigmoidal equation to derive IC50 using the Prism package (GraphPad Software).

K I estimation was performed using the online tool (http://sw16.im.med.umich.edu/software/calc_ki/online tool) based on (Nikolovska-Coleska et al., 2004). All data points are the mean of three replicates.


Native Mass Spectrometry

The protein complex (25 µL) was buffer exchanged into 150 mM ammonium acetate, pH 7.5 using Micro Bio-Spin 6 columns (Bio-Rad, CA). The buffer exchanged sample was infused into the mass spectrometer, a Synapt G2Si qTOF (Waters, MA), using a 20:80

Au:Pd coated borosilicate capillary into a nanoflow electrospray source. The instrument was calibrated using a caesium iodide mixture. The mass spectrometer was run in positive mode with a capillary voltage of 1.2-2.0 kV, a sampling cone of 40-80 V and a source temperature of 45 °C. Mass spectra were processed using MassLynx V4.1 (Waters, MA).


Immunoprecipitation

HeLa cells were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, L-glutamine and penicillin/streptomycin, and cultured in a humidified 5% CO    selected mutations reduce binding between ~65% to 90% compared to wild-type (WT) and

are statistically significant to P < 0.001. 26 The following figure supplements are available for figure 3: Figure S2. Details of the KLC1 TPR -TorsinA C-term interface. Figure S3. Superposition of KLC1 TPR -bound JIP1 C-term and TorsinA C-term peptides.   level. Residues belonging to these helices are shown as stick representation with carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and sulfur atoms colored in gold, dark blue, red, and yellow, respectively.

Helix α1 is less well defined compared to α3. The latter is representative of all other TPR helices.  Nitrogen and oxygen atoms are colored in dark blue and red, respectively. Peptide residues are labelled according to the sequence number and also using their common tyrosine as internal reference (position 0, p 0 ). C-termini are highlighted with a star. Both peptides bind in an extended conformation with the (p -2 -p +1 ) region displaying virtually identical main chain angles while peripheral residues exhibit more variability. TPR1 is not shown as it is not present in the X-ray structure of SKIP WD -bound KLC2 TPR .


Acknowledgments

The X-ray crystallography work was conducted at beamline I04 of Diamond Light Source (Didcot, UK) and at beamline P14 of Petra III/DESY (Hamburg, Germany). We are grateful to the staff scientists working at these beamlines for their excellent technical support.


Additional Information


Competing interests

All authors declare that no competing interests exist. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.


Funding


Author contributions

SP, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article;

MC, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article; YYY, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article; CT, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article; GG, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article; KH, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article; AP, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article; MPD, Conception and design, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article; RAS, Conception and design, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.


Additional Files


Major datasets

The following datasets were generated      


NE) where its ATPase enzymatic activity requires the stimulation by one of two transmembrane cofactors, LAP1 (lamina associated polypeptide 1) or LULL1 (luminal domain like LAP1), via their luminal domains (Zhao et al., 2013).


, 1×10 6 cells were seeded on 10 cm dishes and transfected the next day with vectors expressing FLAG-JIP1 and HA-KLC1 TPR . KLC1 TPR variants R266S, V305T, N343S, N386S and N469S were produced by site-directed mutagenesis using the Quickchange kit and tested alongside wild-type HA-KLC1 TPR . After 24 hours, transfected cells were lysed in 1 mL of lysis buffer (25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 % Nonidet P-40, 0.1 % Triton X-100 containing a protease inhibitor mixture (Roche)) for 10 min before centrifugation at 13000×g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. Supernatants were added to 40 µl of anti-FLAG M2 agarose (A2220, Sigma) and incubated at 4 °C for 2 hours on a rotator. After binding, beads were washed four times in lysis buffer, resuspended in 100 µL of buffer and 25 µL of SDS-loading buffer before boiling. 20 µL of samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE and analyzed by Western blot using antibodies against FLAG and HA.

Figure legends . Figure 1 .
.1KLC1 TPR binds Y-acidic peptides with low micromolar affinity. (A) Schematic diagram of KLC. Residue numbers are for the human version of the KLC1 isoform. Important domains and protein regions are highlighted as well as key interacting partners. The LFP-acidic region (in black) engages in cis with KLC TPR (in gold, numbers correspond to the individual TRP repeats) contributing to the auto-inhibited state. (B) Schematic diagram of the JIP1 cargo adaptor and TorsinA proteins. They use their respective Cterminal regions to bind to KLC1 TPR . The JIP1 C-term (in pink) is located immediately downstream of the PTB domain that is responsible for APP binding while TorsinA C-term (in blue) is an integral part of the AAA+ domain to which LULL1/LAP1 activators bind. (C)Multiple sequence alignment of JIP1 C-term and TorsinA C-term peptides. Functionally unrelated JIP1 and TorsinA proteins share a conserved Y-acidic C-terminal region. Totally conserved Asp and Tyr residues (highlighted by black boxes), a conserved acidic residue (Glu/Asp highlighted by the grey box), and additional acidic residues (empty boxes) identify a common Y-acidic core. Residues upstream the Y-acidic core are not conserved.(D) Fluorescence polarization (FP) measurements indicate that TAMRA-labelled JIP1 C-term binds with high affinity to KLC1 TPR but not to the highly homologous KLC2 TPR . (E) FP measurements show that TAMRA-labelled TorsinA C-term behaves similarly to JIP1 C-term with a strong preference for KLC1 TPR .

Figure 2 .Figure S1 .
2S1Overall structure of the complexes and conformational transition upon Y-acidic peptide recognition. (A,B) KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term . Illustrated representations of the JIP1 C-term peptide (displayed as a pink stick model accompanied by its 2mF o -DF c electron density contoured at the 1.1σ level) bound to the KLC1 TPR domain (gold) in two orthogonal views.The Nanobody (Nb) is shown in light grey. Helices α1 to α12 of the six TPR helix-turnhelix motifs and the non-TPR helix αN located between TPR5 and TPR6 are labeled. The flexible region between αN and α12 is indicated with a broken line while the unmodeled engineered linker connecting KLC1 TPR (α12) to the JIP1 C-term is not shown for clarity.Color-coded N and C labels indicate the N-and C-termini, respectively. Noncarbon elements are nitrogen and oxygen in dark blue and red, respectively. (C,D) KLC1 TPR -TorsinA C-term . As (A,B) for the TorsinA C-term peptide colored in blue. (E) Conformational transition in the KLC1 TPR domain upon recognition of Y-acidic peptides. Superposition of ligand-free KLC1 TPR (PDB code 3NF1, chain A) and KLC2 TPR -TorsinA C-term performed using the Dyndom algorithm . The analysis reveals the presence of an N-terminal 'moving' domain (highlighted in gold and dark grey for KLC1 TPR -TorsinA C-term and KLC1 TPR , respectively) and a C-terminal fixed domain (in light grey) with 'bending residues' shown in violet. The conformational transition requires a rotation of ∼30° degrees around the hinge axis represented by a violet arrow.The following figure supplements are available for figure 2: 2mF o -DF c electron density of selected TPR helices in the KLC1 TPR -TorsinA C-term complex.Movie M1. KLC1 TPR conformational transition upon TorsinA C-term binding.

Figure 3 .
3Molecular interface and cellular validation. (A) Interface contact map for the KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term /TorsinA C-term complexes. The sequence of KLC2 TPR is also shown for comparison. Colored circles indicate residues at the interface as indicated in the inset. Their radius is proportional to the buried area. The letter codes H and S highlight residues involved hydrogen bonds and salt bridges, respectively. The black arrows highlight the only two residues making significant contacts with the Y-acidic peptides that are not conserved in KLC2 TPR . (B) Sliced-surface view of the KLC1 TPR domain with bound JIP1 Cterm . The molecular surface is colored according to its electrostatic potential. Positive and negative potential is shown in blue and red, respectively. (C) Details of the KLC1 TPR -JIP1 Cterm interface. The amino acids involved in the interactions are shown as stick models with oxygen atoms colored in red, nitrogen in blue and carbon in gold and pink for KLC1 TPR and JIP1 C-term , respectively. Hydrogen bonds and salt bridges are represented by dotted grey and magenta lines, respectively. Residues tested for cellular validation (see panel D) are boxed. (D) Western blot analysis of coimmunoprecipitation assays showing the effect of selected KLC1 TPR mutations on the interaction with JIP1. (E) Quantification of relative binding from two independent coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Error bars show SEM. All

Figure 4 .Figure S4 .
4S4Y-acidic and W-acidic motifs bind at partly overlapping sites on KLC TPR and are differentially affected by the presence of the LFP-acidic intramolecular region. (A) Superposition of the KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term and KLC2 TPR -SKIP WD complexes. JIP1 C-term and SKIP WD are shown as stick representation and colored in pink and green, respectively. Selected amino acid positions are labeled using the Y-acidic tyrosine and the W-acidic tryptophan as references (position 0, p 0 ). KLC1 TPR and KLC2 TPR are colored in gold and orange, respectively. TPR1 is missing in the KLC2 TPR -SKIP WD structure. The positions of the Y-acidic JIP1 C-term and W-acidic SKIP WD peptides are shifted along the inner cavity of the super-helical KLC TPR architecture and binding at these alternative locations induces a different degree of conformational change in the receptor. (B) Titration of increasing amounts of nonlabeled SKIP WD in a KLC1 TPR :JIP1 C-term complex shows a decreased FP signal that supports competitive displacement owing to their overlapping binding sites. (C) Superposition of the KLC2 TPR -SKIP WD and KLC2 extTPR structures (view is rotated by ∼90° around the x axis compared to A). For clarity, only the first three TPRs of KLC2 extTPR (in black) that define the local environment of the LFP-acidic (also in black, modelled as poly-Ala) are shown. SKIP WD and LFP-acidic peptides bind at overlapping positions. (D) FP measurements show that the N-terminal extension of KLC1 TPR domain that includes the LFP-acidic region (KLC1 extTPR ) inhibits the interaction with TAMRA-SKIP WD compared with KLC1 TPR alone. (E) Superposition of the KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term and KLC2 extTPR structures (same orientation as C). As in (C) only the first three TPRs of KLC2 extTPR are shown in black. JIP1 C-term (in pink) and LFP-acidic (in black) peptides bind at largely independent positions. (F) FP measurements show that the LFP-acidic N-terminal extension to KLC1 TPR has only a modest impact on TAMRA-JIP1 C-term binding. The following figure supplement is available for figure 4: Conformational transition in the KLC2 TPR domain upon recognition of SKIP WD W-acidic peptide.

Figure 5 .
5JIP3 LZ2 mediates KLC1 TPR dimerization that is independent from JIP1 C-term . (A) ITC data for the binding of GST-JIP3 LZ2 to His 6 -KLC1 extTPR . (B) ITC data for the binding of GST-JIP3 LZ2 to the His 6 -KLC1-JIP1 C-term chimera. (C) Native mass spectra of the untagged SEC-purified KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term :JIP3 LZ2 complex. The illustrations indicate the various species observed and alongside their corresponding molecular weights (MW).

Figure S1 .
S12mF o -DF c electron density of selected TPR helices in the KLC1 TPR -TorsinA C-term complex. (A) α1. (B) α3. Electron density is contoured at the 1.0σ

Figure S2 .
S2Details of the KLC1 TPR -TorsinA C-term interface. (A) Sliced-surface view of the KLC1 TPR domain with bound TorsinA C-term . The molecular surface is colored according to its electrostatic potential. Positive and negative potential is shown in blue and red, respectively. (B) Details of the KLC1 TPR -TorsinA C-term interface. Hydrogen bonds and salt bridges are represented by dotted green and magenta lines, respectively.

Figure S3 .
S3Superposition of KLC1 TPR -bound JIP1 C-term and TorsinA C-term peptides. Carbon atoms belonging to JIP1 C-term are shown in pink while those of TorsinA C-term are in blue.

Figure S4 .
S4Conformational change in the KLC2 TPR domain upon SKIP WD W-acidic peptide binding. Superposition of ligand-free KLC2 TPR (PDB code 3CEQ, chain B) and SKIP WDbound KLC2 TPR (PDB code 3ZFW, chain A) performed using the Dyndom algorithm. The analysis reveals the presence of an N-terminal moving domain (residues 238-297, highlighted in orange and dark grey for KLC2 TPR -SKIP WD and KLC2 TPR , respectively) and a C-terminal fixed domain (residues 298-477, in light grey) while the (296-305) region represents bending residues (in violet). The conformational transition requires a rotation of ∼20° degrees around a hinge axis (violet arrow) that is approximately aligned with helix α6.

Figure 1 .Figure 2 .
12Figure 1.

Figure 3 .
3Figure 3.

Figure 4 .
4Figure 4.


https://www.rcsb.org/structure/6FV0 DOI: 10.2210/pdb6FV0/pdbAuthors 
Year 
Dataset 
title 
Dataset ID and/or URL 

Database, 
licence, and 
accessibility 
information 

Pernigo S, 
Dodding 
MP, and 
Steiner RA 

2018 

Crystal 
structure 
of the TPR 
domain of 
KLC1 in 
complex 
with the C-
terminal 
peptide of 
JIP1 

https://www.rcsb.org/structure/6FUZ 
DOI: 10.2210/pdb6FUZ/pdb 

Publicly 
available at 
RCSB 
Protein Data 
Bank 

Pernigo S, 
Dodding 
MP, and 
Steiner RA 

2018 

Crystal 
structure 
of the TPR 
domain of 
KLC1 in 
complex 
with the C-
terminal 
peptide of 
TorsinA 

Publicly 
available at 
RCSB 
Protein Data 
Bank 


Table 1 .
1X-ray data collection and refinement statistics. Numbers in parentheses refer to the highest resolution bin.Data collection 
Data set KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C-term 
KLC1 TPR -TorsinA C-term 
Beam Line 
P14 (Petra) 
I04 (DLS) 
Wavelength (Å) 
0.9763 
0.9795 
Resolution range a (Å) 
45.18-2.70 
(2.83-2.70) 

52.50-2.29 
(2.33-2.29) 
Space group 
C2 
C2 
Cell dimensions 
(a, b, c) (Å) 
(a, β, γ) (°) 

107.47, 90.36, 51.70 
90, 99.80, 90 

106.04, 89.68, 50.99 
90, 98.00, 90 
Unique reflections a 
13229 
(1747) 

21275 
(1021) 
Overall redundancy a 
3.8 
(3.9) 

4.7 
(3.2) 
Completeness a (%) 
98.6 
(98.5) 

99.6 
(93.9) 
R merge 
a (%) 
5.1 
(117.6) 

8.0 
(83.2) 
R p.i.m. (I) a (%) 
4.7 
(106.7) 

4.0 
(52.0) 
〈I/σ(I) 〉 a 
11.9 
(1.0) 

9.0 
(1.1) 
CC(1/2) a (%) 
99.9 
(58.4) 

99.7 
(74.1) 

Refinement 
PDB code 
6FUZ 
6FV0 
R factor (%)/R free (%) 
23.3/25.6 
20.8/24.5 
# non-H atoms 
protein 
water 
heterogen 

3001 
13 
6 (GOL) 

3039 
90 
7 (PEG) 
Average B value (Å 2 ) 
113.04 
65.81 
rms bond lengths (Å) 
0.009 
0.007 
rms bond angles (°) 
1.08 
0.93 

a 

Table 2 .
2ITC parameters.Zhao, C., Brown, R.S., Chase, A.R., Eisele, M.R., and Schlieker, C. (2013). Regulation of Torsin ATPases by LAP1 and LULL1. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 110, E1545-1554.Zhu, H., Lee, H.Y., Tong, Y., Hong, B.S., Kim, K.P., Shen, Y., Lim, K.J.,Mackenzie, F.,  Tempel, W., and Park, H.W. (2012). Crystal structures of the tetratricopeptide repeat domains of kinesin light chains: insight into cargo recognition mechanisms. PloS one 7, e33943.Interaction 
N 
K D 
(µM) 

ΔH 
(kcal/mol) 

TΔS 
(kcal/mol) 

ΔG 
(kcal/mol) 
His 6 -KLC1 extTPR 
GST-JIP3 LZ2 0.59±0.01 2.99±0.26 
-12.82±0.35 
-5.40 
-7.42 

His 6 -KLC1 TPR -JIP1 C11 
GST-JIP3 LZ2 0.72±0.02 3.19±0.31 
-7.69±0.24 
-0.32 
-7.37 


Human TorsinA can function in the yeast cytosol as a molecular chaperone. I Adam, L Josse, M F Tuite, The Biochemical journal. 474Adam, I., Josse, L., and Tuite, M.F. (2017). Human TorsinA can function in the yeast cytosol as a molecular chaperone. The Biochemical journal 474, 3439-3454.

Cayman ataxia protein caytaxin is transported by kinesin along neurites through binding to kinesin light chains. T Aoyama, S Hata, T Nakao, Y Tanigawa, C Oka, M Kawaichi, Journal of cell science. 122Aoyama, T., Hata, S., Nakao, T., Tanigawa, Y., Oka, C., and Kawaichi, M. (2009). Cayman ataxia protein caytaxin is transported by kinesin along neurites through binding to kinesin light chains. Journal of cell science 122, 4177-4185.

The novel cargo Alcadein induces vesicle association of kinesin-1 motor components and activates axonal transport. Y Araki, T Kawano, H Taru, Y Saito, S Wada, K Miyamoto, H Kobayashi, H O Ishikawa, Y Ohsugi, T Yamamoto, The EMBO journal. 26Araki, Y., Kawano, T., Taru, H., Saito, Y., Wada, S., Miyamoto, K., Kobayashi, H., Ishikawa, H.O., Ohsugi, Y., Yamamoto, T., et al. (2007). The novel cargo Alcadein induces vesicle association of kinesin-1 motor components and activates axonal transport. The EMBO journal 26, 1475-1486.

Two binding partners cooperate to activate the molecular motor Kinesin-1. T L Blasius, D Cai, G T Jih, C P Toret, K J Verhey, The Journal of cell biology. 176Blasius, T.L., Cai, D., Jih, G.T., Toret, C.P., and Verhey, K.J. (2007). Two binding partners cooperate to activate the molecular motor Kinesin-1. The Journal of cell biology 176, 11-17.

Kinesin-dependent axonal transport is mediated by the sunday driver (SYD) protein. A B Bowman, A Kamal, B W Ritchings, A V Philp, M Mcgrail, J G Gindhart, L S Goldstein, Cell. 103Bowman, A.B., Kamal, A., Ritchings, B.W., Philp, A.V., McGrail, M., Gindhart, J.G., and Goldstein, L.S. (2000). Kinesin-dependent axonal transport is mediated by the sunday driver (SYD) protein. Cell 103, 583-594.

. G Bricogne, E Blanc, M Brandl, C Flensburg, P Keller, W Paciorek, P Roversi, A Sharff, O S Smart, C Vonrhein, Global Phasing LtdUnited KingdomBUSTER version 2.10.3 CambridgeBricogne, G., Blanc, E., Brandl, M., Flensburg, C., Keller, P., Paciorek, W., Roversi, P., Sharff, A., Smart, O.S., Vonrhein, C., et al. (2017). BUSTER version 2.10.3 Cambridge, United Kingdom: Global Phasing Ltd.

Axonal transport and neurodegenerative disease. E Chevalier-Larsen, E L Holzbaur, Biochimica et biophysica acta. 1762Chevalier-Larsen, E., and Holzbaur, E.L. (2006). Axonal transport and neurodegenerative disease. Biochimica et biophysica acta 1762, 1094-1108.

Ligand binding by TPR domains. Protein science : a publication of the. A L Cortajarena, Regan , L , Protein Society. 15Cortajarena, A.L., and Regan, L. (2006). Ligand binding by TPR domains. Protein science : a publication of the Protein Society 15, 1193-1198.

TPR proteins: the versatile helix. L D D&apos;andrea, Regan , L , Trends in biochemical sciences. 28D'Andrea, L.D., and Regan, L. (2003). TPR proteins: the versatile helix. Trends in biochemical sciences 28, 655-662.

Structures of TorsinA and its disease-mutant complexed with an activator reveal the molecular basis for primary dystonia. F E Demircioglu, B A Sosa, J Ingram, H L Ploegh, T U Schwartz, eLife 5Demircioglu, F.E., Sosa, B.A., Ingram, J., Ploegh, H.L., and Schwartz, T.U. (2016). Structures of TorsinA and its disease-mutant complexed with an activator reveal the molecular basis for primary dystonia. eLife 5.

A kinesin-1 binding motif in vaccinia virus that is widespread throughout the human genome. M P Dodding, R Mitter, A C Humphries, Way , M , The EMBO journal. 30Dodding, M.P., Mitter, R., Humphries, A.C., and Way, M. (2011). A kinesin-1 binding motif in vaccinia virus that is widespread throughout the human genome. The EMBO journal 30, 4523-4538.

Coot: model-building tools for molecular graphics. P Emsley, K Cowtan, Acta crystallographica Section D, Biological crystallography. 60Emsley, P., and Cowtan, K. (2004). Coot: model-building tools for molecular graphics. Acta crystallographica Section D, Biological crystallography 60, 2126-2132.

Sorting of Dendritic and Axonal Vesicles at the Pre-axonal Exclusion Zone. G G Farias, C M Guardia, D J Britt, X Guo, J S Bonifacino, Cell reports. 13Farias, G.G., Guardia, C.M., Britt, D.J., Guo, X., and Bonifacino, J.S. (2015). Sorting of Dendritic and Axonal Vesicles at the Pre-axonal Exclusion Zone. Cell reports 13, 1221- 1232.

Microtubule-based transport -basic mechanisms, traffic rules and role in neurological pathogenesis. M A Franker, C C Hoogenraad, Journal of cell science. 126Franker, M.A., and Hoogenraad, C.C. (2013). Microtubule-based transport -basic mechanisms, traffic rules and role in neurological pathogenesis. Journal of cell science 126, 2319-2329.

JIP1 regulates the directionality of APP axonal transport by coordinating kinesin and dynein motors. M M Fu, E L Holzbaur, The Journal of cell biology. 202Fu, M.M., and Holzbaur, E.L. (2013). JIP1 regulates the directionality of APP axonal transport by coordinating kinesin and dynein motors. The Journal of cell biology 202, 495- 508.

Integrated regulation of motor-driven organelle transport by scaffolding proteins. M M Fu, E L Holzbaur, Trends in cell biology. 24Fu, M.M., and Holzbaur, E.L. (2014). Integrated regulation of motor-driven organelle transport by scaffolding proteins. Trends in cell biology 24, 564-574.

Structural modeling of heteromeric protein complexes from disassembly pathways and ion mobility-mass spectrometry. Z Hall, A Politis, Robinson , C V , Structure. 20Hall, Z., Politis, A., and Robinson, C.V. (2012). Structural modeling of heteromeric protein complexes from disassembly pathways and ion mobility-mass spectrometry. Structure 20, 1596-1609.

Co-operative versus independent transport of different cargoes by Kinesin-1. J W Hammond, K Griffin, G T Jih, J Stuckey, K J Verhey, Traffic. 9Hammond, J.W., Griffin, K., Jih, G.T., Stuckey, J., and Verhey, K.J. (2008). Co-operative versus independent transport of different cargoes by Kinesin-1. Traffic 9, 725-741.

The Salmonella effector protein PipB2 is a linker for kinesin-1. T Henry, C Couillault, P Rockenfeller, E Boucrot, A Dumont, N Schroeder, A Hermant, L A Knodler, P Lecine, O Steele-Mortimer, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America103Henry, T., Couillault, C., Rockenfeller, P., Boucrot, E., Dumont, A., Schroeder, N., Hermant, A., Knodler, L.A., Lecine, P., Steele-Mortimer, O., et al. (2006). The Salmonella effector protein PipB2 is a linker for kinesin-1. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103, 13497-13502.

Determining the stoichiometry and interactions of macromolecular assemblies from mass spectrometry. H Hernandez, Robinson , C V , Nature protocols. 2Hernandez, H., and Robinson, C.V. (2007). Determining the stoichiometry and interactions of macromolecular assemblies from mass spectrometry. Nature protocols 2, 715-726.

TorsinA in PC12 cells: localization in the endoplasmic reticulum and response to stress. J Hewett, P Ziefer, D Bergeron, T Naismith, H Boston, D Slater, J Wilbur, D Schuback, C Kamm, N Smith, Journal of neuroscience research. 72Hewett, J., Ziefer, P., Bergeron, D., Naismith, T., Boston, H., Slater, D., Wilbur, J., Schuback, D., Kamm, C., Smith, N., et al. (2003). TorsinA in PC12 cells: localization in the endoplasmic reticulum and response to stress. Journal of neuroscience research 72, 158- 168.

Kinesin superfamily motor proteins and intracellular transport. N Hirokawa, Y Noda, Y Tanaka, S Niwa, Nature reviews Molecular cell biology. 10Hirokawa, N., Noda, Y., Tanaka, Y., and Niwa, S. (2009). Kinesin superfamily motor proteins and intracellular transport. Nature reviews Molecular cell biology 10, 682-696.

The structure of the kinesin-1 motortail complex reveals the mechanism of autoinhibition. H Y Kaan, D D Hackney, F Kozielski, Science. 333Kaan, H.Y., Hackney, D.D., and Kozielski, F. (2011). The structure of the kinesin-1 motor- tail complex reveals the mechanism of autoinhibition. Science 333, 883-885.

Xds. W Kabsch, Acta crystallographica Section D, Biological crystallography. 66Kabsch, W. (2010). Xds. Acta crystallographica Section D, Biological crystallography 66, 125-132.

The early onset dystonia protein torsinA interacts with kinesin light chain 1. C Kamm, H Boston, J Hewett, J Wilbur, D P Corey, P I Hanson, V Ramesh, X O Breakefield, The Journal of biological chemistry. 279Kamm, C., Boston, H., Hewett, J., Wilbur, J., Corey, D.P., Hanson, P.I., Ramesh, V., and Breakefield, X.O. (2004). The early onset dystonia protein torsinA interacts with kinesin light chain 1. The Journal of biological chemistry 279, 19882-19892.

A small peptide sequence is sufficient for initiating kinesin-1 activation through part of TPR region of KLC1. T Kawano, M Araseki, Y Araki, M Kinjo, T Yamamoto, T Suzuki, Traffic. 13Kawano, T., Araseki, M., Araki, Y., Kinjo, M., Yamamoto, T., and Suzuki, T. (2012). A small peptide sequence is sufficient for initiating kinesin-1 activation through part of TPR region of KLC1. Traffic 13, 834-848.

Role of the JIP4 scaffold protein in the regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways. N Kelkar, C L Standen, R J Davis, Molecular and cellular biology. 25Kelkar, N., Standen, C.L., and Davis, R.J. (2005). Role of the JIP4 scaffold protein in the regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways. Molecular and cellular biology 25, 2733-2743.

Calsyntenin-1 docks vesicular cargo to kinesin-1. A Konecna, R Frischknecht, J Kinter, A Ludwig, M Steuble, V Meskenaite, M Indermuhle, M Engel, C Cen, J M Mateos, Molecular biology of the cell. 17Konecna, A., Frischknecht, R., Kinter, J., Ludwig, A., Steuble, M., Meskenaite, V., Indermuhle, M., Engel, M., Cen, C., Mateos, J.M., et al. (2006). Calsyntenin-1 docks vesicular cargo to kinesin-1. Molecular biology of the cell 17, 3651-3663.

Inference of macromolecular assemblies from crystalline state. E Krissinel, K Henrick, Journal of molecular biology. 372Krissinel, E., and Henrick, K. (2007). Inference of macromolecular assemblies from crystalline state. Journal of molecular biology 372, 774-797.

Torsin ATPases: structural insights and functional perspectives. E Laudermilch, C Schlieker, Current opinion in cell biology. 40Laudermilch, E., and Schlieker, C. (2016). Torsin ATPases: structural insights and functional perspectives. Current opinion in cell biology 40, 1-7.

A direct interaction between cytoplasmic dynein and kinesin I may coordinate motor activity. L A Ligon, M Tokito, J M Finklestein, F E Grossman, E L Holzbaur, The Journal of biological chemistry. 279Ligon, L.A., Tokito, M., Finklestein, J.M., Grossman, F.E., and Holzbaur, E.L. (2004). A direct interaction between cytoplasmic dynein and kinesin I may coordinate motor activity. The Journal of biological chemistry 279, 19201-19208.

Kinesin motors and disease. E Mandelkow, E M Mandelkow, Trends in cell biology. 12Mandelkow, E., and Mandelkow, E.M. (2002). Kinesin motors and disease. Trends in cell biology 12, 585-591.

c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)-interacting protein-1b/islet-brain-1 scaffolds Alzheimer's amyloid precursor protein with JNK. S Matsuda, T Yasukawa, Y Homma, Y Ito, T Niikura, T Hiraki, S Hirai, S Ohno, Y Kita, M Kawasumi, The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 21Matsuda, S., Yasukawa, T., Homma, Y., Ito, Y., Niikura, T., Hiraki, T., Hirai, S., Ohno, S., Kita, Y., Kawasumi, M., et al. (2001). c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)-interacting protein- 1b/islet-brain-1 scaffolds Alzheimer's amyloid precursor protein with JNK. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 21, 6597-6607.

Phaser crystallographic software. A J Mccoy, R W Grosse-Kunstleve, P D Adams, M D Winn, L C Storoni, R J Read, Journal of applied crystallography. 40McCoy, A.J., Grosse-Kunstleve, R.W., Adams, P.D., Winn, M.D., Storoni, L.C., and Read, R.J. (2007). Phaser crystallographic software. Journal of applied crystallography 40, 658- 674.

Interaction of Huntingtin-associated protein-1 with kinesin light chain: implications in intracellular trafficking in neurons. J R Mcguire, J Rong, S H Li, X J Li, The Journal of biological chemistry. 281McGuire, J.R., Rong, J., Li, S.H., and Li, X.J. (2006). Interaction of Huntingtin-associated protein-1 with kinesin light chain: implications in intracellular trafficking in neurons. The Journal of biological chemistry 281, 3552-3559.

Conventional kinesin: Biochemical heterogeneity and functional implications in health and disease. G Morfini, N Schmidt, C Weissmann, G Pigino, S Kins, Brain research bulletin. 126Morfini, G., Schmidt, N., Weissmann, C., Pigino, G., and Kins, S. (2016). Conventional kinesin: Biochemical heterogeneity and functional implications in health and disease. Brain research bulletin 126, 347-353.

Transcriptome analysis of distinct mouse strains reveals kinesin light chain-1 splicing as an amyloid-beta accumulation modifier. T Morihara, N Hayashi, M Yokokoji, H Akatsu, M A Silverman, N Kimura, M Sato, Y Saito, T Suzuki, K Yanagida, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 111Morihara, T., Hayashi, N., Yokokoji, M., Akatsu, H., Silverman, M.A., Kimura, N., Sato, M., Saito, Y., Suzuki, T., Yanagida, K., et al. (2014). Transcriptome analysis of distinct mouse strains reveals kinesin light chain-1 splicing as an amyloid-beta accumulation modifier. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 111, 2638-2643.

The bacterial cell-division protein ZipA and its interaction with an FtsZ fragment revealed by X-ray crystallography. L Mosyak, Y Zhang, E Glasfeld, S Haney, M Stahl, J Seehra, W S Somers, The EMBO journal. 19Mosyak, L., Zhang, Y., Glasfeld, E., Haney, S., Stahl, M., Seehra, J., and Somers, W.S. (2000). The bacterial cell-division protein ZipA and its interaction with an FtsZ fragment revealed by X-ray crystallography. The EMBO journal 19, 3179-3191.

JLP associates with kinesin light chain 1 through a novel leucine zipper-like domain. Q Nguyen, C M Lee, A Le, E P Reddy, The Journal of biological chemistry. 280Nguyen, Q., Lee, C.M., Le, A., and Reddy, E.P. (2005). JLP associates with kinesin light chain 1 through a novel leucine zipper-like domain. The Journal of biological chemistry 280, 30185-30191.

Structural plasticity of the N-terminal capping helix of the TPR domain of kinesin light chain. T Q Nguyen, M Chenon, F Vilela, C Velours, M Aumont-Nicaise, J Andreani, P F Varela, P Llinas, J Menetrey, PloS one. 12Nguyen, T.Q., Chenon, M., Vilela, F., Velours, C., Aumont-Nicaise, M., Andreani, J., Varela, P.F., Llinas, P., and Menetrey, J. (2017). Structural plasticity of the N-terminal capping helix of the TPR domain of kinesin light chain. PloS one 12, e0186354.

Development and optimization of a binding assay for the XIAP BIR3 domain using fluorescence polarization. Z Nikolovska-Coleska, R Wang, X Fang, H Pan, Y Tomita, P Li, P P Roller, K Krajewski, N G Saito, J A Stuckey, Analytical biochemistry. 332Nikolovska-Coleska, Z., Wang, R., Fang, X., Pan, H., Tomita, Y., Li, P., Roller, P.P., Krajewski, K., Saito, N.G., Stuckey, J.A., et al. (2004). Development and optimization of a binding assay for the XIAP BIR3 domain using fluorescence polarization. Analytical biochemistry 332, 261-273.

The early-onset torsion dystonia gene (DYT1) encodes an ATP-binding protein. L J Ozelius, J W Hewett, C E Page, S B Bressman, P L Kramer, C Shalish, D De Leon, M F Brin, D Raymond, D P Corey, Nature genetics. 17Ozelius, L.J., Hewett, J.W., Page, C.E., Bressman, S.B., Kramer, P.L., Shalish, C., de Leon, D., Brin, M.F., Raymond, D., Corey, D.P., et al. (1997). The early-onset torsion dystonia gene (DYT1) encodes an ATP-binding protein. Nature genetics 17, 40-48.

A general protocol for the generation of Nanobodies for structural biology. E Pardon, T Laeremans, S Triest, S G Rasmussen, A Wohlkonig, A Ruf, S Muyldermans, W G Hol, B K Kobilka, J Steyaert, Nature protocols. 9Pardon, E., Laeremans, T., Triest, S., Rasmussen, S.G., Wohlkonig, A., Ruf, A., Muyldermans, S., Hol, W.G., Kobilka, B.K., and Steyaert, J. (2014). A general protocol for the generation of Nanobodies for structural biology. Nature protocols 9, 674-693.

Structural basis for kinesin-1:cargo recognition. S Pernigo, A Lamprecht, R A Steiner, M P Dodding, Science. 340Pernigo, S., Lamprecht, A., Steiner, R.A., and Dodding, M.P. (2013). Structural basis for kinesin-1:cargo recognition. Science 340, 356-359.

A method for the analysis of domain movements in large biomolecular complexes. G P Poornam, A Matsumoto, H Ishida, S Hayward, Proteins. 76Poornam, G.P., Matsumoto, A., Ishida, H., and Hayward, S. (2009). A method for the analysis of domain movements in large biomolecular complexes. Proteins 76, 201-212.

BORC, a multisubunit complex that regulates lysosome positioning. J Pu, C Schindler, R Jia, M Jarnik, P Backlund, J S Bonifacino, Developmental cell. 33Pu, J., Schindler, C., Jia, R., Jarnik, M., Backlund, P., and Bonifacino, J.S. (2015). BORC, a multisubunit complex that regulates lysosome positioning. Developmental cell 33, 176- 188.

SKIP controls lysosome positioning using a composite kinesin-1 heavy and light chain binding domain. A Sanger, Y Y Yip, T S Randall, S Pernigo, R A Steiner, M P Dodding, Journal of cell science. Sanger, A., Yip, Y.Y., Randall, T.S., Pernigo, S., Steiner, R.A., and Dodding, M.P. (2017). SKIP controls lysosome positioning using a composite kinesin-1 heavy and light chain binding domain. Journal of cell science.

The interaction of Kinesin-1 with its adaptor protein JIP1 can be regulated via proteins binding to the JIP1-PTB domain. T Satake, K Otsuki, Y Banba, J Suenaga, H Hirano, Y Yamanaka, S Ohno, S Hirai, BMC cell biology. 1412Satake, T., Otsuki, K., Banba, Y., Suenaga, J., Hirano, H., Yamanaka, Y., Ohno, S., and Hirai, S. (2013). The interaction of Kinesin-1 with its adaptor protein JIP1 can be regulated via proteins binding to the JIP1-PTB domain. BMC cell biology 14, 12.

. M H Scheinfeld, R Roncarati, P Vito, P A Lopez, M Abdallah, L Adamio, Scheinfeld, M.H., Roncarati, R., Vito, P., Lopez, P.A., Abdallah, M., and D'Adamio, L.

JNK) interacting protein 1 (JIP1) binds the cytoplasmic domain of the Alzheimer's beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP). Jun, The Journal of biological chemistry. 277Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) interacting protein 1 (JIP1) binds the cytoplasmic domain of the Alzheimer's beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP). The Journal of biological chemistry 277, 3767-3775.

Regulation of endosomal membrane traffic by a Gadkin/AP-1/kinesin KIF5 complex. M R Schmidt, T Maritzen, V Kukhtina, V A Higman, L Doglio, N N Barak, H Strauss, H Oschkinat, C G Dotti, V Haucke, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 106Schmidt, M.R., Maritzen, T., Kukhtina, V., Higman, V.A., Doglio, L., Barak, N.N., Strauss, H., Oschkinat, H., Dotti, C.G., and Haucke, V. (2009). Regulation of endosomal membrane traffic by a Gadkin/AP-1/kinesin KIF5 complex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106, 15344-15349.

Structures of the nucleoid occlusion protein SlmA bound to DNA and the C-terminal domain of the cytoskeletal protein FtsZ. M A Schumacher, W Zeng, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 113Schumacher, M.A., and Zeng, W. (2016). Structures of the nucleoid occlusion protein SlmA bound to DNA and the C-terminal domain of the cytoskeletal protein FtsZ. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 113, 4988-4993.

Recognition of a functional peroxisome type 1 target by the dynamic import receptor pex5p. W A Stanley, F V Filipp, P Kursula, N Schuller, R Erdmann, W Schliebs, M Sattler, M Wilmanns, Molecular cell. 24Stanley, W.A., Filipp, F.V., Kursula, P., Schuller, N., Erdmann, R., Schliebs, W., Sattler, M., and Wilmanns, M. (2006). Recognition of a functional peroxisome type 1 target by the dynamic import receptor pex5p. Molecular cell 24, 653-663.

JIP1 and JIP3 cooperate to mediate TrkB anterograde axonal transport by activating kinesin-1. Cellular and molecular life sciences. T Sun, Y Li, T Li, H Ma, Y Guo, X Jiang, M Hou, S Huang, Chen , Z , CMLSSun, T., Li, Y., Li, T., Ma, H., Guo, Y., Jiang, X., Hou, M., Huang, S., and Chen, Z. (2017). JIP1 and JIP3 cooperate to mediate TrkB anterograde axonal transport by activating kinesin-1. Cellular and molecular life sciences : CMLS.

FtsA forms actin-like protofilaments. P Szwedziak, Q Wang, S M Freund, J Lowe, The EMBO journal. 31Szwedziak, P., Wang, Q., Freund, S.M., and Lowe, J. (2012). FtsA forms actin-like protofilaments. The EMBO journal 31, 2249-2260.

Cargo of kinesin identified as JIP scaffolding proteins and associated signaling molecules. K J Verhey, D Meyer, R Deehan, J Blenis, B J Schnapp, T A Rapoport, B Margolis, The Journal of cell biology. 152Verhey, K.J., Meyer, D., Deehan, R., Blenis, J., Schnapp, B.J., Rapoport, T.A., and Margolis, B. (2001). Cargo of kinesin identified as JIP scaffolding proteins and associated signaling molecules. The Journal of cell biology 152, 959-970.

Diffraction-geometry refinement in the DIALS framework. D G Waterman, G Winter, R J Gildea, J M Parkhurst, A S Brewster, N K Sauter, G Evans, Acta crystallographica Section D, Structural biology. 72Waterman, D.G., Winter, G., Gildea, R.J., Parkhurst, J.M., Brewster, A.S., Sauter, N.K., and Evans, G. (2016). Diffraction-geometry refinement in the DIALS framework. Acta crystallographica Section D, Structural biology 72, 558-575.

The JIP family of MAPK scaffold proteins. A J Whitmarsh, Biochemical Society transactions. 34Whitmarsh, A.J. (2006). The JIP family of MAPK scaffold proteins. Biochemical Society transactions 34, 828-832.

Nesprins anchor kinesin-1 motors to the nucleus to drive nuclear distribution in muscle cells. M H Wilson, E L Holzbaur, Development. 142Wilson, M.H., and Holzbaur, E.L. (2015). Nesprins anchor kinesin-1 motors to the nucleus to drive nuclear distribution in muscle cells. Development 142, 218-228.

Decision making in xia2. G Winter, C M Lobley, S M Prince, Acta crystallographica Section D, Biological crystallography. 69Winter, G., Lobley, C.M., and Prince, S.M. (2013). Decision making in xia2. Acta crystallographica Section D, Biological crystallography 69, 1260-1273.

The light chains of kinesin-1 are autoinhibited. Y Y Yip, S Pernigo, A Sanger, M Xu, M Parsons, R A Steiner, M P Dodding, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 113Yip, Y.Y., Pernigo, S., Sanger, A., Xu, M., Parsons, M., Steiner, R.A., and Dodding, M.P. (2016). The light chains of kinesin-1 are autoinhibited. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 113, 2418-2423.

Self-recognition mechanism of MamA, a magnetosome-associated TPR-containing protein, promotes complex assembly. N Zeytuni, E Ozyamak, K Ben-Harush, G Davidov, M Levin, Y Gat, T Moyal, A Brik, A Komeili, R Zarivach, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 108Zeytuni, N., Ozyamak, E., Ben-Harush, K., Davidov, G., Levin, M., Gat, Y., Moyal, T., Brik, A., Komeili, A., and Zarivach, R. (2011). Self-recognition mechanism of MamA, a magnetosome-associated TPR-containing protein, promotes complex assembly. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 108, E480-487.

Structural and functional discussion of the tetra-tricopeptide repeat, a protein interaction module. N Zeytuni, R Zarivach, Structure. 20Zeytuni, N., and Zarivach, R. (2012). Structural and functional discussion of the tetra-trico- peptide repeat, a protein interaction module. Structure 20, 397-405.