Adipose infl ammation: cause or consequence of obesity-related insulin resistance Correlation between obesity-related insulin resistance and infl ammation
2008

Ping Jiao 
Hallett Center for Diabetes and Endocrinology
Brown Medical School
Brown Medical School
Hallett Center for Diabetes and Endocrinology
55 Claverick St, Rm 31802903Providence, ProvidenceRI, RIUSA, USA

Haiyan Xu 
Hallett Center for Diabetes and Endocrinology
Brown Medical School
Brown Medical School
Hallett Center for Diabetes and Endocrinology
55 Claverick St, Rm 31802903Providence, ProvidenceRI, RIUSA, USA

Haiyan Xu 
Hallett Center for Diabetes and Endocrinology
Brown Medical School
Brown Medical School
Hallett Center for Diabetes and Endocrinology
55 Claverick St, Rm 31802903Providence, ProvidenceRI, RIUSA, USA

Adipose infl ammation: cause or consequence of obesity-related insulin resistance Correlation between obesity-related insulin resistance and infl ammation

Diabetes, Metabolic Syndrome and Obesity
200825 R E V I E W Correspondence:adipose infl ammationinsulin resistanceobesity
Obesity constitutes a critical risk factor for the development of many life threatening diseases, particularly insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. Adipose tissue plays an important role in regulating whole body energy homeostatsis and obesity-related insulin resistance. Infl ammation has been commonly linked to insulin resistance. Recent studies demonstrated that adipose tissue is an important source for producing infl ammatory molecules in the obese state, primarily due to accumulation of macrophages. Animal models defi cient in key infl ammatory molecules or with reduced adipose macrophage infi ltration are protected from development of obesity-related insulin resistance. Repression of adipose infl ammation may be a useful approach to ameliorate obesity-associated metabolic disorders.

Correlation between obesity-related insulin resistance and infl ammation

Approximately 30% of US adults and 20% of school-aged children are obese. Obesity has become an epidemic disease and its incidence is still rapidly increasing at an alarming rate (Hill et al 2003). The hallmark of obesity is manifested by massive expansion of adipose tissue, attributable to excessive food consumption and sedentary life style in modern society. Obesity has been identifi ed as a major risk factor for the development of many life-threatening diseases, such as hypertension, atherosclerosis, dyslipidemia, and particularly type 2 diabetes (Kopelman 2000). Type 2 diabetes itself is also a risk factor for the development of heart disease and stroke. As a matter of fact, more than 65% of people with diabetes die from heart disease or stroke. The underlying molecular mechanism for obesity-related metabolic disorders is still not well understood. The correlation between obesity, diabetes and infl ammation have been observed as early as several decades ago, when increased circulating levels of acute phase proteins, such as fi brinogen, haptoglobin, and α-1 antitripsin, were reported (Fearnley et al 1959;Ogston and McAndrew 1964;Ganrot et al 1967). In more recent studies, elevated serum concentrations of more acute phase proteins were shown, including sialic acid, α-1 acid glycoprotein, C-reactive protein (CRP) and serum amyloid A (Crook et al 1993;Pickup et al 1997). In addition, infl ammatory proteins such as IL-6 and plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1), as well as increased white cell count are also found to correlate with type 2 diabetes (Festa et al 2002;Pradhan et al 2001;Vozarova et al 2002). However, fi ndings from these human population studies alone were not suffi cient to stimulate thoughts regarding whether infl ammation could be a causative factor for the pathogenesis of obesity-related insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes.

Recent studies indicate that infl ammatory event in the adipose tissue may play a critical role in the development of insulin resistance. Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα) is the fi rst cytokine identifi ed with elevated expression in adipose tissue from obese rodents and humans, resulting from both increased production and abnormal processing (Hotamisligil et al 1993(Hotamisligil et al , 1995Xu et al 2002b). TNFα inhibits signaling from the insulin receptor and neutralization of TNFα by infusion with a tumor necrosis factor receptor-immunoglobin G (TNFR-IgG) chimeric protein improves insulin sensitivity (Feinstein et al 1993;Hotamisligil et al 1993Hotamisligil et al , 1994. TNFα can also cause dysregulated lipolysis in adipocytes, therefore potentially contributes to the elevation of circulating free fatty acid (FFA) concentration (Green et al 1994). FFA has been demonstrated to be a critical factor for causing systemic insulin resistance in multiple tissues, such as liver and muscle. The discovery that infl ammatory cytokine TNFα impairs insulin signaling greatly stimulated the fi eld and scientists started to view that infl ammation may be a causative event for the pathogenesis of obesity-related insulin resistance. Subsequently, more cytokines, chemokines and other secretary proteins are found to increase in adipose tissue of obese rodents and/or humans, including leptin, interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-8, monocyte chemotactic factor 1 (MCP-1), angiotensinogen, visfatin, resistin, retinol-binding protein-4, serum amyloid A (SAA). Among these molecules, IL-6, IL-8, and MCP-1 have been reported to impair insulin action (Rotter et al 2003;Sartipy and Loskutoff 2003). The reason that cytokine and chemokine production increases in response to triglyceride accumulation in adipose tissue is not clear. One possibility is that these factors might have designated roles to limit excessive fat mass expansion, which unfortunately is at the cost of inducing insulin resistance. Consistent with this hypothesis, TNFα, IL-8, and MCP-1 have been reported to inhibit adipocyte differentiation (Xu et al 1999;Gerhardt et al 2001;Xu and Hotamisligil 2001). Animals defi cient in CCR2, the major receptor of MCP-1, have larger adipocytes but are more insulin sensitive (Weisberg et al 2006). This hypothesis is further supported by two animal models: adipose tissue TNFα transgenic and fat-specifi c insulin receptor knockout mice. Both models demonstrated reduced adiposity but accompanied by severely impaired insulin signaling in adipose tissue (Bluher et al 2002;Xu et al 2002a). However, the systemic insulin sensitivity has been improved despite adipose insulin resistance, suggesting the importance of overall fat mass on metabolism.


Animal models defi cient in key infl ammatory molecules

Intensive investigations with various animal models defi cient in key molecules in the infl ammatory pathway further provided solid evidence for the causative role of infl ammation in the development of obesity-related insulin resistance.

The fi rst proof of principle animal model is TNFα-defi cient mice. In the absence of TNFα, mice are partially protected from development of hyperlipidymia, hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia without an effect on body weight in obesity models induced by high fat diet, defi ciency of leptin, or gold-thioglucose injection (Uysal et al 1997;Ventre et al 1997). Increased tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor was observed in both adipose tissue and muscle in obese mice defi cient in TNFα. In addition, KB-R7785, a synthetic compound that inhibits TNFα production, can improve insulin sensitivity in obese/diabetic KKA y mice (Morimoto et al 1997). These in vivo data support a role of TNFα as a candidate mediator of obesity-induced insulin resistance but also indicate the involvement of other factors since the protection is partial. TNFα signals through two receptors, p55 and p75. The role of TNFα receptors in mediating the effect of TNFα on obesity-related insulin resistance is controversial in two independent studies, which might be attributable to differences in genetic backgrounds (Schreyer et al 1998;Uysal et al 1998).

Recently, the c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) has appeared as a vital regulator in obesity and insulin resistance. Both TNFα and FFA are potent stimulators for JNK activation. Indeed, JNK activity is elevated in liver, adipose tissue and muscle in both diet-induced obese mice and ob/ob mice (Hirosumi et al 2002). Interestingly, different JNK isoforms seem to play distinct roles. JNK1 defi cient mice have decreased adiposity and adipocyte size, increased serum adiponection and lowered serum resistin concentrations, lowered glucose and insulin concentrations, enhanced insulin signaling in the liver and improved whole body insulin sensitivity upon high fat diet (Hirosumi et al 2002). Absence of JNK1 also partially protected ob/ob mice from developing hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia (Hirosumi et al 2002). In contrast, defi ciency of JNK2 does not have any infl uence on diet-induced insulin resistance. These results demonstrate that JNK1 accounts for the majority of increased JNK activity in insulin target tissues and is an important regulator in obesity-related insulin resistance.

IKKβ, the master regulator of infl ammation which can also be activated by TNFα and FFA, is another important serine kinase involved in the development of obesity-related insulin resistance. Homozygous IKKβ defi ciency is lethal due to increased liver apoptosis but heterozygous IKKβ +/− mice appear normal. Lowered fasting glucose and insulin concentrations were observed in IKKβ +/− mice on both standard diet and high-fat diet compared to wild-type littermates (Yuan et al 2001). Furthermore, absence of one IKKβ allele is suffi cient Adipose infl ammation and insulin resistance to lower blood glucose and plasma FFA levels as well as improve glucose tolerance in ob/ob mice (Yuan et al 2001). Arkan and colleagues (2005) further selectively deleted IKKβ in hepatocytes or myeloid cells and showed that IKKβ deficiency in hepatocytes locally protected liver from development of obesity-related insulin resistance, but fat and muscle still develop insulin resistance upon high fat diet. Consistent with these results, transgenic mice selectively expressing the constitutively active form of IKKβ in the liver have increased hepatic production of proinfl ammatory cytokines, which caused profound hepatic insulin resistance (Cai et al 2005). In addition, these proinfl ammatory cytokines also cross talk with other tissues and lead to hyperglycemia, and modest systemic insulin resistance (Cai et al 2005). Interestingly, specifi c deletion of IKKβ in myeloid cells of diet-induced obese mice or ob/ob mice is suffi cient to improve systemic insulin sensitivity, which is attributable to decreased production of proinfl ammatory cytokines or chemokines that are known to inhibit insulin signaling in cultured cells (Arkan et al 2005). These data demonstrate that IKKβ plays an important role in the development of obesity-related insulin resistance by acting in multiple cell types, particularly myeloid cells.

TLR4, a family member of toll-like receptors (TLRs), plays a critical role in pattern recognition and activation of innate immunity (Medzhitov et al 1997). Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is the well characterized ligand for TLR4 (Poltorak et al 1998). Several recent studies demonstrate that FFAs, whose levels are elevated in obesity, can also activate TLR4 . Defi ciency of TLR4 can prevent FFA-induced production of infl ammatory cytokines in both macrophages and adipocytes. In lipid-infused animals, absence of TLR4 signifi cantly improved insulin signaling in muscle and decreased production of infl ammatory cytokines in adipose tissue (Shi et al 2006). Absence of TLR4 also modestly improved systemic insulin sensitivity in female mice upon high fat challenge, presumably through reduced production of proinfl ammatory cytokines in liver and adipose tissue. Similar phenotypes are also observed in diet-induced obese mice with a loss-of-function mutation in TLR4, confi rming a role of TLR4 in linking innate immunity and lipid-induced insulin resistance (Tsukumo et al 2007).


Adipose tissue macrophage accumulation in obesity

Despite the substantive amount of data demonstrating the link between infl ammation and obesity-related insulin resistance, the specifi c cell source for production of infl ammatory molecules are unclear though it appears to be originated from adipose tissue. It was originally thought that adipocytes are the cell type that produces proinfl ammatory factors. It has been shown that adipocytes possess many features of immune cells and adipocyte precursors have phagocytic capacity and can be converted into macrophage-like cells in response to certain stimuli (Cousin et al 1999;Charriere et al 2003).

Two studies in 2003, which used transcription profi ling approach to compare adipose tissue from lean and several rodent obesity models, or adipose tissue from obese animals before and after treatment with compounds of the thiazolidinedione class of anti-diabetic agents, have showed that the majority of genes signifi cantly upregulated in obese adipose tissue are macrophage and infl ammatory genes, which can be repressed by rosiglitazone (Weisberg et al 2003;Xu et al 2003). By separating adipocytes from stromal-vascular cells and histological examination, these studies revealed massive macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue in the obese state.

Bone marrow transplant study further demonstrated that these macrophages are predominantly infi ltrated, rather than converted from local preadipocytes. Activated macrophages are known to secrete a variety of pro-infl ammatory cytokines and chemokines. In these two studies, isolated stromal-vascular cells, the fraction containing infi ltrated macrophages, are demonstrated to be the predominant source for producing proinfl ammatory molecules in comparison to adipocytes, including TNFα, MCP-1, IKKβ, IL-1β, and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). These results suggest that infi ltrated macrophages in adipose tissue in state of obesity are likely an important source contributing to elevation of circulating infl ammatory marker proteins. Blood mononuclear cells (MNCs) in the obese state are also reported to be in a proinfl ammatory state, as refl ected by increased nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB) binding activity, decreased IκB content and increased transcription of NF-κB controlled proinfl ammatory genes, indicating that infl amed circulating MNCs may also contribute to elevation of circulating infl ammatory marker proteins as well . The triggering factors for macrophage infi ltration into adipose tissue and the roles of infi ltrating macrophages are still not well understood. One speculation is that enlargement of fat cells, which commonly occurs in obese state at relatively early stage, may trigger the initial secretion of critical monocyte chemotactic factors. Once macrophages infi ltrate into adipose tissue and get activated, they become the major source of infl ammatory molecules and continue to attract more macrophages to further amplify the harmful cycle. The prototype monocyte chemotactic factor, MCP-1, has been under intensive investigation as such a candidate for recruiting macrophages into adipose tissue in obesity since its expression is upregulated in adipose tissue in early stage of diet-induced obesity. However, controversial results have been reported for the role of MCP-1. One publication showed that mice defi cient in MCP-1 have partially reduced adipose tissue macrophage accumulation upon high fat diet and are accompanied with improved insulin sensitivity and hepatic steatosis (Kanda et al 2006). Acute expression of a dominant-negative MCP-1 mutant also ameliorated insulin resistance in both diet-induced obese mice and db/db mice (Kanda et al 2006). Another publication demonstrated no change of adipose macrophage content in MCP-1 knock out mice (Inouye et al 2007). These results suggest the roles of other monocyte chemotactic factors. Nevertheless, reports from two independent laboratories reported that mice overexpressing MCP-1 transgene in adipose tissue under the promoter of adipocyte fatty acid binding protein have increased macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue and are insulin resistant (Kamei et al 2006;Kanda et al 2006). The major receptor of MCP-1 is CCR2, which also mediates signaling of other monocyte chemotactic factors such as MCP-2 and MCP-3. Macrophages recruited into adipose tissue in obese state have increased expression of CCR2. Mice defi cient in CCR2 have a lean phenotype when fed on a high fat diet due to reduced food intake. When high fat-diet fed CCR2 defi cient mice and control mice are matched for adiposity, partially decreased adipose macrophage content was observed. These mice have improved infl ammatory profi le in adipose tissue, along with improved systemic insulin sensitivity and ameliorated hepatic steatosis (Weisberg et al 2006). DIO mice treated with CCR2 antagonist have a 28% reduction of adipose macrophage content and have improved hyperglycemia (Weisberg et al 2006). These data suggest that CCR2 plays a role in adipose tissue macrophage recruitment in obese state and also point out the potential role(s) of other chemokine receptor(s) since absence of CCR2 only partially blocked macrophage infi ltration upon high fat diet.

Macrophages are phagocytic cells that clear pathogens, dead cells and cell debris in innate immunity and wound healing. It has been shown that adipocyte death increases signifi cantly in obese humans and mice via the mechanism of necrosis. The majority of infi ltrated macrophages in adipose tissue are localized around dead adipocytes to form crownlike structure (CLS) (Cinti et al 2005). This scenario highly resembles atherosclerosis, which is caused by macrophage infi ltration into aorta to clean excessive cholesterol and subsequent formation of foam cells. Interestingly, frequency of adipocyte death in epidydimal fat pat correlates with the extent of macrophage infi ltration (Strissel et al 2007). These data indicate that infi ltrated macrophages are involved in clearance of cell debris, leaked lipids and perhaps are important for adipose tissue remodeling. Macrophages are heterogeneous in function and their properties and activation state are dependent upon local environment factors. Two polarization states, M1 or "classically activated" and M2 or "alternatively activated", have been defi ned for macrophage activation. M1 macrophages have high proinfl ammatory cytokine expression and produce reactive oxygen species; M2 macrophages express high levels of anti-infl ammatory cytokines, such as IL-10. IL-10 can selectively inhibit transcription rates of infl ammatory gene and activate STAT3 to attenuate infl ammatory signals induced by TNFα. Macrophages infi ltrated into adipose tissue in obese state possess features of M1 macrophages and more importantly, macrophages in CLS express protein of TNFα and IL-6 (Lumeng et al 2007;Strissel et al 2007). In contrast, resident macrophages in adipose tissue of lean mice have many features of M2 macrophages, including expression of M2 macrophage characteristic genes such as Ym1, arginase 1, and IL-10. High fat diet is suffi cient to promote macrophage phenotypic switch from anti-infl ammatory M2 polarization to proinfl ammatory M1 polarization. Peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-γ (PPARγ), the molecular target for the anti-diabetic thiazolidinedione class of compounds, has been reported to play a key role in maturation of alternatively activated macrophages with anti-infl ammatory properties (Bouhlel et al 2007). Mice defi cient of PPARγ in myeloid cells have impaired activation of M2 macrophages, as demonstrated by decreased expression and activity of arginase, hallmarks of alternatively activated macrophages (Hevener et al 2007;Odegaard et al 2007). These mice have lower content of alternatively activated macrophages, increased local infl ammation in adipose tissue, impaired insulin signaling in adipose tissue, muscle, and liver on chow diet. These mice are also prone to the development of obesity-related insulin resistance. These results indicate that phenotypic switch from M2 to M1 macrophages are critical for impairing insulin sensitivity.

Transient neutrophil infi ltration into adipose tissue in obesity is also reported, which occurs 3 and 7 days upon high fat diet in epididymal but not subcutaneous fat and disappears on all subsequent times points (Elgazar-Carmon et al 2008). A potential chemotactic factor for neutrophil infi ltration has been proposed to be IL-8, which can be secreted by adipose tissue in obesity. Neutrophils have been demonstrated to directly adhere to adipocytes and this process can be infl uenced by cations and activation state of neutrophils. The time course of adipose tissue neutrophil infi ltration precedes macrophage infi ltration, which does not start increase till 8 weeks upon high fat diet (Strissel et al 2007). Neutrophil infi ltration refl ects acute infl ammation while macrophage infi ltration symbols chronic infl ammation. Activated neutrophils can release ROS and TNFα, whether infi ltrated neutrophils contribute to adipose infl ammation remains a question to be studied.


Targeting infl ammation as a potential therapeutic approach for improving insulin sensitivity

The fi ndings for a potential role of adipose infl ammation in the development of insulin resistance from animal models can also be extended to humans. Macrophage accumulation has been observed in human adipose tissue and the extent has strong positive correlation with BMI and adipocyte area but negatively related to insulin sensitivity (Weisberg et al 2003). The macrophage content is depot dependent. Omental fat of obese humans contains more macrophages than subcutaneous fat. Omental fat macrophage infi ltration correlates to fasting glucose, insulin and hepatic fi broinfl ammatory lesions in obese patients (Cancello et al 2006). In addition, obese subjects with impaired glucose homeostasis have preferential omental adipose macrophage infi ltration (Harman-Boehm et al 2007). Weight loss in obese subjects either through low calorie diet or bariatric surgery have decreased expression of infl ammatory factors and increased expression of anti-infl ammatory molecules, accompanied with decreased macrophage number and improved metabolic profi le (Clement et al 2004;Cancello et al 2005). These data suggest that anti-infl ammatory reagents or blockage of macrophage infi ltration into adipose tissue may be benefi cial for improving systemic insulin resistance in obese patients.

Infl ammation has been generally correlated with insulin resistance in many situations, such as trauma, burn and infection. Although it is a relatively recent fi nding that adipose infl ammation is associated with obesity-related insulin resistance, the effect of anti-infl ammation reagent sodium salicylate on improving symptoms of diabetes mellitus was demonstrated a century ago (Williamson 1901). Later on, high dose aspirin was discovered to not only improve arthritis in a diabetic patient, but also make daily insulin injection unnecessary for controlling blood glucose level (Reid et al 1957). Cessation of aspirin upon disappearance of joint symptoms caused recurrence of glucose intolerance. Subsequent clinical trial with high dose-aspirin reconfi rmed the effect on lowering blood glucose levels (Hecht and Goldner 1959). The molecular target mediating the hypoglycemic effect of salicylates has now been identifi ed, which is IKKβ (Yuan et al 2001). IKKβ activates NF-κB, which is a master transcription factor that activates transcription of numerous infl ammatory genes. Potent small molecule inhibitor aginst IKKβ may be benefi cial for improving insulin reistance in obese subjects.

Another line of evidence that repression of inflammation may be useful for controlling hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetic patients derives from the anti-infl ammatory effect of the widely used insulin sensitizer. Thiazolidinediones (including rosiglitazone and pioglitazone), a new and highly effi cacious class of insulin-sensitizing drugs that mainly targeting adipose tissue by activating PPARγ, have been reported to have anti-infl ammatory effect. PPARγ is a ligand-dependent nuclear hormone receptor predominantly expressed in adipocyte and is a master regulator of adipocyte differentiation. Expression of PPARγ is signifi cantly increased upon macrophage activation and treatment with thiazolidinediones inhibits production of monocyte infl ammatory cytokines and expression of iNOS, gelatinase B and scavenger genes, partly through repressing the activities of transcription factors AP-1, STAT, and NF-κB. In animal models, PPARγ agonists have been reported to improve development of atherosclerosis (Li et al 2000;Stojanovska et al 2007). These results indicate that thiazolidinediones can repress macrophage-mediated infl ammation. Interestingly, atherosclerosis-prone apolipoprotein E-defi cient mice transplanted with infl amed visceral fat developed signifi cantly more atherosclerosis compared to sham-operated animals. Treatment with pioglitazone decreased macrophage content of the transplanted visceral fat tissue, reduced plasma MCP-1 and reduced atherosclerosis (Ohman et al 2008). Ten-week treatment with pioglitazone in subjects with impaired glucose tolerance reduced macrophage number in adipose tissue and decreased infl ammatory cytokine production (Di Gregorio et al 2005). Furthermore, thiazolidinediones are also reported to suppress NF-κB activity in infl amed circulating MNCs in obese subjects (Ghanim et al 2001(Ghanim et al , 2006Mohanty et al 2004). These results suggest that the insulin sensitizing effect of thiazolidinediones could be partially achieved through repression of adipose tissue macrophage content and subsequent reduction of infl ammatory factor production.

In summary, substantive evidence derived from both animal models and human studies supports an important role of adipose infl ammation in the development of obesityrelated insulin resistance. Development of new therapeutic agents targeting improving adipose infl ammation, such as blocking macrophage infi ltration and preventing phenotypic switch of M2 to M1 macrophages, may be effective for attenuating insulin resistance and hyperglycemia associated with obesity.


Disclosure

The authors report no confl icts of interest in this work.

Figure 1
1Mechanism of adipose macrophage infi ltration and the role of adipose infl ammation in systemic insulin resistance. Accumulation of triglycerides in adipocytes causes increased production of MCP-1 and the other monocyte chemotactic factors, which attract circulating monocytes to migrate into adipose tissue. These infl amed monocytes mature into classically activated macrophages and secrete a variety of proinfl ammatory factors that can impair insulin signaling in adipocytes. Dysregulated adipocyte lipolysis contributes to elevation of circulating FFA level which subsequently induces insulin resistance in other tissues such as liver and muscle.

IKK-beta links infl ammation to obesity-induced insulin resistance. M C Arkan, A L Hevener, F R Greten, Nat Med. 11Arkan MC, Hevener AL, Greten FR, et al. 2005. IKK-beta links infl ammation to obesity-induced insulin resistance. Nat Med, 11:191-8.

Adipose tissue selective insulin receptor knockout protects against obesity and obesity-related glucose intolerance. M Bluher, M D Michael, O D Peroni, Dev Cell. 3Bluher M, Michael MD, Peroni OD, et al. 2002. Adipose tissue selective insulin receptor knockout protects against obesity and obesity-related glucose intolerance. Dev Cell, 3:25-38.

PPARgamma activation primes human monocytes into alternative M2 macrophages with antiinfl ammatory properties. M A Bouhlel, B Derudas, E Rigamonti, Cell Metab. 6Bouhlel MA, Derudas B, Rigamonti E, et al. 2007. PPARgamma activation primes human monocytes into alternative M2 macrophages with anti- infl ammatory properties. Cell Metab, 6:137-43.

Local and systemic insulin resistance resulting from hepatic activation of IKK-beta and NF-kappaB. D Cai, M Yuan, D F Frantz, Nat Med. 11Cai D, Yuan M, Frantz DF, et al. 2005. Local and systemic insulin resis- tance resulting from hepatic activation of IKK-beta and NF-kappaB. Nat Med, 11:183-90.

Reduction of macrophage infi ltration and chemoattractant gene expression changes in white adipose tissue of morbidly obese subjects after surgery-induced weight loss. R Cancello, C Henegar, N Viguerie, Diabetes. 54Cancello R, Henegar C, Viguerie N, et al. 2005. Reduction of macrophage infi ltration and chemoattractant gene expression changes in white adi- pose tissue of morbidly obese subjects after surgery-induced weight loss. Diabetes, 54:2277-86.

Increased infi ltration of macrophages in omental adipose tissue is associated with marked hepatic lesions in morbid human obesity. R Cancello, J Tordjman, C Poitou, Diabetes. 55Cancello R, Tordjman J, Poitou C, et al. 2006. Increased infi ltration of mac- rophages in omental adipose tissue is associated with marked hepatic lesions in morbid human obesity. Diabetes, 55:1554-61.

Preadipocyte conversion to macrophage. Evidence of plasticity. G Charriere, B Cousin, E Arnaud, J Biol Chem. 278Charriere G, Cousin B, Arnaud E, et al. 2003. Preadipocyte conversion to macrophage. Evidence of plasticity. J Biol Chem, 278:9850-5.

Adipocyte death defi nes macrophage localization and function in adipose tissue of obese mice and humans. S Cinti, G Mitchell, G Barbatelli, J Lipid Res. 46Cinti S, Mitchell G, Barbatelli G, et al. 2005. Adipocyte death defi nes macrophage localization and function in adipose tissue of obese mice and humans. J Lipid Res, 46:2347-55.

Weight loss regulates infl ammation-related genes in white adipose tissue of obese subjects. K Clement, N Viguerie, C Poitou, FASEB J. 18Clement K, Viguerie N, Poitou C, et al. 2004. Weight loss regulates infl ammation-related genes in white adipose tissue of obese subjects. FASEB J, 18:1657-69.

A role for preadipocytes as macrophage-like cells. B Cousin, O Munoz, M Andre, FASEB J. 13Cousin B, Munoz O, Andre M, et al. 1999. A role for preadipocytes as macrophage-like cells. FASEB J, 13:305-12.

Serum sialic acid and acute phase proteins in type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus. M A Crook, P Tutt, H Simpson, Clin Chim Acta. 219Crook MA, Tutt P, Simpson H, et al. 1993. Serum sialic acid and acute phase proteins in type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Clin Chim Acta, 219:131-8.

Expression of CD68 and macrophage chemoattractant protein-1 genes in human adipose and muscle tissues: association with cytokine expression, insulin resistance, and reduction by pioglitazone. Di Gregorio, G B Yao-Borengasser, A Rasouli, N , Diabetes. 54Di Gregorio GB, Yao-Borengasser A, Rasouli N, et al. 2005. Expression of CD68 and macrophage chemoattractant protein-1 genes in human adi- pose and muscle tissues: association with cytokine expression, insulin resistance, and reduction by pioglitazone. Diabetes, 54:2305-13.

Neutrophils transiently infi ltrate intra-abdominal fat early in the course of high fat feeding. V Elgazar-Carmon, A Rudich, N Hadad, J Lipid Res. 49Elgazar-Carmon V, Rudich A, Hadad N, et al. 2008. Neutrophils transiently infi ltrate intra-abdominal fat early in the course of high fat feeding. J Lipid Res, 49:1894-903.

Reduction of blood fi brinolytic activity in diabetes mellitus by insulin. G R Fearnley, C T Vincent, R Chakrabarti, Lancet. 21067Fearnley GR, Vincent CT, Chakrabarti R. 1959. Reduction of blood fi brino- lytic activity in diabetes mellitus by insulin. Lancet, 2:1067.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha suppresses insulin-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor and its substrates. R Feinstein, H Kanety, M Z Papa, J Biol Chem. 268Feinstein R, Kanety H, Papa MZ, et al.1993. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha suppresses insulin-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor and its substrates. J Biol Chem, 268:26055-8.

Elevated levels of acutephase proteins and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 predict the development of type 2 diabetes: the insulin resistance atherosclerosis study. A Festa, R Agostino, Jr, R P Tracy, Diabetes. 51Festa A, D'Agostino R Jr, Tracy RP, et al. 2002. Elevated levels of acute- phase proteins and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 predict the development of type 2 diabetes: the insulin resistance atherosclerosis study. Diabetes, 51:1131-7.

Serum concentration of alpha-2-macroglobulin, haptoglobin and alpha-1-antitrypsin in diabetes mellitus. P O Ganrot, K Gydell, H Ekelund, Acta Endocrinol (Copenh). 55Ganrot PO, Gydell K, Ekelund H. 1967. Serum concentration of alpha-2- macroglobulin, haptoglobin and alpha-1-antitrypsin in diabetes mellitus. Acta Endocrinol (Copenh), 55:537-44.

Chemokines control fat accumulation and leptin secretion by cultured human adipocytes. C C Gerhardt, I A Romero, R Cancello, Mol Cell Endocrinol. 175Gerhardt CC, Romero IA, Cancello R, et al. 2001. Chemokines control fat accumulation and leptin secretion by cultured human adipocytes. Mol Cell Endocrinol, 175:81-92.

Adipose infl ammation and insulin resistance. Adipose infl ammation and insulin resistance

Circulating mononuclear cells in the obese are in a proinfl ammatory state. H Ghanim, A Aljada, D Hofmeyer, Circulation. 110Ghanim H, Aljada A, Hofmeyer D, et al. 2004. Circulating mononuclear cells in the obese are in a proinfl ammatory state. Circulation, 110:1564-71.

Low-dose rosiglitazone exerts an antiinfl ammatory effect with an increase in adiponectin independently of free fatty acid fall and insulin sensitization in obese type 2 diabetics. H Ghanim, S Dhindsa, A Aljada, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 91Ghanim H, Dhindsa S, Aljada A, et al. 2006. Low-dose rosiglitazone exerts an antiinfl ammatory effect with an increase in adiponectin independently of free fatty acid fall and insulin sensitization in obese type 2 diabetics. J Clin Endocrinol Metab, 91:3553-8.

Suppression of nuclear factor-kappaB and stimulation of inhibitor kappaB by troglitazone: evidence for an anti-infl ammatory effect and a potential antiatherosclerotic effect in the obese. H Ghanim, R Garg, A Aljada, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 86Ghanim H, Garg R, Aljada A, et al. 2001. Suppression of nuclear factor- kappaB and stimulation of inhibitor kappaB by troglitazone: evidence for an anti-infl ammatory effect and a potential antiatherosclerotic effect in the obese. J Clin Endocrinol Metab, 86:1306-12.

Tumor necrosis factor increases the rate of lipolysis in primary cultures of adipocytes without altering levels of hormone-sensitive lipase. A Green, S B Dobias, D J Walters, Endocrinology. 134Green A, Dobias SB, Walters DJ, et al. 1994. Tumor necrosis factor increases the rate of lipolysis in primary cultures of adipocytes without altering levels of hormone-sensitive lipase. Endocrinology, 134:2581-8.

Macrophage infi ltration into omental versus subcutaneous fat across different populations: effect of regional adiposity and the comorbidities of obesity. I Harman-Boehm, M Bluher, H Redel, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 92Harman-Boehm I, Bluher M, Redel H, et al. 2007. Macrophage infi ltration into omental versus subcutaneous fat across different populations: effect of regional adiposity and the comorbidities of obesity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab, 92:2240-7.

Reappraisal of the hypoglycemic action of acetylsalicylate. A Hecht, M G Goldner, Metabolism. 8Hecht A, Goldner MG. 1959. Reappraisal of the hypoglycemic action of acetylsalicylate. Metabolism, 8:418-28.

Macrophage PPAR gamma is required for normal skeletal muscle and hepatic insulin sensitivity and full antidiabetic effects of thiazolidinediones. A L Hevener, J M Olefsky, D Reichart, J Clin Invest. 117Hevener AL, Olefsky JM, Reichart D, et al. 2007. Macrophage PPAR gamma is required for normal skeletal muscle and hepatic insulin sensitivity and full antidiabetic effects of thiazolidinediones. J Clin Invest, 117:1658-69.

Obesity and the environment: where do we go from here?. J O Hill, H R Wyatt, G W Reed, Science. 299Hill JO, Wyatt HR, Reed GW, et al. 2003. Obesity and the environment: where do we go from here? Science, 299:853-5.

A central role for JNK in obesity and insulin resistance. J Hirosumi, G Tuncman, L Chang, Nature. 420Hirosumi J, Tuncman G, Chang L, et al. 2002. A central role for JNK in obesity and insulin resistance. Nature, 420:333-6.

Increased adipose tissue expression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha in human obesity and insulin resistance. G S Hotamisligil, P Arner, J F Caro, J Clin Invest. 95Hotamisligil GS, Arner P, Caro JF, et al. 1995. Increased adipose tissue expression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha in human obesity and insulin resistance. J Clin Invest, 95:2409-15.

Reduced tyrosine kinase activity of the insulin receptor in obesity-diabetes. Central role of tumor necrosis factor-alpha. G S Hotamisligil, A Budavari, D Murray, J Clin Invest. 94Hotamisligil GS, Budavari A, Murray D, et al. 1994. Reduced tyrosine kinase activity of the insulin receptor in obesity-diabetes. Central role of tumor necrosis factor-alpha. J Clin Invest, 94:1543-9.

Adipose expression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha: direct role in obesity-linked insulin resistance. G S Hotamisligil, N S Shargill, B M Spiegelman, Science. 259Hotamisligil GS, Shargill NS, Spiegelman BM. 1993. Adipose expression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha: direct role in obesity-linked insulin resistance. Science, 259:87-91.

Absence of CC chemokine ligand 2 does not limit obesity-associated infi ltration of macrophages into adipose tissue. K E Inouye, H Shi, J K Howard, Diabetes. 56Inouye KE, Shi H, Howard JK, et al. 2007. Absence of CC chemokine ligand 2 does not limit obesity-associated infi ltration of macrophages into adipose tissue. Diabetes, 56:2242-50.

Overexpression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 in adipose tissues causes macrophage recruitment and insulin resistance. N Kamei, K Tobe, R Suzuki, J Biol Chem. 281Kamei N, Tobe K, Suzuki R, et al. 2006. Overexpression of monocyte che- moattractant protein-1 in adipose tissues causes macrophage recruitment and insulin resistance. J Biol Chem, 281:26602-14.

MCP-1 contributes to macrophage infi ltration into adipose tissue, insulin resistance, and hepatic steatosis in obesity. H Kanda, S Tateya, Y Tamori, J Clin Invest. 116Kanda H, Tateya S, Tamori Y, et al. 2006. MCP-1 contributes to macrophage infi ltration into adipose tissue, insulin resistance, and hepatic steatosis in obesity. J Clin Invest, 116:1494-505.

Obesity as a medical problem. P G Kopelman, Nature. 404Kopelman PG. 2000. Obesity as a medical problem. Nature, 404:635-43.

Saturated fatty acids, but not unsaturated fatty acids, induce the expression of cyclooxygenase-2 mediated through Toll-like receptor 4. J Y Lee, K H Sohn, S H Rhee, J Biol Chem. 276Lee JY, Sohn KH, Rhee SH, et al. 2001. Saturated fatty acids, but not unsatu- rated fatty acids, induce the expression of cyclooxygenase-2 mediated through Toll-like receptor 4. J Biol Chem, 276:16683-9.

Peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor gamma ligands inhibit development of atherosclerosis in LDL receptor-defi cient mice. A C Li, K K Brown, M J Silvestre, J Clin Invest. 106Li AC, Brown KK, Silvestre MJ, et al. 2000. Peroxisome proliferator- activated receptor gamma ligands inhibit development of atherosclerosis in LDL receptor-defi cient mice. J Clin Invest, 106:523-31.

Obesity induces a phenotypic switch in adipose tissue macrophage polarization. C N Lumeng, J L Bodzin, A R Saltiel, J Clin Invest. 117Lumeng CN, Bodzin JL, Saltiel AR. 2007. Obesity induces a phenotypic switch in adipose tissue macrophage polarization. J Clin Invest, 117:175-84.

A human homologue of the Drosophila Toll protein signals activation of adaptive immunity. R Medzhitov, P Preston-Hurlburt, Janeway CaJr, Nature. 388Medzhitov R, Preston-Hurlburt P, Janeway CA Jr. 1997. A human homo- logue of the Drosophila Toll protein signals activation of adaptive immunity. Nature, 388:394-7.

Evidence for a potent antiinfl ammatory effect of rosiglitazone. P Mohanty, A Aljada, H Ghanim, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 89Mohanty P, Aljada A, Ghanim H, et al. 2004. Evidence for a potent antiinfl am- matory effect of rosiglitazone. J Clin Endocrinol Metab, 89:2728-35.

KB-R7785, a novel matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor, exerts its antidiabetic effect by inhibiting tumor necrosis factor-alpha production. Y Morimoto, K Nishikawa, M Ohashi, Life Sci. 61Morimoto Y, Nishikawa K, Ohashi M. 1997. KB-R7785, a novel matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor, exerts its antidiabetic effect by inhibiting tumor necrosis factor-alpha production. Life Sci, 61:795-803.

Macrophagespecifi c PPARgamma controls alternative activation and improves insulin resistance. J I Odegaard, R R Ricardo-Gonzalez, M H Goforth, Nature. 447Odegaard JI, Ricardo-Gonzalez RR, Goforth MH, et al. 2007. Macrophage- specifi c PPARgamma controls alternative activation and improves insulin resistance. Nature, 447:1116-20.

. D Ogston, G M Mcandrew, Fibrinolysis in obesity. Lancet. 2Ogston D, McAndrew GM. 1964. Fibrinolysis in obesity. Lancet, 2:1205-7.

Visceral adipose tissue infl ammation accelerates atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E-defi cient mice. M K Ohman, Y Shen, C I Obimba, Circulation. 117Ohman MK, Shen Y, Obimba CI, et al. 2008. Visceral adipose tissue infl ammation accelerates atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E-defi cient mice. Circulation, 117:798-805.

NIDDM as a disease of the innate immune system: association of acute-phase reactants and interleukin-6 with metabolic syndrome X. J C Pickup, M B Mattock, G D Chusney, Diabetologia. 40Pickup JC, Mattock MB, Chusney GD, et al. 1997. NIDDM as a disease of the innate immune system: association of acute-phase reactants and interleukin-6 with metabolic syndrome X. Diabetologia, 40:1286-92.

Defective LPS signaling in C3H/HeJ and C57BL/10ScCr mice: mutations in Tlr4 gene. A Poltorak, X He, I Smirnova, Science. 282Poltorak A, He X, Smirnova I, et al. 1998. Defective LPS signaling in C3H/HeJ and C57BL/10ScCr mice: mutations in Tlr4 gene. Science, 282:2085-8.

C-reactive protein, interleukin 6, and risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus. A D Pradhan, J E Manson, N Rifai, JAMA. 286Pradhan AD, Manson JE, Rifai N, et al. 2001. C-reactive protein, interleukin 6, and risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus. JAMA, 286:327-34.

Aspirin and diabetes mellitus. J Reid, A I Macdougall, M M Andrews, Br Med J. 2Reid J, MacDougall AI, Andrews MM. 1957. Aspirin and diabetes mellitus. Br Med J, 2:1071-4.

Interleukin-6 (IL-6) induces insulin resistance in 3T3-L1 adipocytes and is, like IL-8 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha, overexpressed in human fat cells from insulin-resistant subjects. V Rotter, I Nagaev, U Smith, J Biol Chem. 278Rotter V, Nagaev I, Smith U. 2003. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) induces insulin resistance in 3T3-L1 adipocytes and is, like IL-8 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha, overexpressed in human fat cells from insulin-resistant subjects. J Biol Chem, 278:45777-84.

Monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 in obesity and insulin resistance. P Sartipy, D J Loskutoff, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 100Sartipy P, Loskutoff DJ. 2003. Monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 in obesity and insulin resistance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 100:7265-70.

Obesity and diabetes in TNF-alpha receptor-defi cient mice. S A Schreyer, S C ChuaJr, R C Leboeuf, J Clin Invest. 102Schreyer SA, Chua SC Jr, LeBoeuf RC. 1998. Obesity and diabetes in TNF-alpha receptor-defi cient mice. J Clin Invest, 102:402-11.

TLR4 links innate immunity and fatty acid-induced insulin resistance. H Shi, M V Kokoeva, K Inouye, J Clin Invest. 116Shi H, Kokoeva MV, Inouye K, et al. 2006. TLR4 links innate immunity and fatty acid-induced insulin resistance. J Clin Invest, 116:3015-25.

The anti-atherogenic effects of thiazolidinediones. L Stojanovska, S Y Honisett, P A Komesaroff, Curr Diabetes Rev. 3Stojanovska L, Honisett SY, Komesaroff PA. 2007. The anti-atherogenic effects of thiazolidinediones. Curr Diabetes Rev, 3:67-74.

Adipocyte death, adipose tissue remodeling, and obesity complications. K J Strissel, Z Stancheva, H Miyoshi, Diabetes. 56Strissel KJ, Stancheva Z, Miyoshi H, et al. 2007. Adipocyte death, adipose tissue remodeling, and obesity complications. Diabetes, 56:2910-8.

Loss-offunction mutation in Toll-like receptor 4 prevents diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance. D M Tsukumo, M A Carvalho-Filho, J B Carvalheira, Diabetes. 56Tsukumo DM, Carvalho-Filho MA, Carvalheira JB, et al. 2007. Loss-of- function mutation in Toll-like receptor 4 prevents diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance. Diabetes, 56:1986-98.

Functional analysis of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptors in TNF-alpha-mediated insulin resistance in genetic obesity. K T Uysal, S M Wiesbrock, G S Hotamisligil, Endocrinology. 139Uysal KT, Wiesbrock SM, Hotamisligil GS. 1998. Functional analysis of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptors in TNF-alpha-mediated insulin resistance in genetic obesity. Endocrinology, 139:4832-8.

Protection from obesity-induced insulin resistance in mice lacking TNF-alpha function. K T Uysal, S M Wiesbrock, M W Marino, Nature. 389Uysal KT, Wiesbrock SM, Marino MW, et al. 1997. Protection from obesity-induced insulin resistance in mice lacking TNF-alpha function. Nature, 389:610-4.

Targeted disruption of the tumor necrosis factor-alpha gene: metabolic consequences in obese and nonobese mice. J Ventre, T Doebber, M Wu, Diabetes. 46Ventre J, Doebber T, Wu M, et al. 1997. Targeted disruption of the tumor necrosis factor-alpha gene: metabolic consequences in obese and non- obese mice. Diabetes, 46:1526-31.

High white blood cell count is associated with a worsening of insulin sensitivity and predicts the development of type 2 diabetes. B Vozarova, C Weyer, R S Lindsay, Diabetes. 51Vozarova B, Weyer C, Lindsay RS, et al. 2002. High white blood cell count is associated with a worsening of insulin sensitivity and predicts the development of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes, 51:455-61.

CCR2 modulates infl ammatory and metabolic effects of high-fat feeding. S P Weisberg, D Hunter, R Huber, J Clin Invest. 116Weisberg SP, Hunter D, Huber R, et al. 2006. CCR2 modulates infl ammatory and metabolic effects of high-fat feeding. J Clin Invest, 116:115-24.

Obesity is associated with macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue. S P Weisberg, D Mccann, M Desai, J Clin Invest. 112Weisberg SP, McCann D, Desai M, et al. 2003. Obesity is associated with macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue. J Clin Invest, 112:1796-808.

On the treatment of glycosuria and diabetes mellitus with sodium salicylate. R T Williamson, Br Med J. 1Williamson RT. 1901. On the treatment of glycosuria and diabetes mellitus with sodium salicylate. Br Med J, 1:760-2.

Chronic infl ammation in fat plays a crucial role in the development of obesity-related insulin resistance. H Xu, G T Barnes, Q Yang, J Clin Invest. 112Xu H, Barnes GT, Yang Q, et al. 2003. Chronic infl ammation in fat plays a crucial role in the development of obesity-related insulin resistance. J Clin Invest, 112:1821-30.

Exclusive action of transmembrane TNF alpha in adipose tissue leads to reduced adipose mass and local but not systemic insulin resistance. H Xu, J Hirosumi, K T Uysal, Endocrinology. 143Xu H, Hirosumi J, Uysal KT, et al. 2002a. Exclusive action of transmembrane TNF alpha in adipose tissue leads to reduced adipose mass and local but not systemic insulin resistance. Endocrinology, 143:1502-11.

Signaling pathways utilized by tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 in adipocytes to suppress differentiation. H Xu, G S Hotamisligil, FEBS Lett. 506Xu H, Hotamisligil GS. 2001. Signaling pathways utilized by tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 in adipocytes to suppress differentiation. FEBS Lett, 506:97-102.

Transmembrane tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha inhibits adipocyte differentiation by selectively activating TNF receptor 1. H Xu, J K Sethi, G S Hotamisligil, J Biol Chem. 274Xu H, Sethi JK, Hotamisligil GS. 1999. Transmembrane tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha inhibits adipocyte differentiation by selectively activating TNF receptor 1. J Biol Chem, 274:26287-95.

Altered tumor necrosis factoralpha (TNF-alpha) processing in adipocytes and increased expression of transmembrane TNF-alpha in obesity. H Xu, K T Uysal, J D Becherer, Diabetes. 51Xu H, Uysal KT, Becherer JD, et al. 2002b. Altered tumor necrosis factor- alpha (TNF-alpha) processing in adipocytes and increased expression of transmembrane TNF-alpha in obesity. Diabetes, 51:1876-83.

Reversal of obesity-and diet-induced insulin resistance with salicylates or targeted disruption of Ikkbeta. M Yuan, N Konstantopoulos, J Lee, Science. 293Yuan M, Konstantopoulos N, Lee J, et al. 2001. Reversal of obesity-and diet-induced insulin resistance with salicylates or targeted disruption of Ikkbeta. Science, 293:1673-7.