Epilepsy classification using artificial intelligence: A web-based application


Ali A Asadi-Pooya aliasadipooya@yahoo.com 
Epilepsy Research Center
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences
ShirazIran

Department of Neurology
Jefferson Comprehensive Epilepsy Center
Thomas Jefferson University
PhiladelphiaPennsylvaniaUSA

Davood Fattahi 
Epilepsy Research Center
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences
ShirazIran

Nahid Abolpour 
Epilepsy Research Center
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences
ShirazIran

Reza Boostani 
Department of Computer Science Engineering and Information Technology
Shiraz University
ShirazIran

Mohsen Farazdaghi 
Epilepsy Research Center
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences
ShirazIran

| Mehrdad Sharifi 
Vice-Chancellery for Treatment Affairs
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences
ShirazIran

Emergency Medicine Department


School of Medicine
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences
ShirazIran

Emergency Medicine Research Center
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences
ShirazIran


Epilepsy Research Center
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences
ShirazIran


Shiraz University of Medical Sciences
Grant


Shiraz University of Medical Sciences
2008ShirazIran, from

Epilepsy classification using artificial intelligence: A web-based application
C5FD868F8AC7B60F04F943FE1A9F742810.1002/epi4.12800Received: 24 June 2023 | Accepted: 29 July 2023computerEEGepilepsymachine learningseizure
Objective:The purpose of the current endeavor was to evaluate the feasibility of using easily accessible and applicable clinical information (based on history taking and physical examination) in order to make a reliable differentiation between idiopathic generalized epilepsy (IGE) versus focal epilepsy using machine learning (ML) methods.Methods:The first phase of the study was a retrospective study of a prospectively developed and maintained database.

| INTRODUCTION

The prevalence of epilepsy is about 7 per 1000 people worldwide. 1However, epilepsy is not a single diagnostic entity; various brain disorders may cause different types of epileptic seizures and syndromes.In order to competently diagnose and manage "epilepsy," healthcare professionals must go beyond merely identifying the occurrence or likelihood of recurrent seizures.It is important to make an attempt to diagnose and specify the syndromes and types of epilepsy. 2Any healthcare professional, who is dealing with adult patients with epilepsy (PWE), should at least be able to differentiate two general categories of epileptic syndromes/types from one another: idiopathic generalized epilepsies (IGEs) and focal epilepsies. 2 Making a diagnosis of an epilepsy syndrome or type (eg, IGE vs focal epilepsy) often needs a knowledgeable physician, who is able to obtain a detailed clinical history, access to electroencephalography (EEG), and expertise to interpret an EEG correctly, and access to neuroimaging [brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)] and expertise to review it correctly.This constellation of resources is not always available, even in the most developed nations.Misdiagnosis of epilepsy remains common and the consequences for patients are significant (eg, inappropriate treatments, social restrictions, etc.). 3,4Importantly, mistakes in the interpretation of EEGs are common and this is an important contributor to the misdiagnosis of epilepsy type. 5Therefore, it would be ideal to have an easily accessible and applicable resource to enable a healthcare professional, who is not an expert in the field, but who is dealing with PWE, to make a reliable differentiation between IGE versus focal epilepsy.This syndromic diagnosis establishes the basis for the treating healthcare professional to decide on an appropriate treatment strategy and also to explain the prognosis for patients and their caregivers. 2n recent years, artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) methods have been broadly utilized in medicine, providing affordable and efficient resources for the diagnosis and treatment of various medical problems. 6,7pecifically for epilepsy, many different methods and algorithms (based on AI and ML) have been developed for different purposes. 8,9Classification of epilepsy types has been one of the most attractive topics in this field, for which various algorithms have been introduced in recent years.However, most of these methods are based on EEG analysis or neuroimaging data, which may not be available everywhere. 10,11On the contrary, clinical information (based on history taking and physical examination) is one of the most informative and valuable data sources for the diagnosis of epilepsy.However, this has been rarely investigated and utilized in ML and AI algorithms.

The purpose of the current endeavor was to evaluate the feasibility of using easily accessible and applicable clinical information (based on history taking and physical examination) in order to make a reliable differentiation between IGE versus focal epilepsy using ML methods.We developed a pragmatic algorithm aimed at facilitating epilepsy classification for individuals whose epilepsy begins at age 10 years and older.Earlier-onset epilepsy was excluded as some childhood syndromes are complex with regard to diagnosis and would not readily fit into a broader diagnostic and therapeutic scheme designed for adolescents and adults.Also, in order to enable and facilitate external validation studies by other peers and professionals, the developed and trained ML model was implemented and published via an online web-based application.


| METHODS


| Data collection

The first phase of the study was a retrospective study of a prospectively developed and maintained database.All patients with an electro-clinical diagnosis of IGE or focal epilepsy, at the outpatient epilepsy clinic at Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran, from 2008 until 2022, were included.The first author diagnosed the patients based on clinical features (history and physical examination), EEG, and MRI findings.

Age at seizure onset, sex, seizure semiology, a history of febrile convulsion in childhood, a family history of epilepsy, a history of major head injury (eg, with loss of consciousness for more than 24 hours or with intracranial hemorrhage or with depressed skull fracture-based on the patient's report), other medical comorbidities, physical examination (eg, any obvious focal neurological sign, microcephaly, etc.), and epilepsy syndrome were registered in the database for all patients.


Key points

• A total number of 1445 patients were studied; 964 with focal epilepsy and 481 with idiopathic generalized epilepsy.

• The stacking classifier led to better results than the base classifiers in general.

• This algorithm has the following characteristics: precision: 0.81, sensitivity: 0.81, and specificity: 0.77.


| Clinical features

The first author selected a set of clinical features that are (1) easily obtainable even by people who are not experts in the field and (2) yet are helpful in making a diagnosis of epilepsy type/syndrome (differentiating focal epilepsy from IGE) based on the previous literature.While there are some other clinical features [eg, an exact diagnosis of seizure types (eg, focal seizure with impaired awareness vs absence seizures)] that are very helpful in differentiating focal epilepsy from IGE, these need a skillful and knowledgeable expert; therefore, we did not include these features.Similarly, we did not include EEG and imaging findings for the very same reason.

The selected features included:

• Age at seizure onset: IGE usually begins in childhood/ adolescence/young adulthood.Focal epilepsy may begin at any age.Seizures in IGE rarely begin after 25 years of age. 12,13• Sex: Female patients often outnumber males in IGEs.

5][16] On the contrary, men may have a greater predisposition to behaviors that cause brain injuries and acquired (focal) epilepsy.Furthermore, some of the structural focal epilepsies may be more frequent in men (eg, focal cortical dysplasia, perinodular heterotopia). 17• A history of febrile convulsion: Several studies have shown a potential relationship between a history of febrile convulsion in early childhood and focal epilepsy (ie, temporal lobe epilepsy with mesial temporal sclerosis) later in life. 18 A family history of epilepsy: IGEs have genetic underpinnings while many focal epilepsies are acquired in nature (and some are genetic).• A history of major head injury: Traumatic brain injury has been recognized as a cause of epilepsy since antiquity, and it remains one of the most common and important causes of acquired (focal) epilepsy today. 19 Medical comorbidity: Medical problems (eg, cerebrovascular disorders, cancers, autoimmune disorders, etc.) may cause focal epilepsy.• Aura: Aura type may help differentiate between IGE and focal epilepsy. 20In our database, we have classified and coded aura as follows: "No aura", "Indescribable feeling", "Dizziness", "Fear/Nervousness/Anxiety/ Adrenaline rush", "Cognitive/Deja vu/Jamais vu/ Forced thought", "Epigastric/Abdominal/Nausea", "Elementary visual", "Complex visual", "Elementary auditory", "Complex auditory", "Olfactory", "Gustatory / Taste", "Left focal sensory", "Right focal sensory", "Other sensory", "Headache", and "Other".

• Tongue biting: While ictal injury could be seen in both IGE and focal epilepsies, tongue injury was more frequently reported by patients with temporal lobe epilepsy compared with that by patients with IGE. 21 Physical and neurological examination: An idiopathic epilepsy syndrome (eg, IGE) has no underlying structural brain lesion or other neurological signs and symptoms (by definition), 22 but focal epilepsies may be associated with other abnormalities in examination (eg, focal neurological deficits).


| Data preparation

Using the stratified random portioning method, the dataset was divided into the train (70%) and test (30%) subsets.

Before training the classifiers, a simple constant imputer addressed the occasional missing values, and the data were standardized using a robust scaler.This scaler offsets the median and scales the data based on the interquartile range.Centering and scaling were applied independently on each feature by computing the required statistics on the samples in the training set.


| Classification method

Different types of classifiers were assessed and the final classification was made based on the stacking method.In other words, the proposed classification approach benefited from multiple well-known classifiers, and their results were given to a stacking classifier as an ensemble method to perform the final classification using the best results.The Stacking classifier (also known as stacked generalization) utilizes a combiner model to aggregate the prediction of multiple other learning algorithms (also called base estimators).The base estimators are trained independently on the data, and subsequently, their outcomes are utilized to train the combiner model to produce a final prediction.The stacking method typically outperforms any single one of the base models. 23n the present study, two types of base estimators were involved: three classic classifiers including Support Vector Machine (SVM), Logistic Regression (LogReg), and K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), and five Decision Tree-based ensemble classifiers including Random Forest (RanFor), Gradient Boosting (GradBoost), Adaptive Boosting (Ada-Boost), Bagging, and Extremely Randomized Trees (ExtRa Trees).Hyperparameters of the initial classifiers and the final Stacking classifier were trained using grid search and the best ones on the five-fold cross-validation are reported in Table S1.


| Implementation

All the algorithms were implemented in Python 3.9 using the Scikit-Learn package.The operating system was Microsoft Windows 10 × 64, on hardware with Intel (R) Core (TM) i5-8250U CPU @ 1.60 GHz, 1800 MHz, 4 Cores, 8 logical processors, and 8.00 GB of installed physical memory (RAM).An online application was developed.The front-end user interface (UI) is a simple HTML code that receives clinical inputs from users.Then, using the Flask module, the inputs are given to the back-end Python code (dealing with the trained model), and the final prediction is returned back to be shown on the UI.The application is accessible via the following link: http://www.epiclass.ir/f-ige.


| RESULTS

A total number of 1445 patients were studied; 964 with focal epilepsy and 481 with IGE.Data S1 is the full dataset of patients.Table 1 shows the clinical characteristics of the patients.Eight of the selected variables and features were significantly different between the two groups (IGE vs focal epilepsy) in our database.The history of febrile seizure in childhood was not significantly different between the two groups, but we included this feature in the algorithm based on the previous literature.

The classification results are summarized in Table 2.The stacking classification led to better results than the base classifiers in general (considering precision, sensitivity, specificity, and F1-score).The confusion matrix of the stacking classifier is depicted in Figure S1.Generally, the results showed a considerable effectiveness in utilizing the selected clinical information in the classification of epilepsies (focal epilepsy vs IGE).


| DISCUSSION

In the current endeavor, we developed a pragmatic algorithm aimed at facilitating epilepsy classification (IGE vs focal epilepsy) for individuals whose epilepsy begins at age 10 years and older (http://www.epiclass.ir/f-ige).This algorithm has the following characteristics: precision: 0.81, sensitivity: 0.81, and specificity: 0.77.The most important feature of this algorithm is that it could be used by people who are not experts in epilepsy diagnosis (eg, family physicians, internists, etc.) but may deal with PWE.

In one study of 350 adult PWE (mostly treated by neurologists, presumably after ordering EEG and brain imaging studies), 29% were taking wrong antiseizure medications (misclassified epilepsy type). 4In another study of 324 patients, the overall misdiagnosis rate was 26%, with incomplete history taking and misinterpretation of the EEG equally responsible. 24In another study of 200 patients with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME), 49 (24.5%) were misdiagnosed at the first medical evaluation.The physician was a neurologist in 87.8% of cases with misdiagnoses. 25Therefore, 0.81 precision by the algorithm using only simple features in the clinical history and physical examination seems very promising in advancing care of PWE by assisting the healthcare professionals in making a correct diagnosis of the epilepsy type.

In our algorithm, the classification results for focal epilepsy were better than those for IGE for all the evaluation parameters (Table 2).This may be caused by the imbalanced number of the samples in the classes.Larger studies including more such clinical features (that are easily recognizable professionals who are not experts in neurology/epileptology) may provide different and more reliable results and a multicenter study is very much needed to advance this important task.Such a study on individualized prediction of drug resistance and seizure recurrence after medication withdrawal in people with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy was published recently. 26hile there are other applications to assist healthcare professionals in making a diagnosis of epilepsy type (eg, https://www.epipick.org), 27 our current algorithm and application have two advantages: first, it is based on ML algorithms on a large dataset of patients; second, it uses only simple and easily accessible clinical features as described before.However, our algorithm and application should be validated externally to show its generalizability; the Epipick application has been validated in multiple studies. 28,29The application of AI and ML in medicine has helped healthcare professionals improve the quality of care that they can deliver and has the promise to improve it even more in the near future and beyond. 29Of course, AI and ML will not and cannot put healthcare professionals out of business; rather, they will make it possible for such professionals to do their jobs more accurately and leave some time for the human-human interactions that make medicine the rewarding profession we all value. 30ur study has some limitations.This was a singlecenter study.A single expert (the first author) diagnosed the patients based on clinical features (history and physical examination), EEG, and MRI findings.It would have been more reliable if diagnoses were based on consensus from several experts and follow-up information including therapeutic responses.Furthermore, the database was unbalanced (964 with focal epilepsy vs 481 with IGE), with a possible impact on the reliability of the training and testing stages of the algorithms.


CONCLUSION

We developed a pragmatic algorithm aimed at facilitating epilepsy classification for individuals whose epilepsy begins at age 10 years and older.Also, in order to enable and facilitate future external validation studies by other peers and professionals, the developed and trained ML model was implemented and published via an online web-based application that is freely available at http://www.epicl ass.ir/f-ige (Figure 1).The acceptable classification rate of the proposed framework can promise the feasibility of using clinical features in an affordable and available AI and ML setting to diagnose and classify epilepsy types.





ACKNO WLE DGE MENTSWe thank Shiraz University of Medical Sciences.We confirm that we have read the Journal's position on issues involved in ethical publication and affirm that this report is consistent with those guidelines.AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONSAli A. Asadi-Pooya, M.D. involved in study design, data collection, and manuscript preparation.Davood Fattahi, Ph.D. involved in machine learning process, and manuscript preparation.Other authors collected the data and prepared the manuscript.FUNDING INFORMATIONThis work was supported by Shiraz University of Medical Sciences.The funding source had no involvement in the study design; in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; and in the decision to submit the article for publication.CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENTAli A. Asadi-Pooya: Honoraria from Cobel Daruo, Actoverco; Royalty: Oxford University Press (Book publication); Grant from the National Institute for Medical Research Development.Others: no conflict of interest.DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENTThe data are shared in Data S1.ETHICS STATEMENTThis study was conducted with the approval of Institutional Ethics Review Boards at Shiraz University of Medical Sciences (Post-Doc project by Davood Fattahi, Ph.D. and under the supervision of Ali A. Asadi-Pooya, M.D.).INFORMED CONSENTThe participants gave their informed consent for the use of their data for research purposes.SUPPORTING INFORMATIONAdditional supporting information can be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of this article.
Prevalence and incidence of epilepsy: a systematic review and meta-analysis of international studies. K M Fiest, K M Sauro, S Wiebe, S B Patten, C S Kwon, J Dykeman, Neurology. 882017

Treatment response in newly diagnosed epilepsy: a syndromic approach. A A Asadi-Pooya, M Farazdaghi, Neurol Res. 4472022

The misdiagnosis of epilepsy: appraising risks and managing uncertainty. M M Oto, Seizure. 442017

Reasons for uncontrolled seizures in adults; the impact of pseudointractability. A A Asadi-Pooya, M Emami, N Ashjazadeh, A Nikseresht, A Shariat, P Petramfar, Seizure. 2242013

Errors in EEG interpretation and misdiagnosis of epilepsy. Which EEG patterns are overread?. S R Benbadis, K Lin, Eur Neurol. 5952008

Incremental majorization-minimization optimization with application to large-scale machine learning. J Mairal, SIAM J Optim. 252015

Machine learning applications to differentiate comorbid functional seizures and epilepsy from pure functional seizures. A A Asadi-Pooya, M Kashkooli, A Asadi-Pooya, M Malekpour, A Jafari, J Psychosom Res. 1531107032022

Machine learning models for decision support in epilepsy management: a critical review. E D Smolyansky, H Hakeem, Z Ge, Z Chen, P Kwan, Epilepsy Behav. 1231082732021

Artificial intelligence and computational approaches for epilepsy. S An, C Kang, H W Lee, 10.14581/jer.20003J Epilepsy Res. 1012020

EEGbased epileptic seizure detection via machine/deep learning approaches: a systematic review. I Ahmad, X Wang, M Zhu, C Wang, Y Pi, J A Khan, Comput Intell Neurosci. 64865702022. 2022

An overview of deep learning techniques for epileptic seizures detection and prediction based on neuroimaging modalities: methods, challenges, and future works. A Shoeibi, P Moridian, M Khodatars, N Ghassemi, M Jafari, R Alizadehsani, Comput Biol Med. 1491060532022

Age of onset in idiopathic (genetic) generalized epilepsies: clinical and EEG findings in various age groups. A A Asadi-Pooya, M Emami, M R Sperling, Seizure. 2162012

Late-onset idiopathic (genetic) generalized epilepsies: clinical and EEG findings. A A Asadi-Pooya, M Homayoun, J Clin Neurosci. 762020

Gender differences in epilepsy. J Christensen, M J Kjeldsen, H Andersen, M L Friis, P Sidenius, Epilepsia. 462005

A study of idiopathic generalised epilepsy in an Irish population. G M Mullins, O' Sullivan, S S Neligan, A Mccarthy, A Mcnamara, B Galvin, R J , Seizure. 162007

A clinical study of syndromes of idiopathic (genetic) generalized epilepsy. Asadi-Pooya Emami, M Sperling, M R , J Neurol Sci. 3242013

Sex differences in the neurobiology of epilepsy: a preclinical perspective. H E Scharfman, N J Maclusky, Neurobiol Dis. 722014Pt B

Febrile seizures and mesial temporal sclerosis. F Cendes, Curr Opin Neurol. 1722004

Epilepsy after head injury: an overview. D H Lowenstein, Epilepsia. 5022009Suppl

Aura: epilepsy vs functional (psychogenic) seizures. A A Asadi-Pooya, M Farazdaghi, Seizure. 882021

Ictal injury: epilepsy vs functional (psychogenic) seizures. A A Asadi-Pooya, M Farazdaghi, Epilepsy Behav. 1161077272021

A proposed diagnostic scheme for people with epileptic seizures and with epilepsy: report of the ILAE task force on classification and terminology. J EngelJr, International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE). 200142

Stacked generalization. D H Wolpert, Neural Netw. 51992

The misdiagnosis of epilepsy and the management of refractory epilepsy in a specialist clinic. D Smith, B A Defalla, D W Chadwick, QJM. 9211999

Misdiagnosis in JME: still a problem after 17 years?. D Atakli, S Senadim, S A Baslo, B T Güveli, M D Daryan, H Sari, Seizure. 362016

Individualised prediction of drug resistance and seizure recurrence after medication withdrawal in people with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy: a systematic review and individual participant data meta-analysis. R Stevelink, D Al-Toma, F E Jansen, H J Lamberink, A A Asadi-Pooya, M Farazdaghi, EClinicalMedicine. 11531017322022

A pragmatic algorithm to select appropriate antiseizure medications in patients with epilepsy. A A Asadi-Pooya, S Beniczky, G Rubboli, M R Sperling, S Rampp, E Perucca, Epilepsia. 6182020

Optimal choice of antiseizure medication: agreement among experts and validation of a web-based decision support application. S Beniczky, S Rampp, A A Asadi-Pooya, G Rubboli, E Perucca, M R Sperling, Epilepsia. 6212021

Web-based decision support system for patient-tailored selection of antiseizure medication in adolescents and adults: an external validation study. L Hadady, P Klivényi, E Perucca, S Rampp, D Fabó, C Bereczki, Eur J Neurol. 2922022

Artificial intelligence and machine learning in clinical medicine. C J Haug, J M Drazen, N Engl J Med. 388132023. 2023