[ 283 ON "TICK PARALYSIS" IN SHEEP AND MAN FOLLOWING BITES OF DERMACENTOR VENUSTUS. WITH NOTES ON THE BIOLOGY OF THE TICK


Seymour Had Wen 
Dominion Department of Agriculture, Experimental Farm
AgassizB.CCanada

D V Sci 
Dominion Department of Agriculture, Experimental Farm
AgassizB.CCanada

[ 283 ON "TICK PARALYSIS" IN SHEEP AND MAN FOLLOWING BITES OF DERMACENTOR VENUSTUS. WITH NOTES ON THE BIOLOGY OF THE TICK



saw several sheep which had been affected. The sheep had just been shorn, and, on examining one of them, a large tick which had been cut in half was found attached to its back; surrounding it was a large discoloured area. This was what gave rise in my mind to the idea that the disease was caused by tick bites. I remembered also hearing of curious cases of paralysis in children where ticks were found attached to their backs. Todd (1912), in a recent publication 1 , collected case reports from medical men in British Columbia of paralysis in children associated with tick bites, and Bishopp and King (1913) have heard of similar cases in Montana. After thoroughly going over the situation, I returned to my laboratory at Agassiz, bringing with me a number of ticks, and it was here that the disease was reproduced experimentally under laboratory conditions and in a locality where the disease does not exist. Early in June another visit was made to the affected district, and the flocks of sheep again inspected. There were very few ticks about, however. One lamb was seen (about a month old) partly paralysed in the hind quarters, with a gorged tick attached to its neck. The tick was removed and two days later the lamb could run like the rest. Another lamb, showing slight loss of coordination in the hind quarters, was also caught, but was recovering rapidly.

The obvious reason for few cases developing in lambs is that they usually come late in the season and are kept in fields for a week or ten days after they are born, so that by the time they are taken up to the hills the ticks have practically disappeared for the season.

I was informed that there had been about 25 cases among the lambs, but the shepherd thought some of them had had rheumatism which may, of course, be correct. As far as can be ascertained, the tick season round about Keremeos may in some years commence as early as February and it does not extend much beyond May.

Another shepherd told me that a few adult ticks were usually found on the sheep in the early autumn, and that he generally saw a few cases of paralysis at that time.

j The district of Keremeos is a very hot and dry one (it has the j distinction of being the only place in Canada where scorpions are to be 1 found), and this doubtless is the reason why ticks abound throughout \ the country. 1

See abstract thereof in Appendix II. i


Nature of the disease and symptoms presented.

The disease is a form of paralysis occurring in sheep, man, and probably other animals, and is caused by the bites of Dermacentor venustus Banks 1 .

By referring to the protocols, it will be seen that the tick has a decided preference for biting along the spinal column; whether or not the disease can be reproduced by ticks biting in other parts of the body remains to be proved, but it is evident that the bites of this tick are capable of producing serious local effects at any situation on the body where they become attached. According to sheep owners, the disease is sometimes of long duration. One shepherd told me that he carried a paralysed lamb from camp to camp nearly all summer, and that it finally recovered. In sheep which graze on the mountains, disastrous results are said to occur from affected animals losing their balance and falling.

A yearling colt was seen showing loss of coordination; a dog became paralysed for a few days and recovered after the removal of a tick. Reports have been received of paralysed rabbits having been found, and of young grouse dropping out of the trees with rings of ticks round their necks. All of these reports require scientific investigation. The exact nature of the disease has not been ascertained. All that can be said is that in sheep symptoms of paralysis occur six to seven days after ticks have become attached to them; that the only pathological lesions found on autopsy are subcutaneous haemorrhages where the ticks had been attached and congestion of the brain and cord. Attempts to transmit the disease by inoculations have not been successful, and no parasites have been discovered in the blood or in the nerve tissues. Bouillon cultures, prepared from diseased animals, have remained sterile.

The most likely explanation seems to be that the paralysis is due to toxins inoculated by the ticks, and that these are elaborated especially at the time when gorging is rapid, i.e. twenty-four hours or so before the ticks drop off. The average time six females took to gorge was sixand-a-half days.

The incubation period of six to seven days suggests that "tick paralysis" may be a disease of microbic origin, and it is of course possible that the causative agent has not been recognised; but the fact that no fever has been recorded and inoculations have been unsuccessful rather negatives this idea. That ticks may exert toxic effects is probable. Nuttall (1908) mentions the fact that the bites of the nymphs of Ornithodorus moubata are more to be feared for their aftereffects than the bites of the adults, quite apart from the transmission of the disease.

In referring to the paragraph on the history of the disease, it will be seen that the old sheep became paralysed the first year and that only yearlings were attacked in subsequent years, showing that an immunity is produced after one attack. This does not interfere with the toxin hypothesis, for examples of immunity following the repeated bites of other arthropods (mosquitoes, etc.) are common. Rocky Mountain fever is the only other disease known to be transmitted by D. venustus, and at first it seemed possible that there might be some connection between the two diseases, but so far there seems to be no evidence of the occurrence of Rocky Mountain fever in British Columbia.

The symptoms of " tick paralysis" in lambs develop gradually. The first noticeable sign is restlessness, the lambs at times stagger about and bump against obstacles and occasionally fall when trying to stop ; later on they fall down and cannot rise ; at this stage they struggle a great deal. As paralysis advances the lambs cease struggling but still have a wild-eyed look ; they drink milk with less avidity. As soon as recovery begins they again continually struggle in their attempts to rise, and this continues until they are able to stand, after which recovery is very rapid.

No efforts have as yet been made to treat the affected animals, but this will be undertaken in the course of further investigations. It would appear advisable, however, on general principles, to remove the ticks from affected animals and to resort to dipping, if possible.

The local effects of the bites of D. venustus.

The ticks are easily found on newly shorn sheep, because soon after a tick becomes attached it voids excrement which collects and dries in the hair, thus forming a dark reddish patch. Male ticks frequently attach and detach themselves, and whenever they do so bleeding is profuse ; the blood seems to have lost its clotting properties. In PI. XXI, fig. 1, the effects of the bites under a lamb's skin are visible. The haemorrhages have some resemblance to those seen in cases of haemophilia. In man, shortly after being bitten, a scarlet, irritable patch appears. I was once bitten on the neck by a male. The bite was not felt at first, but the movements made by the tick in detaching itself drew my attention to it; bleeding was profuse, and did not stop for some minutes.

In sheep, after a few days, a bruised appearance develops about the seat of the bite and persists for some time.


Position of ticks on the host.

Out of 108 ticks collected on about 25 sheep on the range, all but four of those which had attached themselves were situated along the back-bone (one on the brisket, three round the base of the ears). The sheep were not all examined very carefully, but a number were turned over and the belly and legs searched. Many of the ticks were not attached ; they were found loose on the fleece and had evidently been picked up recently.

In my experiments the ticks became attached as follows : On lamb I, ten ticks attached themselves within half-an-inch of the back-bone on either side, and one at the base of the right ear (PI. XXI, fig. 2).

On lamb III, three females attached themselves along the backbone, one male at the base of the right ear, and one female on the brisket.

On lamb IV, two females and one male attached themselves along the back-bone (PI. XXI, figs. 3 and 4).

When first applied the ticks were scattered along the back and their movements were not interfered with. Only in one case, that of lamb III, were ticks (one male and one female) placed in position and watched until they attached themselves. This was done three days after the first were put on, as only two had become attached in the lumbar region. It is possible that the second lot of ticks had nothing to do with producing paralysis, for the female was barely gorged when the symptoms first appeared.

The reasons for D. venustus choosing the back and neck as its seat of attachment are probably as follows: (a) there is frequently a parting in the wool along the back, especially in Merinos; (6) the ticks are likely to be brushed off on to the backs of sheep when the animals pass under bushes ; (c) all the denuded portions of a sheep's body are greasy ; (d) the wool is very thick and close on all other parts of the body, except on the brisket, where ticks are occasionally found attached.


Regions where ticks attach themselves on other animals and on man.

In raising experiments on rabbits the larvae and nymphs seem to attach themselves almost anywhere ; perhaps the most favourite places are around the muzzle, eyes and the neck. As no larvae or nymphs were found in these experiments they are not considered, and my remarks refer to adults only.

In horses and cattle the neck, withers, and the periueal region seem to be favourite localities for attachment. In man the nape of the neck is undoubtedly the favourite place-all the shepherds, miners and trappers I have interviewed say the same thing. Medical men also refer to this peculiarity.


Proportion between the sexes found on sheep.

Out of 87 ticks collected off sheep on the range, 53 were females and 34 males.


Habits of male ticks.

When males are placed on sheep, their first impulse is apparently to feed, and in these experiments they did not seem to pay any attention to the females. They reattached themselves several times, and after three or four days sought out the females; then they fastened themselves quite close to them and copulated. The males are somewhat distended after feeding-not at all like Ixodes-and judged from the limited number of observations I have made, copulate with semi-gorged females. This may be different in nature. Males and females will attack a host at different times, and in this event the females may be impregnated before gorging.

As males attach and reattach themselves to a host regardless of females being about, it makes them decidedly more dangerous to man than the males of many other species. Whether they can produce paralysis in the absence of females remains to be proved, but certainly with regard to spotted fever in Montana this habit on the part of D. venustus doubtless renders them more dangerous.


Protocols of experiments.

Tick-transmission experiment (14-25 iv. 1913 Eleven ticks attached themselves, all but one (on back of ear) attached within half-an-inch of the median line on either side. 5

Lamb not drinking his milk as nsual in the evening. 6

Lamb weak. 7

Loss of coordination becoming marked as day progressed; at 4 p.m. could not stand. Two gorged $ s dropped off. Temperature 103-1° F. 8

Total paralysis, except for head and neck; lamb feeds well notwithstanding; continually grinds his teeth. Temperature 1O3' 1° F. 9

Paralysis continues. 10

Temperature 103-2° F. Incontinence of urine since paralysis started; cannot stop flow if tapped or startled. Drinks milk well. 11

Temperature 103-3° F. Observed ticks copulating on lamb. Paralysis continues. 12

Lamb raised his head easily in the morning; was much better in afternoon ; could stand for a moment when raised; also had more or less control over his urine when startled.

Autopsy. Lamb killed by bleeding. Organs apparently normal. Coverings of the brain congested; a fibrinous exudate present in the ventricles.

Attempts to transmit the disease by inoculation (1913).

Lamb No. II. Date 25 iv. Inoculated in three places (lumbar, cervical and occipital regions), with material from brain, spinal cord and cerebellum of Lamb No. I. 28 iv. Temperature rose gradually to 105-5-106° F. Lamb had soreness between shoulder blades; temperature probably due to the formation of pus. 3 v.

Abscess broke; lamb better. 3-13 v. Lamb perfectly well. 13 v.

Lamb was reinoculated with mashed-up ticks (three gorged ¥ s and one <? ) which were removed from Lamb No. III. 13 v.-l vi. Lamb perfectly well; no effects from inoculation. (5-15 v. 1913 Lamb could hardly stand, incontinence of urine; in evening was unable to stand unless assisted. One s fell off gorged.


Tick-transmission experiment

Autopsy. Lamb killed at 9 p.m. by bleeding. All organs normal. The coverings of the brain were distinctly injected.

Note. Blood counts (differential) made before and after paralysis appeared showed no variation from the normal.

The temperatures recorded in the tick-transmission experiments are quite within the normal range for lambs.

Attempt to transmit the disease by inoculation (1913 Experiments with guinea-pigs.

-, 13 v. Two guinea-pigs were inoculated along the back with a few drops of fluid i from mashed-up ticks. , 31 v.

No results of any sort up to date; guinea-pigs destroyed. 14 v.

Six guinea-pigs were inoculated intraperitoneally with 2 c.c. each of denbrinated blood from Lamb No. IV. 14 v.

Six guinea-pigs were inoculated subcutaneously with brain emulsion. 31 v.

No results up to date, when guinea-pigs were destroyed.


SUMMARY.

" Tick paralysis " occurs in British Columbia and affects man, sheep, and probably other animals. The disease is caused by the bites of Dermacentor venustus Banks. It is usually of short duration, is benign in character, but occasionally it persists for long periods, and may terminate fatally. From an economic point of view, the disease is of some importance to the sheep industry. The causative agent has not been discovered, and the disease has not been reproduced by inoculation. The most likely hypothesis is that the tick injects a toxin which gives rise to symptoms appearing coincidentally with the complete engorgement of the tick. In three consecutive cases, experimentally produced by me in lambs, paralysis occurred six to seven days after the ticks were put on. In no case did I fail to produce paralysis through the agency of the tick bites. It has been proved that D. venustus usually bites sheep along the back-bone; possibly the point of attachment may have some bearing on the symptoms or severity of the case. It is probable that \ other species of ticks may produce a similar disease. No larvae or nymphs I were encountered on sheep, and I have no records of their attacking man t in British Columbia.

I I am indebted to Dr F. Torrauce, Veterinary Director-General, for I permission to publish this paper. APPENDIX I.

I append the following notes upon the biology of D. venustus, since they bear directly upon the subject of this paper, and I have successfully raised the species from the affected locality.

Protocols. Lot I (1912 Gorged larvae of D. venustus were collected from a squirrel at Merritt, B.C. They were takeu to the laboratory at Agassiz, placed in tubes with moistened filter paper, and kept at room temperature. The first nymph emerged (metamorphosis lasted 23 days). Six nymphs were placed on a rabbit (3-4 days after ecdysis). Three gorged nymphs dropped off the host (two after five days, one after seven days). One <r and two ? s emerged (metamorphosis to adult lasted 32 days).

Lot II (1912II ( -1913. 6 vi.

Gorged ? s of D. venustus were collected by Dr Thonison at Keremeos, B.C., from horses imported from the United States. The ticks were forwarded to Agassiz. 12 vn.

The ? s began to oviposit (pre-oviposition period eight days). 12 vn.

Larvae emerged (metamorphosis from egg to larva lasted 36 days). 24 rx.

Larvae were placed on a rabbit (34 days after ecdysis). 28 ix.

16 gorged larvae dropped off the host (the period of parasitism lasting four days). 5 xi.

10 nymphs emerged (metamorphosis from larva to nymph lasted 38 days). 22 xi. 46 nymphs were placed on a rabbit (17 days after ecdysis). 28-30 xi.

Three gorged nymphs dropped off the host (the period of parasitism on the host lasting 7-8-9 days). 20 II.-4 in. 1913. One $ and two <? s emerged (metamorphosis from nymph to adult lasted 84-94 days in a cold room).

Note. These raising experiments were conducted at room temperature; the temperature varied greatly, according to the weather, and in Lot II the metamorphosis of the adults was no doubt much prolonged.


COPULATION.

The copulation of Dermacentor venustus was observed on a lamb's back at Agassiz, British Columbia, on the 24th April, 1913. The act of copulation lasted 33 minutes. The operation began by the male hooking his three posterior pairs of legs under those of the female, then by his rooting about and inserting his hypostome into the vulva. The palpi were parted as in sucking blood. At times it was noticed that he was moving his mouthparts; later he worked more actively and appeared to be enlarging the opening; he then depressed his capitulum so that his mouthparts were no longer visible. It looked as though he had withdrawn them from the female vulva and had directed them towards his genital aperture where they appeared to be working. A minute or two afterwards his mouthparts were again visible (palpi not parted, nor was the hypostome in the female vulva). A glistening fluid was now seen which increased in amount, and finally surrounded the mouthparts and the vulva. The fluid was later seen to be of a reddish tinge; possibly it originated from the female, as she passed a similar looking material from her anus during the act.

After a time, before the male abandoned the female, he was seen to move up her body so that his hypostome was on a level with hers; the genital orifices would be in juxtaposition. These movements were repeated several times. The reasons for them were made apparent later, when a spermatophore was found attached partly within the vulva. Judging from the movements of the male at one stage of the act, he was exerting pressure with his body to expel the contents of the spermatophore, and when he retreated he felt about with his mouthparts as though to ascertain if the spermatophore was in position. After the male had abandoned the female the fluid surrounding the vulva was gently removed with a brush and a collapsed spermatophore was found attached. The accompanying photograph, fig. 7, shows the spermatophore attached to the vulva.


Time required for D. venustus $ s to gorge on sheep.

The average time for the first six females which dropped off gorged was 6'5 days (the shortest period four days, the longest ten days).


Weights of females before and after gorging on sheep.

3 $s unengorged: average weight = 0"001 gramme. 1 ? (gorged) weighed 0610 gramme. 1 ? " 0-550 1 ?

" " 0600 Average = 0-587 "

Pre-oviposition period lasted eight days at summer heat and four, five and six days in the case of three % s with intermittent heat in incubator at 32° C.

Oviposition (1912). 15 vn. 51 eggs laid. 15-16 VII. 479 eggs laid. From 12.30 noon to 3.20 p.m., 66 eggs were laid, which equals 2*5 minutes for each egg. From 5.15 p.m., to 12 noon on the following day a female laid 474 eggs, which equals 2"3 minutes for each egg.


Longevity.

A partly gorged female taken from a lamb on 5 VI. 1913 was still alive on 24 vii. 1913 (a period of 49 days). A fully gorged female which dropped off a lamb on 25 IV. 1913 was still alive on 24 VII. 1913 (a period of 89 days).

Two unengorged females were alive and active after 50 days, and attached themselves to two different animals.


SUMMARY.

Duration of parasitism upon the host.

The larvae remain upon the host four days, nymphs 4-9 days, females 4-10 days (average for six ?s = 6"5 days). The time required for metamorphosis from egg to larva = 36 days, at summer temperature ; gorged larva to nymph = 24-38 days at summer heat; gorged nymph to adult = 32 days (in summer) to 84-94 days in a cold room in winter.

The pre-oviposition period lasted eight days in summer and four, five and six days in the case of three !j!s with intermittent heat in an incubator at 32° C.

The process of copulation, observed on a lamb's back, lasted 33 minutes. The males copulate with semi-gorged females.


Increase in weight of $ s through feeding.

Three unfed $s averaged O' OOl gramme; three replete $s averaged 0'587 gramme in weight.

Oviposition: A $ was observed to oviposit as follows :

Beginning on 15 VII. 1912, the first day, she laid 51 eggs; first to second 479 eggs (66 eggs or 25 minutes per egg laid between 12.30 p.m. to 3.20 p.m.); from 5.15 p.m. on second day to 12 noon on third day she laid 474 eggs, or 23 minutes for each egg. APPENDIX II. Todd (1912) addressed letters to a number of doctors in British Columbia, asking for information concerning the ill-effects following tick bites. He records that six letters were received, mentioning instances in which tick bites were followed by paralysis, and occasionally by death. I would cite the following :

" Dr G. B. H., Creston, B.C.: A little girl, four years of age, gradually lost the use of her legs during two or three days until she was unable to stand. A tick was removed from the nape of the neck and within three days the child was well again." "Dr 0. M., Vernon, B.C., January 1912: A healthy child, threeand-a-half years of age, had been perfectly well until two hours before examination. When the patient was seen there was no temperature and the pulse was normal, but the legs were almost completely paralysed. The child could not stand, and the reflexes were gone. A tick was found firmly attached to the base of the neck ; it was removed. The paralysis continued during the day. Next morning there was slight improvement, and by the evening the child had recovered the use of her legs.

Dr N. knows of an instance in which an adult complained of weakness of the legs after a tick bite on the back." "Dr W. O. R., Nelson, B.C.: About 1900 a child died suddenly with symptoms of acute ascending paralysis. After death a large tick was found at the nape of the neck.

In 1901, a second child with the same symptoms died after an illness of two days. A tick was found attached to the right temple.

The knowledge of these two cases suggested the presence of a tick when a third child, previously very healthy, was seen, whose legs had been becoming weaker for two days. One tick was found at the nape of the neck; it was removed, and in two days the child was quite well again.

On April 10th, 1912, a little girl, three years of age, had become paralysed. The legs were completely paralysed and the reflexes gone ; paresis of the arms was marked. Three ticks were removed from the nape of the neck and the child recovered completely." Dr Todd adds: " These notes are made public in the hope that they may induce physicians who have seen or who may see similar cases to publish their experiences, for it seems possible that an undescribed disease, caused by ticks, may occur in British Columbia. The subject demands investigation."

The " ticks" referred to in Dr Todd's paper are most probably D. venustus as this species is common in the districts he mentions.

Nuttall (1911) in his notes on the biology of Ixodes, refers to Ixodes pilosus.

I quote the following : "Relation to Disease. According to C. W. Mally (ix 1904), Cape of Good Hope, the farmers around Carlisle Bridge have no doubt but that this tick produces 'paralysis' in sheep, especially in merinos The tick is, however, frequently found on healthy sheep." Eaton (1913) reports a case of tick bite, followed by widespread transitory muscular paralysis, in a little girl.

Briefly, the symptoms he describes are as follows: A little girl, four years of age, became restless and unsteady on her feet. She also lost her appetite. When she was undressed and put to bed a tick was found attached to the back of the right shoulder. The tick was probably an Ixodes (sp. ?).

On the second day the child could not stand, and appeared very ill and in a state bordering on delirium (temperature 101'4° F.). The muscles of the lower limbs were motionless, the arm muscles could be moved, the knee jerks were absent. Over the lower part of the right scapula was a pink patch about the size of a penny, in the centre of which was a purplish-black spot a quarter-of-an-inch in diameter. In the middle of this was an aperture in which lay the head-parts of the tick (the body had been cut off) ; these were scraped out and the cavity cleansed with pure carbolic.

On the third day there was no sign of return of voluntary movement in the legs, but the muscles were not so limp. On the fourth day the knee-jerks were obtainable but with difficulty ; the child could now stand and even walk a few steps with support. The pupils of the eyes were still inactive to light. Diarrhoea present from third day. On the fifth day the child could walk without support.

Eaton quotes other cases noted by Cleland. Cleland refers to a statement of Bancroft's that the bites of Queensland ticks (sp. ?) frequently kill dogs and cats. One attack is said to confer immunity.  Parasitology vi 20


PLATE XXI

Fig. 1 .
1Fig. 2. Fig. 3. S. Hadwen, phot.

Fig.Fig. 7 .
7Fig. 8. S. Hadwen, phot. EXPLANATION OF PLATES XXI AND XXII. (Photographs by S, Hadwen.) Fig. 1. Effect of bites under the skin (Lamb No. I). Fig. 2. Eleven Z>. venustus attached to back of Lamb No. I. Fig. 3. Lamb No. IV. Two females and one male attached. Line drawn on lamb's back to indicate median line. Fig. 4. Enlargement of lower ticks in Fig. 3, showing position of male and female. Fig. 5. Lamb No. Ill, showing paralysis. Fig. 6. Lamb No. IV, showing loss of coordination. Fig. 7. D. venustus ? (gorged), with spermatophore attached. Fig. 8. D. venustus ? (unengorged).


).Lamb No. I. 
Day 
1 
Put eleven ? s and two <? s D. venustus on lamb's back. 
2 
One ¥ fell off without becoming attached. 
3 



). Lamb No. III. Lamb recovered completely. Killed on day 27 ; all organs appeared normal. Tick-transmission experiment (5-13 v, 1913). Lamb No. IV.Day 

1 
Put seven ¥ s and three js D. venustus on lamb's back. 
2 
Temperature 103-3° F. 
3 
Temperature: M. 103° F., E. 103-4° F. 
Day 

4 
Temperature: M. 102-7° F., E. 103° P. Put on one more ? and one S 
collected from bear by J. W. Prank, Creston, British Columbia. These 
ticks were placed on the neck. Two ? s attached themselves to the 
lumbar region, one s on the side of the head, and one 9 on the 
sternum. 
5 
Temperature: M. 102-8° F. 
6 
Temperature: M. 102-5° F., E. 102-8° F. 
7 
Temperature: E. 103-6°F. Lamb well in morning ; at 9 p.m. showed gome 
loss of coordination; bumped into obstacles when moving about. 
8 
Temperature : M. 102-8° F., E. 103-4° F. Paralysis advancing, struggles a 
good deal; if braced could just stand in morning. The two ? s 
attached in the lumbar region; all parts posterior seemed to be most 
affected. The lamb threw his hind parts in the air, though later in the 
day paralysis was almost complete except for the head and neck. Lamb 
wild-eyed and restless, appetite diminished; one ? fell off. PI. XXII, 
fig. 5. 
9 
Lamb could just stand in morning; much improved in afternoon; stood 
more easily and could stop flow of urine. One ? dropped oft; two ? s 
and one <f removed. 
10 
Lamb much better. Appetite improved ; still unsafe on hind legs. 
11 
Lamb well, except for slight crouch when walking. 
12-27 1 
Put eight ¥ s and two 3 s on lamb's back. 
2 
Temperature: M. 103-2° F. 
3 
Temperature: M. 101-2° F., E. 103° F. 
4 
Temperature: M. 102-9° F., E. 102-8° F. Two ?s and one t found 
attached along back. 
5 
Temperature: M. 102° F. 
6 
Temperature: M. 101° P., E. 102° F. 
7 
Temperature: M. 102-8° P. 
8 
In the morning the lamb showed weakness; in the evening it bumped 
into everything. Lamb off its feed. Temperature: M. 102-2° F., 
E. 102-4° F. PI. XXII, fig. 6. 
9 



.-l vi. Lamb remained perfectly well; no effects from inoculation.). 
Lamb No. V. 
Date 
13 v. 
Inoculated subcutaneously with 20 c.c. of defibrinated blood taken from 
Lamb No. IV. 
13 vExperimental inoculation with mashed-up ticks. 

19 v. 
Inoculated in two places along the back with mashed-up ticks: one engorged 
¥ from Lamb No. Ill and one engorged ? from Lamb No. IV; three 
unengorged ? s from Keremeos. 
1 vi. 
No bad effects of any sort to date. 




).Date 
25 vi. 

18 VII. 
22 vn. 
27-29 VII. 

29 vm. 


Notes on the biology of D. venustus will be found in Appendix I.

On " Tick Paralysis. On " Tick Paralysis."

Additional notes on the biology of the Rocky Mountain Spotted-Fever Tick. F C Bishopp, W V King, Journ. Econ. Entomol. vi. BISHOPP, F. C. AND KING, W. V. (1913). Additional notes on the biology of the Rocky Mountain Spotted-Fever Tick. Journ. Econ. Entomol. vi. 200-211.

. J B Cleland, Australian Medical Oaz. quoted by EatonCLELAND, J. B. (1912). Australian Medical Oaz. (quoted by Eaton).

A case of Tick-Bite followed by wide-spread transitory muscular paralysis. E M Eaton, Tropical Diseases Bull. n. 205-206. (Review from Australian Med. Oat. xxxni. EATON, E. M. (1913). A case of Tick-Bite followed by wide-spread transitory muscular paralysis. Tropical Diseases Bull. n. 205-206. (Review from Aus- tralian Med. Oat. xxxni. 391-394.)

Letter from Veterinary Director-General. S Hadwen, Proc. Brit. Columbia Vet. Assoc. (As yet unpublished. Brit. Columbia Vet. Assoc. (As yet unpublishedAddress on "Tick ParalysisHADWEN, S. (1913). Preliminary note on "Tick Paralysis." Letter from Veterinary Director-General. Amer. Veter. Review. (1913). Address on "Tick Paralysis." Proc. Brit. Columbia Vet. Assoc. (As yet unpublished.)

Tick-bite in British Columbia. J L Todd, Canadian Med. Assoc. Journ. On the effect of Tick-Bites. TODD, J. L. (1912). Tick-bite in British Columbia. Canadian Med. Assoc. Journ. On the effect of Tick-Bites.

On the presence of an anticoagulin in the salivary glands and intestines of Argas persicus. Parasitology, I. 302-310. (1908-11). [Regarding.the effects of the bites of various ticks. G H F Ncttall, Nuttall, Cooper Warburton, Robinson , vm. 1-154.On the r61e of Insects, Arachnids and Myriapods, etc. Johns Hopkins Hospital Reports. Parasitology, vi. 84-85. AND STRICKLAND, C.Ticks8The Ixodoidea or Ticks. Part i, 85 et seq. {Argas persicus, A.reflexus, 0. coriaceus, 0. nxoubata). Part. /. ricinus, I. pilosusNCTTALL, G. H. F. (1899). On the r61e of Insects, Arachnids and Myriapods, etc. Johns Hopkins Hospital Reports, vm. 1-154. (1908). The Ixodoidea or Ticks, Harben Led I. Journ. Roy. lnst. Publ. Health, xvi. 385-403, 8 figs. (1911). On symptoms following Tick-bites. Parasitology, iv. 89-93. --(1913). [Effect of bite of Ixodes putus.] Parasitology, vi. 84-85. AND STRICKLAND, C. (1908). On the presence of an anticoagulin in the salivary glands and intestines of Argas persicus. Parasitology, I. 302-310. (1908-11). [Regarding.the effects of the bites of various ticks.] Nuttall, Warburton, Cooper, and Robinson : Ticks, Part i, 85 et seq. {Argas persicus, A.reflexus, 0. coriaceus, 0. nxoubata). Part II, 313-316 (/. ricinus, I. pilosus).

On a disease in man following tick-bites, and occurring in Lorenco Marques. J F Sant&apos; Anna, Parasitology. SANT' ANNA, J. F. (1911). On a disease in man following tick-bites, and occurring in Lorenco Marques. Parasitology, iv. 87-88.