O P E N A C C E S S Meeting report Report on the 2nd Florence International Symposium on Advances in Cardiomyopathies: 9th meeting of the European Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases WG of the ESC


Franco Cecchi 
Careggi University Hospital
FlorenceItaly

Iacopo Olivotto 
Careggi University Hospital
FlorenceItaly

Robert O Bonow 
Northwestern University
ChicagoUSA

Magdi Yacoub 
Imperial College
LondonUK

Qatar Cardiovascular Research Center
DohaQatar

O P E N A C C E S S Meeting report Report on the 2nd Florence International Symposium on Advances in Cardiomyopathies: 9th meeting of the European Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases WG of the ESC
10.5339/gcsp.2012.15


1. There was an intentional and unprecedented level of integration between basic and clinical science, in each individual sessions, combining genomics and molecular biology with clinical management. This fostered a very close interchange between physicians, geneticists and clinical scientists, which enormously enhanced the investigative conversation that keeps cardiac research moving forward. 2. Each of the main sessions included keynote lectures by senior investigators as well as presentations from young scientists and physicians, with original contributions selected by the scientific committee. This formula was particularly stimulating due to the complementary nature of the contributions; the right mix of experience and enthusiasm was truly contagious and enjoyable. The quality of the abstracts and the 3 winning abstract presentations, showed outstanding enthusiasm from the young investigators in basic research. They bring a sense of optimism and courage to all of us.

The II Florence Meeting 2012 provided all the attendees with an opportunity to improve their understanding in this challenging area of cardiology and to stimulate further research in the field. "Meetings are for meeting, and must be inspirational". This is particularly true for this II International Florence meeting, thanks to the Scientific Committee and the Faculty for their valuable contribution. We do hope to organize the third one in the near future.

For those that couldn't make it, the final program and most of the talks are available on the Qatar Cardiovascular Research Center website: http://www.qcardio.org/knowledge-hub.php


Cite this article as: Cecchi F, Olivotto I, Bonow RO, Yacoub M. Report on the 2nd Florence International Symposium on Advances in Cardiomyopathies: 9th meeting of the European Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases WG of the ESC, Global Cardiology Science & Practice 2012:15 http://dx.doi.org/10.5339/gcsp.2012.15http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.5339/gcsp.2012.15 

Submitted: 04 November 2012 
Accepted: 19 November 2012 
q 2012 Cecchi, Olivotto, Bonow, 
Yacoub, licensee Bloomsbury Qatar 
Foundation Journals. This is an open 
access article distributed under the 
terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution license CC BY 3.0, which 
permits unrestricted use, 
distribution and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work 
is properly cited. 

Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy 2 Northwestern University, Chicago, USA 3 Imperial College, London, UK 4 Qatar Cardiovascular Research Center. Doha, Qatar *Email: francocecchi337@gmail.com