Isolated Osteochondral Autograft Transplantation for a Focal Chondral Defect of the Patella


Evan P Shoemaker 
From Twin Cities Orthopedics
EdinaMinnesotaU.S.A

B.SLuke V Tollefson 
From Twin Cities Orthopedics
EdinaMinnesotaU.S.A

M.DMatthew T Rasmussen 
From Twin Cities Orthopedics
EdinaMinnesotaU.S.A

M.DDustin R Lee 
From Twin Cities Orthopedics
EdinaMinnesotaU.S.A

M.DRobert F Laprade laprademdphd@gmail.com 
From Twin Cities Orthopedics
EdinaMinnesotaU.S.A

From Twin Cities Orthopedics
EdinaMinnesotaU.S.A

Isolated Osteochondral Autograft Transplantation for a Focal Chondral Defect of the Patella
A55FAC18D540B71B41ABD8A1B4B8E90010.1016/j.eats.2025.103673Received April 2, 2025; accepted April 25, 2025.
Patellar chondral lesions are disabling injuries that are mechanically limiting and lead to the further progression of osteoarthritis.Patellar chondral lesions are identified in 11.0% to 34.6% of routine knee arthroscopies.Multiple surgical interventions, including chondroplasty, microfracture, osteochondral transplantation, and matrix-induced autologous chondrocyte implantation, have been described, but the best treatment method is debated.For isolated chondral lesions of the patella, osteochondral autograft transplantation from a lesser weightbearing surface in the knee has reported mid-and long-term success.This Technical Note describes isolated osteochondral autograft transplantation for a focal chondral defect of the patella.

L esions of the patellar cartilage present unique challenges for physicians due to the repetitive stress of everyday activities on the patellofemoral joint.They can be mechanically limiting and lead to the early progression of osteoarthritis.The incidence of patellar chondral defects found during routine arthroscopy ranges from 11.0% to 34.6%, 1,2 and many progress unnoticed for extended periods due to the forceresistant surface and native thickness of the patellar cartilage surface. 3Conservative management is typically indicated to restore native mechanics to the patellofemoral joint.Still, when measures fail to provide symptomatic relief, surgeons face the challenge of developing reproducible resurfacing techniques with predictable outcomes. 4,5Current evidence on surgical management of isolated patellofemoral chondral defects is limited, but existing methods are primarily inclusive of 3 repair mechanisms: marrow stimulation, osteochondral transplantation/grafting, and matrixinduced autologous chondrocyte implantation procedures.Osteochondral autograft transplantation (OAT) exists as the only option that replaces autologous hyaline cartilage, but limitations exist based on surrounding cartilage conditions and donor site morbidity.Improved outcomes have been reported for short-and mid-term follow-ups for OAT to treat osteochondral defects of the patella. 2,4,6In this technique, we describe a single-stage OAT for an isolated chondral defect of the patella.


Surgical Technique

A detailed video of the assessment, approach, patellar OAT, and chondroplasty is shown in Video 1.The stepby-step guide and surgical pearls are included in Table 1.


Patient Evaluation

Diagnosis of chondral injuries of the patella should start with the clinical examination, with evidence of patellar grinding, mechanical locking, and audible crepitation indicative of a probable chondral injury of the patella.Radiographic assessment and diagnostic imaging should include sunrise views to assess for patellofemoral joint space narrowing and osteophytes and magnetic resonance imaging to assess for any chondral pathology (Fig 1).


Anesthesia and Positioning

The patient is supine on the operating table and induced under general anesthesia.An examination under anesthesia is performed to confirm the clinical findings.A high-thigh tourniquet is placed on the surgical leg.The surgical leg is placed in an extremity holder (Mizho OSI), and the patient is administered cefazolin for prophylaxis against infection.


Arthroscopy

Anteromedial and anterolateral parapatellar portals are made, and the camera is inserted into the joint.The knee is insufflated with normal saline, and the suprapatellar pouch, lateral and medial gutters, and intraarticular surfaces of both compartments are assessed.The root and ramp areas of the medial and lateral menisci are palpated with a probe to evaluate attachment areas (Fig 2).Next, the integrity of the anterior cruciate ligament and the posterior cruciate ligament attachments are confirmed, ensuring the ligaments are taut.Finally, the chondral defect is identified on the patella, and the size of the defect is approximated.A probe is used to establish the margins of the defect based on the integrity of the cartilage, observing if any delamination has occurred (Fig 3).A defect size of 10 to 12 mm is often the upper size limit for an OAT procedure.


Approach and Medial Arthrotomy

An anterior midline incision is made 6 cm proximal to the superior pole of the patella to just distal to the tibial tubercle, followed by a medial parapatellar arthrotomy separating the vastus medialis oblique and the quadriceps tendon (Fig 4).Once the extensor mechanism is isolated and the exposure is complete, a Z retractor and a penetrating towel clip are used to retract the patella laterally in an everted position.The cartilage defect is identified, and the diameter is measured to determine the size of the autograft transfer needed.Once the margins are delineated, a surgical marking pen is used to outline the borders to ensure all of the defect margins are resurfaced (Fig 5).Anteromedial and anterolateral parapatellar portals are made, the arthroscope is inserted into the joint, and the joint is insufflated with normal saline.

The suprapatellar pouch, lateral and medial gutters, and intra-articular surfaces of both compartments are assessed.The medial and lateral menisci are palpated with a probe to evaluate attachment areas.

Next, the ACL and the PCL attachments are confirmed, ensuring the ligaments are taut.The chondral defect is identified on the patella, and the size of the defect is approximated.

Palpation with a probe occurs to establish the margins of the patellar defect based on the integrity of the cartilage, observing if any delamination has occurred.An anterior midline incision is made 6 cm proximal to the superior pole of the patella to just distal of the tibial tubercle, exposing the extensor mechanism.This is followed by a medial parapatellar arthrotomy.

The interval for medial arthrotomy separates the vastus medialis oblique and the quadriceps tendon.A Z retractor and a penetrating towel clip are used to secure the patella in an everted lateral position.The chondral defect on the patella is measured and prepped for removal.

The diameter of the defect is measured to determine the size of the autograft transplant needed.Once the margins are identified, a surgical marking pen is used to outline the fibrillated cartilage borders.A chondroplasty is performed, and the defective tissue is removed with a series of reamers, rongeurs, and pick-ups.

If chondral flaps were not removed with the shaver during arthroscopy, they should be removed first.Reaming of the defect begins by establishing the center and placing a guide pin at this point.This is overreamed to a desired depth of the bone.A series of rongeurs, blades, and pick-ups to remove excess portions of the pathologic cartilage.Attention is now brought to the harvest site for the autograft on the superolateral portion of the lateral femoral condyle, and the measured diameter of the defect is used to match the diameter of the autograft plug.The harvester is removed and ready for final transplantation into the patella.

The harvester is inserted perpendicular to the joint to avoid offset prominence within the graft.An osteochondral plug is harvested from a lesser articulating portion of the superolateral trochlea by malleting down the harvester to the matching desired depth.

The osteochondral donor plug is inserted into the recipient site.It is then firmly and carefully impacted into place.

The pin at the center of the patella is removed from the defect site, and suction is used a final time to remove any small loose bodies.The plug is placed in the prepared recipient site, and the inserter is slowly turned clockwise to deploy the plug into the patella.A towel and impactor are then used to reduce any prominent portions of the plug into the recipient site to align contiguously with the patellar cartilage margins.Deep and superficial tissues are closed in a layered fashion.

The medial arthrotomy is closed first, and then a layered closure prevents hematoma postoperatively.


Defect Debridement and Donor Site Harvest

If chondral flaps were not completely removed with the shaver during arthroscopy, they can now be removed.Reaming of the defect begins by establishing the center and placing a guide pin at this point.This is overreamed with an autograft OATS (Osteochondral Autograft Transfer System) Recipient Site reamer (Arthrex, Naples, FL) to a desired depth of 13 mm, with caution to avoid iatrogenic heat necrosis during reaming.A series of rongeurs, blades, and pick-ups are used to remove the remaining reaming fragments (Fig 6).

Attention is now brought to the harvest site for the autograft, and the previously measured diameter of the defect is used to match the diameter of the autograft plug.The Tube Harvester (Arthrex) is inserted perpendicular to the joint to avoid prominence within


Osteochondral Autograft Transplantation

The pin at the center of the patella is removed from the defect site, and suction is used a final time to remove any small loose bodies.The OAT Tube Harvester (Arthrex) is placed in the debrided site matching the margins and is slowly turned clockwise to deploy the plug into the patella.A towel and small impactor are then used to reduce any prominent portions of the osteochondral autograft into the recipient site to align contiguously with the patellar cartilage margins (Figs 8 and 9).


Final Closure

Closure begins with the medial arthrotomy, using No. 2 nonabsorbable sutures (Ethicon, Raritan, NJ).The remaining deep tissues are closed with 0 and 2-0 Vicryl (Ethicon), followed by a Monocryl stitch (Ethicon) for the superficial skin.Steri-strips are loosely applied, followed by the application of a sterile dressing, and a knee is placed in an immobilizer in full extension.Once the exposure of the patella is complete, a Z retractor and a penetrating towel clip are used to retract the patella and evert the patella laterally.The defect is identified (black circle), and the diameter is measured to determine the desired size of the donor site plug that is subsequently harvested from a lesser weightbearing area of the knee (B).Once the margins were established and we determined our calculated diameter of 10 mm was accurate, a surgical marking pen was used to outline the defect on each border to ensure coverage of the resurfacing process (C).Tube Harvester (Arthrex).After the location of the donor site is confirmed on a lesser articulating chondral surface of the knee (superolateral trochlea in this case), the harvester is placed perpendicular (A) to the joint surface to avoid prominence within the graft, and a 10-mm-diameter and 13-mm-deep donor osteochondral plug is taken (black arrow).The harvester is carefully spun, alternating 90 clockwise and 90 counterclockwise, to remove the plug.The OAT is now ready for final transplantation into the patella, and clearance of the exposed recipient site is confirmed before the removal of the guide pin (B).


Postoperative Protocol

The patient will be nonweightbearing on the surgical limb for 6 weeks.Flexion will be limited to 60 for the first two weeks and then may increase as tolerated.This is mainly to protect the arthrotomy incision.The patient will utilize a continuous passive motion at 0 to 60 for 2 hours twice a day for 2 weeks and may gradually increase knee range of motion as tolerated.


Discussion

Patellar osteochondral lesions of the knee remain a challenge to treat.][9][10] The use of OAT is advantageous for numerous reasons: a single-stage procedure to restore hyaline cartilage, the use of autologous tissue, and lower costs associated with the donor harvest.A retrospective study by Figueroa et al. 2 analyzed outcomes of high-grade patellar chondral defects that were treated and received an OAT.A total of 26 patients were included (mean age, 28.5 years) with chondral defects averaging 180 mm 2 , and patients received a median of 1 autograft (range, 1-3).Imaging outcomes revealed that 92% of patients showed plug integration to adjacent bone and good cartilage characteristics comparable with adjacent cartilage.At a mid-term follow-up, most patients reported good or excellent results with symptom and activity level improvements.Regarding isolated singleplug OAT using a press-fit technique (as described in this technique), a study by Filardo et al. 11   the long-term outcomes of knee OAT using a plug from a lesser weightbearing area.The cohort included 15 patients with a mean follow-up of 17.5 AE 3.5 years.Functional outcomes were assessed by Lysholm, International Knee Documentation Committee, and Tegner scores, and significant improvements were observed in all metrics.


investigated

Although improved outcomes have been reported in the short and long term, this procedure is not without inherent risk factors.Donor site morbidity of OAT from a lesser weightbearing surface of the knee has been observed, resulting in mechanical locking, fibrocartilage hypertrophy necessitating surgical intervention, and persistent anterior knee pain. 12The advantages and disadvantages of this technique are presented in Table 2.

Fig 1 .
1
Fig 1. Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of an axial (A) and coronal (B) view of a right knee.The heightened signal intensity in the mid to lateral facet of the patella with edema present inferior to the patella is indicative of an osteochondral defect present (white arrows, white circles).The increased signal intensity in the subchondral bone is indicative of subchondral cystic changes.The approximate size of the defect was measured at 10 mm in diameter, both proximal to distal and medial to lateral.Clinical examination revealed moderate patellofemoral crepitation but no instability indicative of a medial patellofemoral ligament tear.


Fig 2 .
2
Fig 2. Right knee arthroscopic view of the lateral (A) and medial (B) meniscus from the anterolateral parapatellar portal.The lateral and medial root attachments are palpated to confirm they are intact (white arrows).(LFC, lateral femoral condyle; MFC, medial femoral condyle; PHLM, posterior horn of lateral meniscus; PHMM, posterior horn of medial meniscus.)


Fig 3 .
3
Fig 3. Right knee arthroscopic view from the anterolateral portal of the osteochondral lesion on the patella.Any chondral flaps or loose bodies (A) are removed using a shaver, and the margins of the lesion are probed to determine if any delamination has occurred (B).


Fig 4 .
4
Fig 4. With the patient in the supine position, a right knee anterior midline incision should be made 6 cm proximal to the superior pole of the patella to just distal to the tibial tubercle, which exposes the extensor mechanism (A).Next, a medial parapatellar arthrotomy separating the vastus medialis oblique and the quadriceps tendon is performed so the patella and the donor site on the superolateral trochlea can be exposed (B).




e4


Fig 5 .
5
Fig 5. Right knee anterior view of the focal osteochondral defect of the everted patella (A) with the patient in supine position.Once the exposure of the patella is complete, a Z retractor and a penetrating towel clip are used to retract the patella and evert the patella laterally.The defect is identified (black circle), and the diameter is measured to determine the desired size of the donor site plug that is subsequently harvested from a lesser weightbearing area of the knee (B).Once the margins were established and we determined our calculated diameter of 10 mm was accurate, a surgical marking pen was used to outline the defect on each border to ensure coverage of the resurfacing process (C).


Fig 6 .
6
Fig 6.Right knee anteromedial view of the debridement of the focal osteochondral defect of the patella with the patient in the supine position.(A) The center of the patellar cartilage defect is identified, and a guide pin is drilled into the center of the defect.(B) A 10-mm-diameter OATS (Osteochondral Autograft Transfer System) Recipient Site reamer (Arthrex) is used to ream 13 mm deep, exposing the subchondral surface.(C) A series of rongeurs, blades, and pick-ups are used to remove the reaming fragments and confirm that the margins of the recipient site are flush and prepared for the press fitting of the autograft donor plug.


Fig 7 .
7
Fig 7. Right knee anterior view with the patient in the supine position of the osteochondral autograft transplantation (OAT) Tube Harvester (Arthrex).After the location of the donor site is confirmed on a lesser articulating chondral surface of the knee (superolateral trochlea in this case), the harvester is placed perpendicular (A) to the joint surface to avoid prominence within the graft, and a 10-mm-diameter and 13-mm-deep donor osteochondral plug is taken (black arrow).The harvester is carefully spun, alternating 90 clockwise and 90 counterclockwise, to remove the plug.The OAT is now ready for final transplantation into the patella, and clearance of the exposed recipient site is confirmed before the removal of the guide pin (B).


Fig 8 .
8
Fig 8. Right knee anterior view of the osteochondral autograft transplantation (OAT) with the patient in the supine position.The remnant loose osteochondral bodies are removed with suction from the recipient site on the patella (A).The OAT Tube Harvester (Arthrex) is placed on the aperture of the recipient site to confirm the size of the autograft.Before gentle impaction, the T handle on the harvester is spun clockwise to advance the OAT into the recipient site on the patella (B).A towel and impactor are used to set the plug and reduce any prominent portion within the recipient site, so it sits flush on the patella (C).


Fig 9 .
9
Fig 9. Right knee anterior view of the osteochondral autograft in the patella.After initial placement (A), any portion of the plug that is proud is gently impacted, ensuring that no gaps remain in the patellar cartilage defect area (B).The donor site on the superolateral trochlea (A, white arrow) required no backfill or bone grafting before closure.The medial arthrotomy is closed using No. 2 nonabsorbable sutures (Ethicon).


Table 1 .
1
Step-by-Step Guide and Surgical Pearls for Isolated Osteochondral Autograft Transplantation for a Focal Chondral Defect of the Patella
Step-by-Step Guide

Table 2 .
2
Advantages and Disadvantages of an Isolated Osteochondral Autograft Transplantation for a Focal Chondral Defect of the Patella Advantages Disadvantages No risk of disease transmission and no issues of viability of osteochondral allograft due to delayed implantation Risk of donor site morbidity and residual anterior knee pain Immediate osteochondral transplantation option and restoration of native biomechanics of the patellofemoral joint Risk of donor plug and recipient site mismatch and failure to integrate into the subchondral bone Lower associated cost when compared to the use of an allograft plug Higher demand technically to harvest and donate the osteochondral plug.Poses an increased risk of iatrogenic injury to the surrounding anatomy PATELLA OAT FOR CARTILAGE DEFECT e7

ACL, anterior cruciate ligament; PCL, posterior cruciate ligament. e2 E. P. SHOEMAKER ET AL.
DisclosuresThe authors declare the following financial interests/ personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: R.F.L. has received funding grants from Ossur, Smith & Nephew, Arthroscopy Association of North America, and American Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine; is a consultant or advisor for Ossur, Smith & Nephew, and Responsive Arthroscopy; has received travel reimbursement from Smith & Nephew; has received speaking and lecture fees from Foundation Medical, LLC; and has a patent with royalties paid to Ossur.All other authors (E.P.S., L.V.T., M.T.R., D.R.L.) declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Articular cartilage defects in 1,000 knee arthroscopies. K Hjelle, E Solheim, T Strand, R Muri, M Brittberg, Arthroscopy. 182002

High-grade patellar chondral defects: Promising results from management with osteochondral autografts. D Figueroa, Calvo Rodriguez, R Donoso, R Espinoza, J Vaisman, A Yanez, C , Orthop J Sports Med. 82020

Patellofemoral contact pressures. The influence of q-angle and tendofemoral contact. H H Huberti, W C Hayes, J Bone Joint Surg Am. 661984

Osteochondral autologous transplantation for treating patellar high-grade chondral defects: A systematic review. R Donoso, D Figueroa, J Espinoza, C Yanez, J Saavedra, Orthop J Sports Med. 723259671198766182019

Surgical strategies for chondral defects of the patellofemoral joint: A systematic review. F Migliorini, A Baroncini, A Bell, C Weber, F Hildebrand, N Maffulli, J Orthop Surg Res. 175242022

Autologous osteochondral transfer of the knee demonstrates continued high rates of return to sport and low rates of conversion to arthroplasty at long-term follow-up: A systematic review. J F Oeding, M E Dancy, F W Fearington, Arthroscopy. 402024

Concomitant medial patellofemoral ligament reconstruction, tibial tubercle osteotomy, trochleoplasty, and osteochondral autograft transfer to the patella. J A Stone, E P Shoemaker, L V Tollefson, E L Slette, N J Jacobson, R F Laprade, Arthrosc Tech. 141032992024

Osteochondral allograft transplantation for treatment of focal patellar osteochondral lesion. M B Ferrari, G Sanchez, A Chang, A Sanchez, Ellera Gomes, J L Provencher, M T , Arthrosc Tech. 62017

Treatment of patellofemoral chondral lesions using microfractures associated with a chitosan scaffold: Mid-term clinical and radiological results. R Calvo, D Figueroa, F Figueroa, J Bravo, M Contreras, N Zilleruelo, Cartilage. 132021

Patellar fresh osteochondral allograft transplantation. T J Dekker, M I Kennedy, W J Grantham, N N Dephillipo, R F Laprade, Arthrosc Tech. 82019

Single-plug autologous osteochondral transplantation: Results at minimum 16 years' follow-up. G Filardo, E Kon, Di Matteo, B , Di Martino, A Marcacci, M , Orthopedics. 372014

Donor-site morbidity after osteochondral autograft transfer procedures. R F Laprade, J C Botker, Arthroscopy. 202004