Oral manifestations and dental considerations of patients with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: a scoping review


DDSJulia Niklasson julia.niklasson@uu.se 
Department of Plastic and Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
Uppsala University
UppsalaSweden

MDAnders R€ Onnblom 
Department of Medical Sciences
Uppsala University
UppsalaSweden

MDAdnan Lidian 
Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery
Uppsala University
UppsalaSweden

PhD, cAndreas Thor 
Department of Plastic and Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
Uppsala University
UppsalaSweden

Oral manifestations and dental considerations of patients with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: a scoping review
C66C313EE60C2AB0FA120A3E7930F42E10.1016/j.oooo.2023.08.001Received for publication Apr 25, 2023; returned for revision Jul 20, 2023; accepted for publication Aug 5, 2023.
Objective.We examined the range, nature, and extent of research conducted regarding the oral and dental implications of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) to identify gaps in the research and knowledge of the field.Study Design.We performed a scoping review according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews and 2017 Guidance for the Conduct of Joanna Briggs Institute Scoping Reviews.We searched the MEDLINE and Web of Science databases for all full-text articles published in English from December 1946 to October 2022.Results.We identified 103 articles describing oral and dental considerations of patients with HHT, primarily case reports.Most reported oral telangiectasias of the tongue, lips, and palate.Many reported management of bleeding and the use or recommendation of prophylactic antibiotics before dental procedures.Conclusions.Oral telangiectasias are commonly found in patients with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, and dental professionals may be the first to diagnose it in their patients.Early detection and diagnosis are important to prevent potentially fatal outcomes, and prophylactic antibiotics before procedures may be warranted.(Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol  2023;136:691À702)Statement of Clinical RelevanceOral telangiectasias are commonly found in patients with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, and dental professionals may be the first to diagnose it in their patients.Early detection and diagnosis are important to prevent potentially fatal outcomes, and prophylactic antibiotics before procedures may be warranted.

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT), also known as Mb Osler or Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome, 1 is an autosomal-dominant inherited disorder with an approximate prevalence of 1 in 5,000 to 8,000 affected individuals in the population. 2,3Mutations in genes, most commonly endoglin or ACVR1, affect the transforming growth factor beta superfamily and cause aberrant formation of vascular endothelial cells, resulting in malformed vascular networks. 4The malformations of the vascular system range from large visceral arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) to minor mucocutaneous telangiectasias.Visceral arteriovenous malformations in HHT are characterized by a lack of capillaries intervening veins and arteries, causing right-to-left shunts. 1 Telangiectasias in HHT usually develop between the ages of 20 and 30 years and increase in incidence with age.Likewise, the development of AVMs is positively associated with increasing age.As age increases, AVM-related symptoms tend to increase in both severity and frequency, whereas severe symptoms tend to occur less frequently in younger patients. 5elangiectasias are malformed capillary beds in the oral and nasal cavities that blanch with pressure and refill promptly after the pressure is removed.Because telangiectasias are often superficial on the mucosal surface and prone to tear with minimal trauma, 6 recurrent epistaxis is the most common clinical presentation of HHT.The recommended treatments to minimize epistaxis severity in HHT are prophylactic use of nasal lubricants (White Vaseline or Nozoil), saline washing, and prophylactic medical treatment using peroral tranexamic acid.In the event of epistaxis, patients are advised to use self-management products, such as hemostatic gauzes or sponges, to stop the bleeding. 7If the patient cannot self-manage epistaxis, physicianaided use of different types of nasal packing, including topical vasoconstrictive agents such as lidocaine-Àadrenaline or topical tranexamic acid, may be warranted.If conservative management of recurrent epistaxis is ineffective, different types of laser treatments; 8 septodermoplasty; or surgical procedures, such as the Young procedure for epistaxis, may be recom-mended. 9In recent years, the use of bevacizumab (Avastin) has been suggested, but further controlled trials examining the effects of this potent medical agent are required. 10arger AVMs are mostly found in the lungs as pulmonary arteriovenous malformations (PAVMs); in the liver as hepatic arteriovenous malformations; or in the cerebral system, including the spinal cord, as cerebral arteriovenous malformations.Complications from shunting or bleeding may be sudden and fatal.Patients with PAVMs can develop brain abscesses or suffer from stroke because of septic emboli.For this reason, screening for PAVMs is recommended for all patients with confirmed HHT diagnosis, 11 for whom the incidence of PAVM is estimated to range from 24% 12 to 48.6%. 13Pulmonary arteriovenous malformations with a feeding vessel diameter >2 mm typically require embolization to prevent complications. 11Early diagnosis, screening, and treatment can reduce the serious sequelae associated with the disease. 14ntibiotic prophylaxis before surgical and dental procedures is recommended for patients with HHT who have PAVMs.This treatment aims to decrease the risk of paradoxical embolism and prevent bacteremia due to right-to-left shunting, which is believed to cause neurologic symptoms, such as cerebral abscess or stroke. 15Dental procedures, such as single tooth extraction, dental scaling, and endodontic treatment, have been reported to cause bacteremia, with anaerobic bacteria more commonly found than aerobic microorganisms. 16Non-invasive dental activities, such as tooth brushing, have also been shown to cause dental-associated bacteremia, 17 which may prompt consideration of the benefits of antibiotic prophylaxis for patients with daily bacteremia exposure.The microorganisms in brain abscesses can also be detected in the periodontal bacterial flora.However, it is difficult to determine the impact of a dental procedure, as it can take months for a brain abscess to present clinically.Further research regarding dental-associated bacteremia and the susceptibility of HHT patients with PAVMs to bacteremia is warranted. 11iagnosis of HHT requires presence of at least 3 of the following 4 Curaçao Diagnostic Criteria for HHT: (1) spontaneous and recurrent epistaxis; (2) multiple telangiectasias located on the lips, oral cavity, fingertips, and the mucosa of the nasal cavity and gastrointestinal tract; (3) AVMs in the lungs, liver, brain, and spinal cord; and (4) a family history of HHT, particularly having first-degree relative with HHT. 1 There is a need for a summary of research findings regarding the latest treatment modalities and expert opinions on this rare disease to aid the clinical practitioner in its diagnosis and treatment.To assist in this endeavor, we conducted a scoping review of the literature regarding oral and dental considerations in HHT.We chose to conduct a scoping review rather than a systematic review because of the small number of high-quality articles we identified in a preliminary search, which we attribute to the rarity of HHT.Using the guidelines of Munn et al., 18 we aimed to systematically map the previous research into the oral and dental considerations of patients with HHT to identify gaps in knowledge.Our research was guided by the following research question: What are the oral and dental considerations regarding and possible treatment strategies for patients with HHT?


METHODS AND MATERIALS

We performed this scoping review according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews 19 and 2017 Guidance for the Conduct of Joanna Briggs Institute Scoping Reviews. 20After a preliminary search of existing literature, we established and registered a protocol (DOI 10.17605/OSF.IO/PZTVM).Our search strategy was drafted by an experienced librarian at Uppsala University and refined by discussion (Supplementary Table S1).Due to the low prevalence of patients diagnosed with HHT, we anticipated identifying few, if any, randomized controlled trials examining the oral and dental considerations of patients with HHT.Therefore, we broadened the study design to include guidelines and case reports to review different aspects of oral and dental considerations in HHT.

To identify articles, we searched the MEDLINE and Web of Science databases for all articles published from December 1946 to October 2022 that met the inclusion criteria of being published in English and having full-text availability.We conducted our first search according to the Joanna Briggs Institute population/concept/context framework, defining the population as all human patients diagnosed with HHT; the concept as studies using any type of research design, including randomized control trials, cohort trials, casecontrol studies, cross-sectional studies, case reports, and opinion articles; and the context as having oral or dental relevance.As our search strategy included searching "all fields" in the database search engine, we retrieved several irrelevant articles that we excluded from our final sample.We did not alter our search strategy to compensate for these irrelevant articles to keep our search parameters sufficiently broad to retrieve all potentially relevant articles.

We exported the search results into EndNote and removed all duplicates.During the peer review process in June 2023, we updated the search parameters to include new literature published after October 13, 2022.After comparing the original and updated search results, we removed duplicates to ensure the final search records were accurate (Supplementary Table S2).One reviewer then evaluated the records to exclude unrelated articles and divided the articles into 5 groups that we considered data items: case reports, statements/guidelines/reviews, clinical manifestations, treatment modalities/clinical relevance, and other (Figure 1).Of the 513 articles we identified, we screened 409, for which 2 reviewers sequentially evaluated the titles, abstracts, and full text.We included case reports that contained the term "oral" even if oral considerations were not the article's main focus if the article addressed oral telangiectasis diagnosed according to the Curaçao Criteria.Finally, we carefully reviewed the full text of the selected articles and summarized them in tables.


RESULTS

Using our search strategy and criteria, we identified 107 articles, case reports, observational studies, and statements/guidelines that we classified as case reports, statements/guidelines/reviews, clinical manifestations, treatment modalities/clinical relevance, and other.A total number of 77 case reports published between 1946 and 2023 qualified for inclusion.The majority described cases in adult patients, with only a few describing clinical manifestations in pediatric patients, and telangiectasias were most frequently reported in the oral cavity, lips, tongue, and palate.Of the 5 categories, case reports, shown in Table I, comprised the greatest number.Most case reports described the clinical manifestation of HHT but not any treatment strategies specifically of oral interest, although several provided possible treatment modalities.

Table II shows the studies describing the clinical manifestations of HHT in larger patient samples ranging from 6 to 268 patients.The 11 articles describe the number and the locations of telangiectasias, with several providing insight into the complications from bleeding from telangiectasias and 3 describing clinical manifestations in pediatric patients.Table III shows   22 PROST Telangiectasias on tongue and lips, fractured incisor caused by trauma, and hemorrhage on tongue managed by compression, maxillary denture, and caution at site of telangiectasia.Scopp et al. 23 OM Telangiectasias on tongue, buccal mucosa, hard and soft palate, and lips.Dental procedures performed without any complications.Durocher et al. 24 PROST Telangiectasias on tongue, lips, buccal mucosa, and palate.Upper denture had not caused palate lesions to hemorrhage.Oliver et al. 25 OM Telangiectasias on tongue, uvula, hard palate, and lips.Traiger et al. 26 OM Telangiectasia on gingiva, tongue, hard and soft palate, and lips.Smith et al. 27 OM 2 cases of telangiectasia on tongue.Hashimoto et al. 28 OM Telangiectasia on lips, tongue, and buccal mucosa.Donaldson et al. 29 PROST Telangiectasias on palate, lips, and tongue.Upper denture was not considered cause of bleeding.Austin et al. 30 PERIO Treatment of HHT with conservative and surgical periodontal therapy.Cos et al. 31 PED No signs of oral telangiectasia in a 13-y-old female.Olson et al. 32 PROST Telangiectasias on tongue, palate, and lips and on the masticatory gingiva mandibular ridge.Lower denture did not cause hemorrhage.Peery et al. 33 OM Telangiectasias on tongue and lips.Flint et al. 34 OM Telangiectasias on tongue and lips, with trauma against tongue causing bleeding and emergency admission to hospital.Reyes-M ujica et al. 35 PED Telangiectasias on tongue and floor of mouth in a 23-mo-old.Maruyama et al. 36 OM Telangiectasias on oral mucosa.Colver et al. 37 OMS Telangiectasias on palate and hemorrhage treated by excision and infrared coagulation.Ogino et al. 38 OM Telangiectasias on tongue.Takahama et al. 39 OM Telangiectasias on tongue and lips.Finkbeiner et al. 40 OMS Telangiectasias on gingiva, with bleeding lesion on marginal gingiva treated with laser.Ishikawa et al. 41 OM Telangiectasias on buccal mucosa.Edwards et al. 42 ENDO Telangiectasias on palate, tongue, and lips.Treatment of external cervical root resorption palate aspect of anterior maxillary teeth caused by telangiectasia.Yunoki et al. 43 OM Telangiectasias on tongue and lips.Haarmann et al. 44 OM Telangiectasias on palate, tongue, and gingiva.Kamal et al. 45 OM Telangiectasias on tongue and lips.Ragsdale et al. 46 OM Four cases of telangiectasias on oral mucosa and tongue.Fraga et al. 47 PED No signs of oral telangiectasias in a 5-y-old.Juares et al. 48M Telangiectasias on tongue, lower lip, and buccal mucosa.Lozano et al. 49 OMS Treatment of gingival overgrowth with electrical gingivectomy.Lee et al. 50M Telangiectasias on tongue.Santos et al. 51 OM Telangiectasias on tongue and lips.Stojanov et al. 52 OM Telangiectasias on tongue and lips treated by embolization of right lingual artery.Ishikawa et al. 41 OM Telangiectasias on floor of mouth.Cesareo et al. 53 OM Telangiectasias on oral cavity mucosa.Chang et al. 54 OM Telangiectasias on lips and tongue.Corre et al. 55 GP Telangiectasias on vestibule, brain abscess 1 wk after 10 teeth had been extracted, infection with Fusobacterium nucleatum and Staphylococcus epidermidis.Olitsky et al. 56 OM Telangiectasias on tongue and lips.Hopp et al. 57 OMS Telangiectasias on gingiva and larger AVM.Treatment of lesion on marginal gingiva by sclerotherapy.Mylona et al. 58 GP Telangiectasias on lips and cerebral abscess caused by infection with Enterococcus faecalis 10 d after dental procedure performed without antibiotic prophylaxis.Samol et al. 59 OM Telangiectasias on lips.Velthuis et al. 60 OM Telangiectasias on lips.Chadha et al. 61 OM No signs of mucocutaneous telangiectasia.Inocêncio et al. 62 OM Telangiectasia on lips.Kaminski et al. 63 OM Telangiectasia on tongue and lips.Boza et al. 64 OM Telangiectasia on oral mucosa and tongue.Chiu et al. 65 OM Telangiectasia on tongue.Komaki et al. 66 OM Telangiectasia on lips.Ahamed et al. 67 OMS Telangiectasias on hard palate and gingival and lingual mucosa.


DISCUSSION

As shown in Tables I and II, diagnosis of HHT associated with multiple telangiectasias, often in the oral cavity and lips, has been well documented in case reports and cohort studies with larger patient samples.In this scoping review of 107 articles, we retrieved 65 that had been published since 2010, indicating an escalation in this field of research.Most articles are case reports and observational studies, and we retrieved no randomized controlled trials from the databases, possibly due to the low prevalence of HHT.We identified no articles describing HHT-related orofacial pain, orthodontic treatment, dentofacial orthopedics, or cariology.In the following sections, we describe our findings regarding the dental and oral considerations and management of patients with HHT according to dental specialty.


General practice dentistry

Most patients with HHT present with telangiectasias in the mucosa, gingiva, palate, tongue, and/or lips.As dental visits typically occur regularly and most patients with HHT first present with telangiectasias in the oral  69 2015 OM Telangiectasia on tongue and lips and brain abscess, with no mention of dental procedure.Holden et al. 70 2016 OM No signs of mucocutaneous telangiectasia.Kiyeng et al. 71 2016 OM Telangiectasias on tongue and hard palate.Lonarcevic et al. 72 2016 OM Telangiectasias on tongue, lips, and oral mucosa.Muthu et al. 73 2016 OM Telangiectasias on lips.Dissanayake et al. 74 2017 OM Telangiectasias on oral mucosa.Khaitan et al. 75 2017 OM Telangiectasias on tongue, hard palate, and lips.Jackowska et al. 76 2018 OM Telangiectasias on tongue and lips.Latos et al. 77 2018 OM Telangiectasias on oral mucosa.Mill an-Cayetano et al. 78 2018 OM Telangiectasias on tongue and lips.Ejiri et al. 79 2019 OM Telangiectasias on tongue.Jan et al. 80 2019 OM Telangiectasias on tongue and palate.Mangkorntongsakul 81 2019 OM Telangiectasias on tongue and lips.Tokoro et al. 82 2019 OM Telangiectasias on tongue and oral mucosa.Leonida et al. 83 2019 OMS Telangiectasias on tongue, palate, and lip of undiagnosed HHT.Hospital admission after tooth extraction and implant surgery.Treatment with implant in region 36 and antibiotic prophylaxis.Leung et al. 84 2019 PED Telangiectasias on tongue and floor of mouth in a 6-mo-old.Bowers et al. 85 2020 OMS Telangiectasias on tongue, floor of mouth, and hard palate.Treatment with KTP laser coblation and bevacizumab injection.Callejas-Moraga et al. 86


OM

Telangiectasias and oral angiodysplasia.Campo Costa et al. 87 2020 OM Telangiectasias on tip of tongue and lip.Claudia et al. 88 2020 OM Telangiectasias on vestibule, lips, soft and hard palate, tongue, and sublingual region.Girit et al. 89 2020 PED Telangiectasias on vestibule in a 13-y-old.Lim et al. 90 2020 OM Telangiectasias on tongue and lips.Frade et al. 91 2021 OM Telangiectasias on tongue and lips.Ochi et al. 92 2021 OM Telangiectasias on oral mucosa.Xu et al. 93 2021 OM Telangiectasias on tongue.Khan et al. 94 2022 OM No signs of mucocutaneous telangiectasia.Raghvi et al. 95 2022 OM Telangiectasias on tongue.Liu et al. 96 2023 OM Telangiectasias on tongue.

OM, oral medicine; PROST, prosthodontics; HHT, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia; PERIO, periodontology; PED, pediatric dentistry; OMS, oral and maxillofacial surgery; ENDO, endodontics; GP, general practitioner; AVM, arteriovenous malformation.

cavity, dental professionals have a unique opportunity to be the first clinicians to diagnose HHT.Upon finding telangiectasias in the oral cavity, they can ask their patients if they experience recurrent epistaxis and have a familial history of HHT to confirm the diagnosis and then refer them to a specialist for further treatment.An important finding is that HHT patients with previous or known PAVMs should be given antibiotic prophylaxis before dental procedures.Shovlin et al. 11 and Boother et al. 119 have attempted to link dental procedures to the formation of brain abscesses, but the correlation is difficult to study due to ethical considerations and the often months-long duration of brain abscess development.Bacteremia can be caused by an everyday event, such as tooth brushing, or a large event, such as in 2 case reports that each described dental procedures involving 10 extractions having been conducted 1 week before the development of brain abscesses. 55,58Brain abscesses may have also developed after dental procedures in several case reports that did not state whether a dental procedure had been performed or what the status of dental hygiene had been before the development of a brain abscess. 69To minimize the risk of dental bacteremia and the need for Review article and presentation of patients with HHT who all had intra oral lesions, mainly on the lips and tongue.Recommended that dental professionals prevent injury of mucosal telangiectasia by removing sharp or abraded teeth.Folz et al. 98 2004 Clinical report OM 70 Found telangiectasias in the oral cavity and observed that the number of sites affected increased with age.Of 70 patients, 13 had experienced hemorrhage from the oral cavity, most of which could be stopped by the patient.Geisthoff et al. 99 2006 Observational study OM 11 Investigated lesions of the buccal mucosa with contact endoscopy to describe and monitor oral lesions.Giordano et al. 100 103 2018 Observational study OM 20 Examined 14 patients with telangiectasia on the oral mucosa, tongue, and lips.

Gonzalez et al. 104 2019 Retrospective cohort study PED 90  In pediatric patients found cutaneous telangiectasia (73%) was more common than oral (27%).Observed adolescents aged 10 to 18 y have a higher incidence of oral telangiectasia than children aged 0 to 9 y.Reported 1 case in the cohort had experienced a hemorrhagic event involving extra nasal telangiectasia (lip) that required no treatment.Only 21 of 90 patients with multiple telangiectasias had them on the locations in the Curaçao Criteria.Matti et al. 105 2021 Observational study PED 70 Found pediatric patients with HHT more often have nasal telangiectasias than oral and skin telangiectasias and that 13 of 90 patients had 3 or more telangiectasias on the skin and/or oral cavity.Hyldahl et al. 106 2022 Observational study OM 34 Found 16 of 18 patients with HHT1 but only 9 of 15 patients with HHT2 had telangiectasias on the tongue.Found 14 of 18 patients with HHT1 but only 8 of 15 patients with HHT had oral mucosal telangiectasias.The differences between the HH1 and HH2 patients were significant.Regarding sites, 47.1% reported bleeding from the gums, 20.6% from the lips, 14.7% from the tongue, and 14.7% from the palate.McDonald et al. 107  dental procedures, patients with HHT should receive support, recommendations, and information about dental hygiene. 114In accordance, one of the latest recommendations of the European Reference Network for Rare Diseases is that all patients with PAVM and HHT receive a written recommendation of antibiotic prophylaxis before dental procedures. 114


Oral Medicine

Diagnosis of HHT is associated with multiple telangiectasias often found in the oral cavity and lips, as is well documented in both the case reports and cohort studies of larger patient samples shown in Tables I and II.The telangiectasias often need no treatment if asymptomatic, and diagnosis for HHT can be confirmed if the patient meets 3 of the four 4 Curaçao Criteria.


Oral and maxillofacial surgery

Several case reports describe the use of the same management of telangiectasias on the tongue that cause bleeding and of nasal telangiectasias that cause bleeding, primarily the use of self-management measures.

When patients needed medical intervention, several cases were treated by laser ablation, 37,40,[116][117][118] several cases by laser ablation in combination with Avastin, 67- 85 and 1 case by sclerotherapy. 57One article described the management of gingival overgrowth associated with HHT using an electrotome, 49 and 1 article described the treatment of a large AVM on the tongue by embolization. 52Most studies describe the treatment of bleeding oral telangiectasias in 1 case or several cases, but none provided recommendations for treating oral telangiectasias.One article recommended using a dental night guard to prevent occlusive trauma against oral telangiectasias and thereby minimize the risk of bleeding, 117 and several recommended restoration of fractured or carious teeth. 22,97One article described treatment in 1 patient with HHT by immediately replacing an extracted first molar in the lower left jaw with an implant using a post-extractive, 1-stage technique. 83The patient also received antibiotics 3 days prior and 3 days after the intervention and did not experience any septic events, but no follow-up on the implant was reported. 83


ENDODONTICS

One article described an interesting case of external root resorptions caused by telangiectasias in the hard palate near the frontal incisors that were treated endodontically by root-canal treatment and crown lengthening. 42However, this was the only case described in the literature.


Periodontology

In one Danish study with clinical examination of and complementary questionnaire regarding the bleeding  15 2008 Opinion Recommended that patients with PAVM and HHT receive antibiotic prophylaxis before dental procedures.Olitsky et al. 110 2010 Key recommendations for practice

Recommended that all patients with history of PAVM be informed about and receive antibiotic prophylaxis before dental procedures if at risk of bacteremia and other infections.Shovlin et al. 111 2014 Clinical review Recommended antibiotic prophylaxis for patients with PAVM before dental procedures and that patients maintain meticulous oral hygiene.patterns of 34 patients with HHT, almost half reported experiencing bleeding from the gums. 106However, the authors did not indicate whether this bleeding was from telangiectasias or caused by plaque-induced gingival bleeding.One case report of 2 patients described initial periodontal treatment with oral instruction and information, plaque control, and quadrant-wise scaling, followed by uneventful periodontal surgical procedures. 30As no unusual bleeding occurred, the bleeding that did occur could be correlated to the degree of periodontal inflammation.


Pediatric dentistry

The incidence and number of telangiectasias generally increase with age, but they can occur in children with HHT, 100,104 with several articles describing cases of young children with oral telangiectasias. 35,47,84However, as younger patients typically do not have multiple telangiectasias on the locations specified in the Curaçao Criteria, they may not meet 3 of 4 of the criteria necessary for the diagnosis of HHT. 104One study found that children more often present with nasal telangiectasias rather than oral or skin telangiectasias. 105In the findings of 1 study, whether children have problems with hemorrhage from the oral cavity that need hospital treatment is not reported. 104


Prosthodontics

In treating edentulous patients, several articles describe the importance of ensuring that dentures do not interfere with or cause traumatic pressure on oral telangiectasias on the gingival ridges or in the vestibulum.None reported observing any hemorrhage linked to the traumatic wear of dentures in the upper or lower jaw. 22,24,29,32


CONCLUSIONS

In this scoping review of 103 articles describing oral and dental considerations regarding HHT in the literature, we highlighted the limited research in this area and the gaps in knowledge resulting thereof.As most studies we identified are case reports, there is a clear need for higher-quality studies examining larger samples to establish a more reliable evidence base to guide practitioners in clinical decision-making.Indeed, the fact that most of the articles we included are case reports, which can be attributed to the low prevalence of patients diagnosed with HHT and the limited number of articles describing oral considerations, was a limitation of this study.Nevertheless, the case reports we included provide insight into what should be the focus of future research.Another limitation was the exclusion of several case reports that might have been of interest, due to being published in another language than English.Given the limited amount of literature available on dental and oral considerations in HHT, the fact that 32 case reports were excluded out of the total number of 109 identified case reports, shown in Figure .1, may have led us to miss relevant considerations and could have created a bias in our findings.Despite these limitations and the fact that we cannot offer clinical recommendations based on our findings, our study highlights the importance of dental professionals remaining aware of the signs of HHT, particularly oral telangiectasias, as they might be the first to diagnose HHT in their patients.Future research should focus on describing the extent of oral pathology that needs treatment in patients with HHT, providing further evidence of the need for antibiotic prophylaxis before dental procedures, and describing the dental status of patients with a diagnosis of HHT.


FUNDING

The study was financed by grants from the Swedish state under ALF (Agreement on Medical Education and Clinical Research), an agreement between the Swedish government and the county councils, and by ALFÀRegion Uppsala (Regionalt ALFÀavtal Uppsala).


Table V. Articles covering other topics included in the scoping review


Authors

Year Article type No. patients Oral or dental relevance Milton et al. 120 1993 Case report/ treatment 3 Buccal epithelial autografts were used in 3 patients when conventional therapies were not sufficient to manage the severity of epitaxies with promising results.Further research is warranted with a larger patient sample.Steinbach et al. 121 2012 Observational study 54 Found that the gustatory and olfactory function of patients with HHT is reduced but that although patients had a reduced ability to smell and detect odors, they did not have reduced taste sensitivity compared to healthy subjects.Hvelplund et al. 122 2012 Retrospective cohort study 171 According to the European Reference Network on Rare Multisystemic Vascular Diseases., all patients should receive written advice on antibiotic prophylaxis before dental procedures.In Denmark, online 32% of patients received written advice, although 75% were thoroughly informed.Geisthoff et al. 123 2023 -Described nationwide HHT awareness campaign for dental professionals.After a case report was published in the journal of the German dental association, which reached almost 77,000 readers, 5 patients were identified and referred by dentists.

Fig. 1 .
1
Fig. 1.Flow diagram of article selection process according to Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews


Table I .
I
Case reports included in the scoping review Authors Year Main field Clinical presentation and treatment strategies Peluse et al. 21OM Telangiectasia on hard palate, gingiva, oral mucosa, floor of mouth, and lips and gingival hemorrhage from telangiectasia.Syrop et al.


Table I .
I
68ntinuedAuthorsYear Main field Clinical presentation and treatment strategies Barbosa et al.682015 OM Telangiectasias on lips, gums, palate, and oral and nasal mucosa.Dittus et al.


Table II .
II
Articles describing clinical manifestations included in the scoping review
AuthorsYear Article typeField No.Oral or dental relevancepatientsKilley et al. 971970 ObservationalOM 6study

Table III .
III
Articles describing statements, guidelines, and reviews included in the scoping review
AuthorsYearArticle typeRecommendationsSharathkumar et al. 1082008Review articleSummarizes the clinical manifestations and management of HHT.Te Veldius et al. 1092008Review article describing 8Provided update of medical and dental considerations. Described 8 patientscaseswith telangiectasias on the tongue and lips.Shovlin et al.

Table IV .
IV
Articles describing treatment modalities/clinical relevance included in the scoping review
AuthorsYear Article typeMain field No. patientsTreatment modalities/clinical relevanceShovlin et al. 112008 Cohort studyGP305 HHTBetween May first 1999 and May 31th 2005, 228 patients devel-and PAVMoped brain abscesses, after which many were diagnosed withPAVM and HHT. Some patients had received dental care/exami-nation 8 to 10 wk preceding the event. Most abscess cultureswere sterile but anaerobic or microaerophilic bacterial isolates,including Actinomyces meyeri and Streptococcus milleri, wereidentified in some abscesses. No isolates were localized in thepatients who had received dental care before brain abscess. Pro-phylactic antibiotic history was not reported.Frigerio et al. 1162015 Clinical report OMS6Six patients were experiencing recurrent bleeding from 4 to 16 oraltelangiectasias. Four patients were treated with alexandrite andpulsed-dye laser treatment and 2 were treated with pulsed-dyelaser alone. Bleeding was ablated after 2 to 3 laser sessions with a6-wk interval.Favia et al. 1172016 Clinical report OMS24Telangiectasias were located on the palate (10%), lower lip (15%),upper lip (19%), gingiva (6%), and tongue (33%). Among thepatients with advanced lesions, 87% were symptomatic, withbleeding, pain, and swelling. All patients were treated with diodelaser treatment and required multiple visits, most of which wereto treat bleeding in advanced lesions caused by dental trauma.Patients were consequently recommended protective occlusalplates to reduce complications from bleeding.Papaspyrou et al. 118 2016 RetrospectiveOMS38Described 19 patients with telangiectasia on the tongue, 17 on theAnalysislips, and 3 on hard palate. Treated extra-nasal telangiectasias byNd:YAG laser. During a follow-up period of 36 mo, 7 patientsrequired reoperation but which patients did was not specified.Boother et al. 1192017 ProspectiveGP403 HHTBetween June 2005 and December 2016, 37 patients developedcohort studyand PAVMcerebral abscesses. PAVM was usually diagnosed after a cerebralabscess event. Of the 37 patients, 14 had received dental care inthe months before the cerebral abscess event, 3 patients wereexperiencing ongoing dental infections, and 11 were receivingongoing dental intervention ongoing or received it more than 12mo after treatment. Only 1 patient with known diagnosis ofPAVM was treated with prophylactic antibiotics.Tempesta et al. 962023 ProspectivePED7 HHTDescribed performance of laser photocoagulation of telangiectasiascohort studybut did not specify the outcomes for HHT patients alone.Reported that treatment appeared to be effective for intraoral andperioral telangiectasia. Followed patients for 30 d, during whichthey reported manageable mild pain and no ulcers, scarring, ornecrosis.
GP, general practitioner; HHT, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia; PAVM, arteriovenous malformation; OMS, oral and maxillofacial surgery; PED, pediatric dentistry.

Vol. 136 No. 6 December 2023
Niklasson et al. December 2023
December 2023
Niklasson et al. December 2023
Niklasson et al. December 2023
DECLARATION OF INTERESTSThe authors have no disclosures to declare.SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALSSupplementary material associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.oooo.2023.08.001.
Diagnostic criteria for hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Rendu-Osler-Weber syndrome). C L Shovlin, A E Guttmacher, E Buscarini, Am J Med Genet. 912000

Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia: a population-based study of prevalence and mortality in Danish patients. A D Kjeldsen, P Vase, A Green, J Intern Med. 2451999

Genetic epidemiology of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia in a local community in the northern part of Japan. M Dakeishi, T Shioya, Y Wada, Hum Mutat. 192002

Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia: pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment. C L Shovlin, Blood Rev. 242010

Age-related clinical profile of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia in an epidemiologically recruited population. H Plauchu, J P De Chadar Evian, A Bideau, Am J Med Genet. 321989

Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology: A Rationale for Diagnosis and Treatment. R E Marx, D Stern, 2012QuintessenceBatavia, IL

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: an overview of diagnosis, management, and pathogenesis. J Mcdonald, P Bayrak-Toydemir, R E Pyeritz, Genet Med. 132011

Second International Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia. M E Faughnan, J J Mager, S W Hetts, Ann Intern Med. 1732020

Nasal closure for severe hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia in 100 patients. The Lund modification of the Young's procedure: a 22-year experience. V J Lund, Y Darby, J Rimmer, Rhinology. 552017

Topical propranolol improves epistaxis control in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT): a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial. M Mei-Zahav, Y Gendler, E Bruckheimer, J Clin Med. 931302020

Primary determinants of ischaemic stroke/brain abscess risks are independent of severity of pulmonary arteriovenous malformations in hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia. C L Shovlin, J E Jackson, K B Bamford, Thorax. 632008

Prevalence of pulmonary arteriovenous malformations (PAVMs) and occurrence of neurological symptoms in patients with hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT). A D Kjeldsen, H Oxhøj, P E Andersen, J Intern Med. 2482000

Pulmonary arteriovenous malformations in patients with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. V Cottin, H Plauchu, J Y Bayle, Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1692004

Systematic screening in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: a review. S Kroon, R J Snijder, M E Faughnan, Curr Opin Pulm Med. 242018

Post-NICE 2008: antibiotic prophylaxis prior to dental procedures for patients with pulmonary arteriovenous malformations (PAVMs) and hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia. C Shovlin, K Bamford, D Wray, Br Dent J. 2052008

Detection and quantitation by lysis-filtration of bacteremia after different oral surgical procedures. A Heimdahl, G Hall, M Hedberg, J Clin Microbiol. 281990

Bacteremia associated with toothbrushing and dental extraction. P B Lockhart, M T Brennan, H C Sasser, Circulation. 1172008

Systematic review or scoping review? Guidance for authors when choosing between a systematic or scoping review approach. Z Munn, Mdj Peters, C Stern, BMC Med Res Methodol. 181432018

PRISMA Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR): checklist and explanation. A C Tricco, Lillie E Zarin, W , Ann Intern Med. 1692018

Chapter 11: scoping reviews. Mdj Peters, C Godfrey, P Mcinerney, Z Munn, A C Tricco, H Khalil, JBI Manual for Evidence Synthesis. E Aromataris, Z Munn, Long Beach, CAJBI2020

Gingival hemorrhage with oral manifestations in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia; successful control with sclerosing agent sylnasol; effect of vitamin P and nicotinic acid; role in case reported which was observed 5 years. S Peluse, Arch Otolaryngol. 441925. 1946

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia; report of a case. H M Syrop, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. 101957

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia involving the oral cavity; review with report of a case. I W Scopp, A Quart, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. 111958

Oral manifestations of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. R T Durocher, A L Morris, L W Burket, 196114

Report of a case. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. W M Oliver, 196316Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia

Oral manifestations of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia; report of a case. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. J Traiger, 196418

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. R M Smith, M Robbins, 196519

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. An electron microscopic study. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. K Hashimoto, M S Pritzker, 197234

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, Raynauds disease, and CREST syndrome. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. D Donaldson, Rwt Myall, 197336

Report of periodontal treatment in 2 cases. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. G B Austin, A M Quart, B Novak, 198151Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia with oral manifestations

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia of bladder in a child. L R Cos, R Rabinowitz, M F Bryson, Urology. 201982

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: prosthetic management and considerations. J W Olson, R L Miller, B S Dukes, J Prosthet Dent. 501983

Clinical spectrum of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler-Weber-Rendu disease). W H Peery, Am J Med. 821987

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: family study and review. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. S R Flint, O Keith, C Scully, 198866

Osler-Weber-Rendu disease in an infant. Reyes-M Ujica, M , L Opez-Corella, E , P Erez-Fern Andez, L , Hum Pathol. 191988

A case of Rendu-Osler-Weber disease with cerebral hemangioma, multiple pulmonary arteriovenous fistulas and hepatic arteriovenous fistula. J Maruyama, M Watanabe, S Onodera, Jpn J Med. 281989

Infrared coagulation for bleeding mucosal telangiectasia. G B Colver, S Davies, J Bullock, J Laryngol Otol. 1061992

Cerebellar abscess associated with pulmonary arteriovenous fistula and hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia-case report. M Ogino, H Inoue, S Harada, Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo). 361996

A case of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Rendu-Osler-Weber's disease) with dystrophic calcinosis cutis and retinal lesions. H Takahama, S Noto, M Ito, J Dermatol. 292002

Progressive laser treatment of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia of the gingiva: case report. R L Finkbeiner, Int J Periodontics Restor Dent. 242004

A second mitral valve replacement in a patient with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler's disease). S Ishikawa, K Oshima, M Aizaki, Jpn Heart J. 452004

External cervical root resorption involving multiple maxillary teeth in a patient with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. P C Edwards, T Mcvaney, 2005100

Images in cardiovascular medicine. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia with pulmonary arteriovenous fistulas. K Yunoki, T Naruko, M Komiyama, Circulation. 1142006

Subcutaneous temporal abscess as a clinical manifestation of pulmonary arteriovenous malformations in a patient with hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (Rendu-Osler-Weber disease). S Haarmann, A S Budihardja, F Hozle, Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 362007

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. A H Kamal, U B Prakash, Mayo Clin Proc. 8213642007

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: from epistaxis to life-threatening GI bleeding. J A Ragsdale, Gastroenterol Nurs. 302007

Surgical treatment of congenital pulmonary arteriovenous fistula in children. J C Fraga, E Favero, F Contelli, J Pediatr Surg. 432008

Rendu-Osler-Weber syndrome: case report and literature review. A J Juares, A R Dell'aringa, J C Nardi, Braz J Otorhinolaryngol. 742008

Use of an electrosurgical scalpel in gingival overgrowth associated with Rendu-Osler-Weber syndrome. F J Lozano, M J Villaescusa, J Craniofac Surg. 192008

A case of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. H E Lee, C Sagong, K Y Yeo, Ann Dermatol. 212009

Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome-dental implications. Psd Santos, K S Fernandes, M H Magalhaes, J Can Dent Assoc. 752009

Endovascular treatment of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectases of the tongue. D Stojanov, P Bosnjakovic, S Ristic, Otolaryngol Pol. 632009

A rare case of hypoparathyroidism associated to Rendu-Osler-Weber sndrome. R Cesareo, M Iozzino, De Rosa, B , Acta Endocrinol. 72011

Successful bosentan therapy for pulmonary arterial hypertension associated with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. S A Chang, S Y Jang, C S Ki, Heart and Vessels. 262011

A brain abscess following dental extractions in a patient with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. P Corre, C Perret, B Isidor, Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 492011

Picture of the month. Telangiectases secondary to hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. S E Olitsky, Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 1652011

Oral vascular malformation in a patient with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: a case report. R N Hopp, D C De Siqueira, M Sena-Filho, Spec Care Dentist. 322012

Brain abscess caused by Enterococcus faecalis following a dental procedure in a patient with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. E Mylona, C Vadala, V Papastamopoulos, J Clin Microbiol. 502012

A rare cause of fatal right ventricular cardiac decompensation. A Samol, F Woetzel, P J Barth, Cardiovasc Pathol. 212012

Left atrial appendage closure for stroke prevention in patients with atrial fibrillation and hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Case Rep Cardiol. S Velthuis, M J Swaans, J J Mager, 2012. 2012646505

Pulmonary hypertension in a patient with hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia. D Chadha, A Handa, A Kumar, BMJ Case Rep. 20120083522013. 2013

Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome during pregnancy. G Inocêncio, A Braga, T Lima, BMJ Case Rep. 20130097922013. 2013

Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia in a patient taking anticoagulant drugs who has sustained facial trauma. B Kaminski, K Blochowiak, K Olek-Hrab, Postep Dermatol Alergol. 302013

Case for diagnosis. hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. J C Boza, T V Dorn, F B Oliveira, An Bras Dermatol. 892014

Red papules on the tongue of a patient with hemiparesis. H Y Chiu, S J Lin, JAMA. 3122014

A case of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia with repeated hemobilia arrested by argon plasma coagulation under direct peroral cholangioscopy. Y Komaki, S Kanmura, K Funakawa, Gastrointest Endosc. 802014

Life-threatening oral bleed-a rare presentation of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. S K Ahamed, Y Al-Thobaiti, J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 7352015

Rendu-Osler-Weber syndrome: dermatological approach. A B Barbosa, G Hans, Cfd Vicari, An Brasil Dermatol. 902015

Bleeding and clotting in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. C Dittus, M Streiff, Ansell J , World J Clin Cases. 32015

Implications of an incidental pulmonary arteriovenous malformation. V K Holden, N G Shah, A C Verceles, J Investig Med High Impact Case Rep. 423247096166371902016

Definite hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia in a 60-year-old black Kenyan woman: a case report. J C Kiyeng, A Siika, C Koech, J Med Case Rep. 101262016

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia with bilateral pulmonary vascular malformations: a case report. Vojnosanit Pregl. O Lonarcevic, 201673

A 32-year-old-man with a severe headache, visual loss, and nodular pulmonary opacities. V Muthu, I S Sehgal, R Agarwal, Chest. 1502016

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, liver disease and elevated serum testosterone (Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome): a case report. R Dissanayake, K P Wickramarathne, S N Seneviratne, BMC Res Notes. 10582017

It looks familial: hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. B K Khaitan, V Gupta, M Rai, Am J Med. 1302017

Thyroplasty in unilateral vocal fold paresis with coexisting hereditary hemorrhagic telenagiectasia: a case report. J Jackowska, H Klimza, N Zagozda, Medicine. 9732018

2-year follow-up of lung transplantation as a treatment of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler-Weber-Rendu disease). M Latos, M Ryba, E Lazar, Adv Respir Med. 862018

Clinical clue leading to a genetic condition. J F Mill An-Cayetano, P Boixeda, Med Clin (Barc). 150e12018

Liver transplantation in a patient with hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia and pulmonary hypertension. K Ejiri, S Akagi, K Nakamura, Pulm Circ. 942019

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: a rare cause of anemia. Jan W , Tameez Ud Din, A Chaudhary, Fmd , Cureus. 11e53492019

Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia. V Mangkorntongsakul, C J Forsyth, Med J Aust. 2102019e1

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Rendu-Osler-Weber's disease): detailed assessment of skin lesions by dermoscopy and ultrasound. S Tokoro, T Namiki, T Ugajin, Int J Dermatol. 582019

Intra and extra oral clinical manifestations of Rendu-Osler-Weber syndrome: case report and literature review. A Leonida, G Caccianiga, D Lauritano, J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 332019

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Akc Leung, K F Leong, B Barankin, J Pediatr. 2102322019

Treatment of tongue telangiectasia in a patient with hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia. Emr Bowers, S Lee, BMJ Case Rep. 13e2384852020

Severe osteomalacia with multiple insufficiency fractures secondary to intravenous iron therapy in a patient with Rendu-Osler-Weber syndrome. Callejas-Moraga El, E Casado, M Gomez-Nunez, Bone Rep. 1352020

In the tip of the tongue. Campos Costa, F Freitas, J Coutinho, M , Rheumatology (Oxford). 592642020

Anatomoclinical correlations of oral manifestations in Rendu-Osler disease. T C Claudia, S R Alexandra, D Carmen, Rom J Oral Rehabil. 122020

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia and pulmonary arteriovenous malformations. S Girit, E Senol, O Karatas, Respir Med Case Rep. 3032020

Surgery of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia with severe refractory gastrointestinal bleeding: a case report of a rare condition. D R Lim, D B Kim, H K Kim, Int J Surg Case Rep. 722020

Left atrial appendage occlusion: a therapeutic option in a patient with atrial fibrillation and hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. L Frade, C Gouveia, R Guerreiro, Cureus J Med Sci. 1372021

Successful treatment of bilateral multiple pulmonary arteriovenous malformations in a patient with brain abscess and severe hypoxemia using a combination of transcatheter embolotherapy and surgical resection: a case report. T Ochi, M Chiyo, T Ito, J Cardiothorac Surg. 1652021

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia with liver cirrhosis: a case report. L X Xu, F Xu, Q Z Wang, BMC Gastroenterol. 2162021

A rare case of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: a case report. A R Khan, S Waqar, M H Wazir, Cureus J Med Sci. 1462022

Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia of nasal mucosa-a case report. A Raghvi, K Gowthame, S Rajasekaran, J Clin Diagn Res. 162022

Targeted diode laser therapy for oral and perioral capillary-venous malformation in pediatric patients: a prospective study. A Tempesta, F Dell'olio, R A Siciliani, Children (Basel). 106112023

Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia. H C Killey, L W Kay, Br J Oral Surg. 71970

Mucocutaneous telangiectases of the head and neck in individuals with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia-analysis of distribution and symptoms. B J Folz, B M Lippert, A C Wollstein, Eur J Dermatol. 142004

Contact endoscopic findings in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. U W Geisthoff, C Sittel, P K Plinkert, Head Neck. 282006

Screening for children from families with Rendu-Osler-Weber disease: from geneticist to clinician. P Giordano, A Nigro, G M Lenato, J Thromb Haemost. 42006

Genotype-phenotype relationship for localization and age distribution of telangiectases in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. T G Letteboer, H J Mager, R J Snijder, Am J Med Genet A. 1462008

An evaluation of the severity and progression of epistaxis in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia 1 versus hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia 2. B N Hunter, B H Timmins, J Mcdonald, Laryngoscope. 1262016

Clinical features and treatment of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. S Li, S J Wang, Y Q Zhao, Medicine. 9762018

Localization and age distribution of telangiectases in children and adolescents with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: a retrospective cohort study. C D Gonzalez, S D Cipriano, C A Topham, J Am Acad Dermatol. 812019

Nasal endoscopy in the clinical diagnosis of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. E Matti, R Lizzio, S Ugolini, 74e.2-79.e2J Pediatr. 2382021

Skin and mucosal telangiectatic lesions in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia patients. S J Hyldahl, M Q El-Jaji, A Schuster, Int J Dermatol. 612022

Frequency of epistaxis and telangiectasia in patients with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) in comparison with the general population: Curaçao diagnostic criteria revisited. J Mcdonald, J Kornish, D A Stevenson, Genet Med. 251008652023

Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia. A A Sharathkumar, A Shapiro, Haemophilia. 142008

Rendu-Osler-Weber disease: update of medical and dental considerations. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. E C Veldhuis, A H Veldhuis, F S Van Dijk, 2008105

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: diagnosis and management. S E Olitsky, Am Fam Physician. 822010

Pulmonary arteriovenous malformations. C L Shovlin, Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1902014

. C L Shovlin, R Condliffe, J W Donaldson, D G Kiely, S J Wort, British Thoracic Society. British Thoracic Society Clinical Statement on Pulmonary Arteriovenous Malformations. Thorax. 722017

The lung in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. S Dupuis-Girod, V Cottin, C L Shovlin, Respiration. 942017

European Reference Network For Rare Vascular Diseases (VASCERN) outcome measures for hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT). C L Shovlin, E Buscarini, A D Kjeldsen, Orphanet J Rare Dis. 1352018

Prevention of serious infections in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: roles for prophylactic antibiotics, the pulmonary capillaries-but not vaccination. C Shovlin, K Bamford, C Sabba, Haematologica. 1042019

Laser applications for benign oral lesions. A Frigerio, O T Tan, Lasers Surg Med. 472015

Diode laser treatment and clinical management of multiple oral lesions in patients with hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia. G Favia, A Tempesta, L Limongelli, Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 542016

YAG laser treatment for extranasal telangiectasias: a retrospective analysis of 38 patients with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia and review of the literature. G Papaspyrou, B Schick, Al Kadah, B Nd, ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec. 782016

Cerebral abscess associated with odontogenic bacteremias, hypoxemia, and iron loading in immunocompetent patients with right-to-left shunting through pulmonary arteriovenous malformations. E J Boother, S Brownlow, H C Tighe, Clin Infect Dis. 652017

A new technique using cultured epithelial sheets for the management of epistaxis associated with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. C M Milton, J C Shotton, D J Premachandran, J Laryngol Otol. 1071993

Does hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia affect olfactory or gustatory function?. S Steinbach, A J Fasunla, S P Schafers, Am J Rhinol Allergy. 262012

A retrospective cohort study on European Reference Network for Rare Vascular Diseases 5 outcome measures for hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia in Denmark. T Hvelplund, B Lange, S D Bird, Orphanet J Rare Dis. 1782022

Nationwide awareness campaign and call for dental screening for hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia in Germany. U W Geisthoff, F H€ Olzle, B A Stuck, Int J Dent. 87377272023. 2023