An insight on psychiatric insight


T Coelho Rocha 
J Cunha 
S Torres 
A Lopes 

Psychiatry And Mental Health Department
Centro Hospitalar Barreiro-Montijo
BarreiroPortugal


Serviço De Psiquiatria, Unidade Local de Saúde do Baixo Alentejo
BejaPortugal


Departamento De Psiquiatria E Saúde Mental, Hospital do Espírito Santo de Évora
Department Of Psychiatry And Mental Health
Centro Hospitalar de Vila Nova de Gaia e Espinho
Psychiatry Department
Centro Hospitalar entre o Tamega e Sousa EPE
Évora, Vila Nova de Gaia, PenafielPortugal, Portugal, Portugal

An insight on psychiatric insight
Conflict of interest: AGR has received honoraria, registration for congresses and/or travel costs from Janssen, Lundbeck-Otsuka and Angelini. EPP1028 *Corresponding author.Day hospitalDelusional disorderadherencepsychosis


Introduction: Lying can be defined as stating a deliberate falsehood with the intent to deceive. It is part of our everyday life but it can be pathological, without motivation and a symptom of psychiatric illness. Although pathological lying has been debated for a century, it remains a controversial issue in Psychiatry. Objectives: We aim to perform a review regarding pathological lying and related issues. Methods: We performed an updated review in the PubMed database and GoogleScholar using the terms "pathological lying", "compulsive lying", "mythomania" and "pseudologia fantastica". The included articles were selected by title and abstract. We also consulted reference textbooks. Results: We described the difference between normal and pathological lying and debated the different types of pathological lying, such as compulsive lying, mythomania and pseudologia fantastica. Conclusions: Recognizing lying is crucial for a skilled patient interview and distinguishing between pathological and non pathological lying may be decisive for an accurate differential diagnosis. Introduction: Animal hoarding is characterized by hoarding of a large number of animals without providing minimum conditions of nutrition and sanitation, accompanied by lack of insight for the behavior and by social isolation. Despite studies detecting an increasing incidence, the behavior is still poorly understood. Objectives: To review clinical evidence on animal hoarding and to report a clinical case. Methods: We report a clinical case based on patient's history and clinical data, along with a review of the literature on animal hoarding. The terms "Noah syndrome" and "animal hoarding disorder" were searched on PubMed® database. Results: We present the case of a 51-years-old woman, living alone, with higher education. His first contact with psychiatry was in August 2019 upon aggravated self-neglect and behavioral disorganization. She was living with around 40 cats, her home was extremely deteriorated. In December 2019 she was admitted to a psychiatric unit. A schizophrenia diagnosis was established and pharmacological treatment was initiated. She was discharged to a chronic psychiatric institution. Studies found out that animal hoarders are typically middle age/older women living alone in squalid conditions. Animal hoarding is characterized by a chronic course and intense emotional attachment to animals. It seems to be associated with traumatic situations, as well as mental disorders such as schizophrenia or dementia. Published data on intervention and treatment is still limited. Conclusions: Animal hoarding phenomenon requires further investigation, regarding developmental risk factors and co-morbid mental disorders. Comprehensive approaches to clinical intervention and management strategies in animal hoarding are necessary.

Keywords: Animal hoarding disorder; psychopathology; schizophrénia; Comorbid symptoms Introduction: Parkinson's disease is a neurodegenerative pathology characterized by motor and non-motor symptoms. Hallucinations, especially visual ones, are frequent in this context, with an estimated prevalence of 16 to 40% and associated with a less favorable prognosis. These hallucinations can range from coarse formations to well-defined structures. Objectives: To assess the prevalence of visual hallucionations in a sample of patients diagnosed with Parkinson's Disease. Methods: A cross-sectional descriptive study conducted in a Neurology Department of a Level III portuguese hospital. The sample included patients with Parkinson's Disease observed in an outpatient Neurology appointment between October 1 and December 9, 2019. Results: In the period considered, 100 patients with Parkinson's disease were observed, 65% male, with an average age of 69 years. In 11% of the patients visual hallucinations were reported, of which about half were well defined. All of them had no previous history of visual hallucinations and were under dopaminergic medication.


Conclusions:

The results show an inferior prevalence when comparing to the literature, albeit still frequent. Therapeutic adequacy has a well recognised impact at a functional level and prognosis. Therefore we stress the importance of a regular follow-up of these patients, recommending a rigorous and comprehensive clinical review. Introduction: The filliation delusion was first described in 1950 by Ey as a false belief about belonging to a family group other than one's own. Since then, 70 years have passed and litterature is still scarce on this type of presentation. Objectives: Using a case report as a starting point, the aim of this article is to review data on the various frameworks of delusional development, while discussing in what capacity social cognition impairment, theory of mind and overall lack of insight, typical in schizophrenic patients, could be related to this type of delusion. Methods: The authors present a case report of an episode of a filliation delusion in a patient with chronic schizophrenia. A search on PubMed and ClinicalKey was performed, from which the relevant publications were selected and reviewed. Results: The case referes to a 64 year old woman previously diagnosed with schizophrenia who developed, over the period of two years, a filliation delusion. The patient believed having been born in Russia and being subsequently adopted by different families. There was history of irregular attendance to consultations and non-compliance to treatment. Conclusions: There is still lack of proper investigation regarding the development of delusions in schizophrenic patients. Social cognition and insight are important predictors of functioning, and might behave as a marker of liability to psychosis. This should have strong implications in these patients' treatment approaches. The lack of consensual measurement instruments make it difficult to draw solid conclusions, and this should be the main focus moving forward. Introduction: Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection produces a chronic systemic disease that induces chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Patients with chronic HCV infection may present with a range of extrahepatic symptoms including neuropsychiatric disorders. Objectives: The aims of this review are to summarize recent literature looking at the associations between psychosocial and neurocognitive factors and HCV, identify the most common neuropsychological disorders and consider the probable mechanisms of mental and cognitive impairment in patients with HCV. Methods: PubMed/Medline was systematically searched for psychosocial and neurocognitive factors associated with hepatitis C and patient wellbeing. In this review 83 valid articles were analyzed from 1994 to 2018. Results: According to the literature review in the group of HCVpositive patients were found a significant decrease in higher cognitive functions: memory impairment, concentration and listening. These manifestations of cognitive dysfunction are supposed to be similar to the early symptoms of Alzheimer's disease. An increased risk of developing dementia has also been noted. The most frequently diagnosed symptoms were fatigue and sleep disturbances, associated with mood disorders diagnosed in 19,2% of cases. Several mechanisms have been considered to explain the pathogenesis of neuropsychiatric disorders observed in chronic HCV infection: 1) the concept of the direct neuroinvasion of HCV; 2) derangement of metabolic pathways; 3) cerebral or systemic inflammation. Conclusions: To date, the mechanisms of various mental and neurological disorders in patients with chronic HCV infection have been partially identified, but the long-term effect of these changes requires further study.

Keywords: neuropsychological disorders; influence of the hepatitis C virus


And Medical Psychology, RUDN University, Moscow, Russian Federation and 2 Psychiatry, Narcology And Psychotherapy, Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry, Moscow, Russian Federation *Corresponding author. doi: 10.1192/j.eurpsy.2021.1275

Keyword : Lying
:EPP1031Clinical case of animal hoardingcharacterization and management of a new disorderL. Lopes*, A. Certo, S. Pereira and Â. Venâncio Department Of Psychiatry And Mental Health, Centro Hospitalar de Vila Nova de Gaia e Espinho, Vila Nova de Gaia, Portugal *Corresponding author. doi: 10.1192/j.eurpsy.2021.1272


Keywords: Parkinson; visual hallucionations EPP1033 Filiation delusion: A rare presentation A.C. Rodrigues 1 * and C. Oliveira 2 1 Unidade De Reabilitação, Centro Hospitalar Psiquiátrico de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal and 2 Clínica 3, Centro Hospitalar Psiquiátrico de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal *Corresponding author. doi: 10.1192/j.eurpsy.2021.1274