Perindopril: do randomised, controlled trials support an ACE inhibitor class effect? A meta-analysis of clinical trials
March/April 2009

Jacques R Snyman 
Francois Wessels 
Perindopril: do randomised, controlled trials support an ACE inhibitor class effect? A meta-analysis of clinical trials

CARDIOVASCuLAR JOuRNAL OF AFRICA •
202March/April 2009AFRICA 127
Background: Due to the lack of face-to-face trials between ACE inhibitors, clinicians and third-party funders may assume they provide similar outcomes. As a result, ACE inhibitors may be prescribed interchangeably and deemed to provide the same outcomes for all patients when used chronically, that is for more than six months. Objective: This meta-analysis aims to dispute the assumption of a class effect when prescribing ACE inhibitors (ACEIs), since the evidence from all the clinical trials is not uniform and therefore a direct comparison is impossible. Methods: Published randomised, controlled trials were selected using an applicable literature search for all ACEIs, irrespective of drug combination, for any cardiovascular outcome (both composite and individual outcomes were included). The average length of ACEI exposure per trial had to be longer than six months). This meta-analysis was performed using odds ratios as the parameter of efficacy in a fixed-effects model.Results/Conclusion: Perindopril resulted in significantly fewer patients reaching the primary endpoint versus all otherACEIs combined. The results were consistent for myocardial infarction, stroke and mortality (5 vs 11%, p = 0.0001). Perindopril alone or as part of combination therapy in clinical trials seemed to deliver clear and consistent outcome differences compared to other ACEI trials. In the presence of positive outcomes from robust randomised, controlled trials for perindopril, one cannot assume a class effect for all ACEIs.Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are a treatment option selected for patients throughout the cardiovascular continuum. 1,2 In patients with hypertension, guidelines throughout the world recommend an ACEI as one of the first-line therapies.

Compelling indications for the use of ACEIs in these guidelines are listed in Table 1. 3 These guidelines therefore leave the impression that the clinical benefit across the spectrum of ACEI molecules may be taken as uniform. This leads the clinician to believe that the outcomes from an array of diverse randomised, controlled trials are the same, despite significant differences in design criteria (inclusion and exclusion criteria, dosage and dosing intervals, etc).

The aim of this meta-analysis was to compare the magnitude of clinical benefit across the spectrum of ACEI molecules, irrespective of trial design and dosage, since this is usually the way in which these products are used in clinical practice. It was therefore noted that ACEIs are prescribed in combination with other drugs to treat cardiovascular conditions in approximately 80% of patients, 4 making it illogical to try and separate the effect of combinations from that of single molecules, since the clinical benefit is the ultimate driver of how the patient should be treated.

It is well established that a broad range of blood pressurelowering drugs, including ACEIs, reduce the risks of major Any drug that lowers BP unless absolutely contraindicated, will conffer protection against target-organ damage. However, the following classes of drugs have additional protective properties in the case of the listed associated clinical conditions/target-organ damage.


Compelling indications Drug class Angina

Beta-blocker or CCB (rate lowering preferred) Prior myocardial infarct Beta-blocker and ACEI (ARB if ACEI intolerant). Verapamil if beta-blockers contraindicated and aldosterone antagonist. Loop diuretics for volume overload Left ventricular hypertrophy (confirmed by ECG) ARB (preferred) or ACEI Stroke: secondary prevention Low dose thiazide-like diuretic and ARB or ACEI Diabetes type 1 or 2 with or without evidence of microalbuminuria or proteinuria ACEI or ARB -usually in combination with a diuretic Chronic kidney disease ACEI or ARB -usually in combination with a diuretic Isolated systolic hypertension Low-dose thiazide or thiazide-like diuretic or long-acting CCB cardiovascular (CV) events. Various meta-regression analyses and overviews of trials have determined the benefits of blood pressure lowering. [5][6][7] The conclusions made in ACEI trials (i.e. ACEI vs angiotensin receptor blockers, calcium channel blockers, diuretics and β-blockers) have further emphasised the need for ACEIs to be part of standard therapy, not only for hypertension but for the majority of cardiovascular conditions. 5,6,8,9 However, no formal attempts have been made to evaluate the contribution of one or more ACEIs to the specific value of the outcomes achieved by the class.

This analysis focuses on the contribution of perindopril to the overall benefits seen in the ACEI class, due to the large number of positive clinical trials utilising perindopril. It has already been established that there is sufficient clinical data demonstrating the proven clinical benefit of perindopril in various cardiovascular conditions. This meta-analysis was undertaken to determine whether perindopril produces a greater reduction in cardiovascular events and/or morbidity/mortality outcomes for all patients versus all the other commonly prescribed ACEIs combined as a class. The main aim of this analysis was therefore to compare the ACEI trials that delivered tangible clinical outcomes (irrespective of type of outcome).

Applying the results of clinical trials to general practice is extremely difficult. This analysis, by pooling the clinical trial data, will allow clinicians to discern which molecule has the most robust clinical data to support its use in any patient within the cardiovascular continuum.


Methods

The following trials were considered for inclusion: all randomised, controlled trials of ACEI therapy (placebo and/or other active therapy) for any cardiovascular outcomes. A literature search was conducted using Pubmed, Medline and Cochrane library. Relevant articles were selected on the basis of titles, references cited in reviews and commentaries, and selected publications. The rationale for selection of these trials was to determine whether the ACEI arm of the trial had an effect on the clinically stated outcomes irrespective of comparator, blood pressure lowering or patient-specific characteristics. The fact that baseline criteria differed among the studies is acknowledged, however this was a drawback of all indirect comparisons. In the absence of uniformity, this analysis focuses on clinical outcomes as the driver of the comparison, since this ultimately informs clinical practice and is the only guarantee of benefit. It is therefore acknowledged that this analysis is not typical, in that the baseline demographics differ, but this is necessarily due to the lack of suitable comparable studies.

All studies of a minimum of six months' duration that measured a specific ACEI outcome effect, both composite and individual cardiovascular measures, were included in the analysis. Studies measuring only surrogate endpoints were not considered.

The qualifying studies were checked for: blinding, randomisation, completeness of follow up, and methods of measuring outcome events. All trials had to have reported at least one of the pre-specified outcomes (all-cause mortality, stroke, CV events, mortality due to CV events, and myocardial infarction) and had to have had at least six months' follow up. Due to large discrepancies in the primary outcomes, an analysis was performed using the primary outcome of the trials, irrespective of these differences, i.e. was the stated outcome reached or not? (see Fig. 1 for search strategy).

The meta-analysis was performed using odds ratios (ORs) as the parameter of efficacy, utilising a fixed-effects model. This is a measure of treatment effectiveness and also examines the effects of other variables in that relationship using logistic regression. The influence of the perindopril studies was assessed on the pooled effect sizes by excluding these studies in a manner similar to the Tobias method. 10 This measured the influence of the perinodopril studies against the combined ACEI effect using Statsdirect software.


Results

The initial literature search resulted in 253 studies, but outcome data were available for only 30 trials that met the inclusion criteria. These trials in total included approximately 204 000 patients (see Table 2 for demographic data).

Seven ACEIs were researched in the included studies, irrespective of dosages and patient characteristics. The primary endpoint of all trials differed in some respects, but the majority were composite endpoints. Composite endpoints lead to higher event rates and enable smaller sample sizes and shorter followup, or both. These endpoints may prove challenging to interpret but it is precisely this result that should be considered in making an evidence-based selection. All the primary endpoints were combined in the initial analysis. Wherever possible, especially in three-arm treatment design trials, both comparators were included in order to provide each ACEI with the maximum possible benefit of effect.


Comparison of primary endpoints

In these event-driven trials, the ACEIs as a class had a lower likelihood of an event occurring, compared to any of the comparator drugs or placebo (OR 0.91; 95% CI: 0.88-0.94; p < 0.0001). This primary endpoint analysis was only for composite endpoints. (Trials with specific primary endpoints, e.g. stroke, myocardial infarction, are analysed in that specific section.) Only four of the trials produced a statistically significant reduction in the primary  Composite endpoints: a = mortality, b = fatal/non-fatal MI, c = stroke, d = hospitalisation, e = revascularisation, f = other. NS = non-significant difference in outcome. *ASCOT study stopped early due to 11% risk reduction in all-cause mortality, p = 0.0247 -safety board halted study.

AFRICA clinical endpoint: three trials using perindopril and one using ramipril.

The effect size for perindopril alone was larger than that of the combined ACEI analysis. See Fig. 2 for details. Perindopril showed a significant risk reduction of 18% (OR 0.82; 95% CI: 0.77-0.88; p < 0.0001) when compared to the overall ACEI effect.

When this analysis was repeated, excluding the perindopril studies, the ACEI effect was reduced to 5% (OR 0.95; 95% CI: 0.91-0.98; p = 0.0039) (Fig. 3). It is clear that the perindopril outcomes drove the magnitude of the ACEI benefit.


Myocardial infarction as outcome

In all the trials, only 18 reported an actual measure of myocardial infarction (MI) as a specific outcome. No separate analysis of fatal and non-fatal MI was performed, as most studies opted to group the two outcomes, or selected and reported on only one. A subgroup of each incident would therefore reduce the statistical power and overall impact, defying the aim of this analysis.

The perindopril trials demonstrated a highly significant event reduction (OR 0.78; 95% CI: 0.72-0.85; p < 0.0001) (Fig. 4). This was better than the event reduction with all other ACEIs combined (OR 0.86; 95% CI: 0.80-0.91; p < 0.0001). Perindopril resulted in nearly twice as many events saved. The difference in absolute risk in effect was 0.32 for ACEIs and 1.45 for perindopril (p < 0.0001).

The only other ACEI that has demonstrated a benefit in reduction of MI is ramipril, as used in the HOPE trial. 19 This reduction was similar in magnitude to the perindopril effect but has only been proven in high-risk CAD patients.


Stroke as outcome

This current analysis confirms previous results, 5,39 in that when the ACEIs were pooled, the overall effect resulted in a risk reduction (OR 0.96; p = 0.0451). The effect of perindopril on stroke demonstrated a highly significant reduction in event rate (OR 0.79; 95% CI: 0.72-0.86; p < 0.0001). However, the exclusion of perindopril trials from the other ACEI trials reproduced a nonsignificant reduction in stroke events (OR 1.05; p = 0.1287) (Fig.  5 compared to comparator drugs).

In pooling all the evidence for stroke reductions with ACEIs, the effect of perindopril became diluted. Therefore, from the data set analysed, all ACEIs cannot be advocated to reduce the risk    of stroke. This reconfirms findings that lowering blood pressure is important but that the particular drug properties and dosages may be even more relevant.


Mortality as outcome

Mortality is the most commonly measured outcome in cardiovascular trials (and probably the most critical), although in many instances the causes for death are not analysed homogeneously. In order to produce an objective, meaningful analysis, all causes of mortality were combined; there was no separation of CV death, death due to stroke or MI, or all-cause mortality. It is well accepted that additional risk factors and co-morbid diseases may compound the measurement of this outcome, but for the patient, it remains immaterial and yet critically important. This should also be true for the treating clinician.

Perindopril, in the six outcome trials, showed a reduction in death compared to other drugs and or placebo (OR = 0.89; 95% CI: 0.84-0.95; p = 0.0008) (Fig. 6). This represents a significant 11% reduction in mortality, which is both a clinically and statistically significant benefit for all cardiovascular patients. This outcome includes all patients, irrespective of entry criteria (i.e. diabetes, cerebrovascular incident, hypertension, post-myocardial infarction or high risk for cardiovascular disease based on a combination of risk factors).

The ACEI benefit, demonstrated in 23 different ACEI trials, excluding perindopril, was only 5% (OR 0.95; 95% CI: 0.92-0.98; p = 0.0033). The absolute risk difference correlates to a NNT of 210 for ACEIs versus 127 for perindopril (p < 0.0001).


discussion

Only two other analyses have been performed to compare ACEI effects as a class of drugs. 40,41 Both these articles by Pilote used ramipril as the comparator and Canadian retrospective data. The conclusions drawn indicated that survival benefits 'differed according to specific ACE inhibitor prescribed'.

In this meta-analysis of patients (n = 204 000) treated with ACEIs for different conditions in the cardiovascular continuum, the results clearly demonstrated a significant reduction in events: all-cause events (primary endpoints), mortality, stroke and myocardial infarction. According to this analysis of published clinical data, it would seem that the effects of perindopril were, however, larger than those of the rest of the class of ACEIs. The magnitude of this effect should be quantified in subsequent analyses.

It is accepted that there are differences in outcomes that may be related to the differences in baseline risk and the use of concomitant secondary medications such as statins, β-blockers and aspirin. Consideration is given to differences in design, for example, the ALLHAT study where no diuretic could be added to the ACEI. It is statistically impossible to discern individual drug effects within a trial; this does not imply a lack of effect nor does it indicate probable effect. These factors were not compensated for in this analysis due to the complexity of the multiple trial designs and the lack of comparable data. This does not detract from the outcome since the ACEI benefit was obvious in spite of the other drugs being used in all arms of the trials included, i.e. best-alternative care, and only strengthens the benefit observed with the ACEI. Clinicians are left with a clinical decision to select a drug from a class and should select based on proven outcome benefit rather than 'presumed' benefit.

In the face of conclusive evidence, science dictates that positive outcomes should be considered. The inference of outcomes between two drugs within the same class is not ideal; however in the absence of head-to-head trials, a level of informal comparison must be made. The obvious ideal solution to the dilemma of 'class effect' is a head-to-head study with comparable doses driving similar surrogate targets (e.g. blood pressure lowering) with sufficient patient numbers, but the realisation is that this will never occur within the ACEI class, mainly due to the cost implications involved.

It is more critical to view the results of multiple trials with relevant agents as being in some way attributable to the individual properties of the ACEIs, despite there being no obvious proven relationship between the pharmacological properties (e.g. half life, tissue affinity and lipophilicity) of the individual medications and their clinical benefit in the trials. The difference in the magnitude of positive outcomes achieved with specific agents compels us to appreciate these pharmacological differences and argues against a class effect.

Several recent publications have attempted to analyse the ACEI properties. The latest by Comini concluded: 'Our findings provide further proof of differential effects associated with ACE inhibitor therapy and suggest that the clinical benefits associated with these drugs may not solely reflect a class effect extending their benefit beyond blood pressure lowering effect'. 42 The findings from the current analyses are complemented by various other published analyses such as Pilote, 40 who found: 'In summary, our results suggest that not all drugs within the class of ACE inhibitors should be considered to have the same effect. The exact mechanisms causing these differences are unclear, although they are probably related to the structural and pharmacological characteristics of the individual drugs'.

Meta-analyses provide a framework to formally evaluate the treatment effect quantitatively from at least two trials. However, the Committee for Proprietary Medicinal Products guidance document on meta-analyses states that a meta-analysis involving trials that are not convincing in their own right is inferior to one robust trial supported by smaller trials. From a statistical point of view, it is important to evaluate the possibility of a qualitative trial-by-treatment interaction, and to be aware that differential exposure to study medication across different trials can have an AFRICA effect on outcome. 43 This clearly confirms that all the perindopril trials with robust clinical outcomes should be considered to be more valuable than the other ACEI trials with less-than-convincing outcomes.

In order to make any meaningful comparison of drug usage, the doses of the ACEIs need to be considered. It is evident that in many trials, the positive outcomes were only achieved when high dosages of ACEIs were used. This was confirmed by the high-dose ramipril in high-risk patients in the HOPE study. Also, when using enalapril or lisinopril, the only doses with confirmed outcomes were in excess of 40 mg (SOLVD I, 32 CONSENSUS I 30 studies).

Perindopril's outcomes were achieved over the entire dose spectrum, depending on the specific outcome tested (4-8 mg). 7,[11][12][13][14]28 However, when outcomes were positive in the high-risk patients, the dosage of perindopril used was also at the top end of the dose range (EUROPA 12 ) (8 mg). This is re-emphasised in the ADVANCE study, 7 where 50% of patients were on 4 mg perindopril and 50% on 8 mg perindopril. ADVANCE measured the effect of high-dose perindopril in reducing outcomes.


Comparable outcomes with most commonly used ACEIs: enalapril and lisinopril

The results of the meta-analysis isolating the enalapril and lisinopril results are summarised in Table 3. Comparing perindopril with enalapril/lisinopril, the magnitude of benefit is obvious: MI reduction was the only significant outcome for enalapril/lisinopril, which translates into an ARR of 0.40* versus absolute risk reduction (ARR) or 1.45 for perindopril. This means that to reduce one event, 250 patients need treatment with enalapril/lisinopril versus only 69 with perindopril. (*Calculated from data obtained from STOP2, ALLHAT, ANBP2, ABCD and CAMELOT studies.)

The other outcomes for enalapril/lisinopril were not significant, whereas perindopril maintained the same order of benefit (NNT: 60, 63, 124, respectively for composite outcome, stroke, and mortality**). Since the cost of a single event is generally high, this clearly offsets any price difference between drugs. (**Calculated from data obtained from ASCOT, EUROPA and PROGRESS studies.) The absolute differences between perindopril and enalapril/lisinopril translate into a two-to three-fold reduction in outcomes.

Similarly, ramipril effects should be considered in their entirety with DREAM, DIABHYCAR, PART-2, AIRE and HOPE studies all being combined. This effect would be driven entirely by the outcomes of HOPE -high dose (10 mg) at night in high-risk CAD patients. Application of these results would have been appropriate in this set of patients only, and would have been extrapolated to hypertensive or other cardiovascular patients.

In a recent publication by Hansen,44 the ACEIs were shown to demonstrate a similar clinical efficacy after myocardial infarction. The conclusion that there is a class effect is based on the treatment post MI in the acute setting and when used in comparable dosages. In the clinical data from the EUROPA 12 study, where 65% of patients had a history of MI, the use of 8 mg perindopril in this chronic setting demonstrated a reduction in the primary endpoint of major cardiac events, especially MI. The conclusion that 'the dosage used appears to influence clinical efficacy, and using appropriate dosage is thus important to achieve full benefits of treatment' is of paramount importance. Assuming a class effect of 'comparable dosages' is therefore flawed, as no dosage comparisons exist across the class of ACEIs. Therefore, only the proven clinically effective dosages of specific ACEIs should be used.


Conclusion

This overview of cardiovascular studies has clearly confirmed the hypothesis that trials utilising perindopril have consistently and convincingly demonstrated the clinical benefit of using this ACEI. The clinical outcomes from individual trials, as well as in a meta-analysis format, have proven the lack of a so-called class effect within the ACEI class. The point estimates of all the combined perindopril trials lie outside the CI of the overall estimate of all the ACEIs, indicating the excessive influence. It is evident that perindopril and, to a lesser extent, ramipril have good clinical outcomes, warranting their selection over any other ACEI.

Caution has to be used in the interpretation of the results, as many of the outcome studies, which met the search and methodological criteria of the meta-analysis, involved use of perindopril in varying dosages and in combination with a variety of other drugs. It is impossible to attribute all the benefits achieved solely to the effect of the ACEI. Used in combination with amlodipine or indapamide in different clinical settings demonstrated the proven benefit. This meta-analysis merely confirmed the effect that multiple therapies can achieve in various cardiovascular clinical settings. The use of perindopril alone or in combination with amlodipine and indapamide all contributed to the positive effects shown. The positive effects of indapamide and amlodipine individually may also have contributed to the positive results and would need to have a separate analysis to disprove.

Based on this meta-analysis, the assumption that a class effect exists for all ACEIs may not be the most correct option. To therefore knowingly recommend an ACEI that has no conclusive clinical outcomes data in any of the cardiovascular conditions discussed may need to be reviewed and reconsidered. 


Pfizer launches global regenerative medicine research unit

Pfizer recently announced the launch of a new research unit known as Pfizer Regenerative Medicine. This independent research unit will build on recent scientific progress in understanding the biology of stem cells and the opportunity this provides to discover and develop a new generation of regenerative medicines for major medical needs.

Scientists at Pfizer Regenerative Medicine will explore the use of stem cells to develop future treatments that may prevent disability, repair failing organs and treat degenerative diseases. The ultimate goal will be to deliver new medicinal products that can pave the way for the use of cells as therapeutics. 'Pfizer Regenerative Medicine represents a great opportunity to focus world-class research in a field that holds considerable promise for biomedical science and for the treatment of many debilitating conditions such as diabetes and neurodegenerative disorders', said Dr Rod MacKenzie, head of worldwide research at Pfizer.

Dr Corey Goodman, president of Pfizer's Biotherapeutics and Bioinnovation Center, said, 'The formation of this new unit represents another key step forward in Pfizer's commitment to be at the forefront of new approaches in biotherapeutics and bio-innovation and to expand our research efforts and expertise into emerging areas of biomedical science, such as regenerative medicine, that have great potential for human health. ' The unit will be led by chief scientific officer, Dr Ruth McKernan, who said 'I'm very excited to lead this new research unit. While there is still a lot to understand about how stem cells can be used therapeutically, we believe it is one of the most promising areas of scientific research.'

Pfizer Regenerative Medicine will operate as one of Pfizer's new small, inde-pendent research units to help it foster a biotechnology culture and environment.

A key component of the success of the units will be collaboration with leading academic, biotechnology and pharmaceutical partners around the world.

Pfizer Regenerative Medicine will be co-located in the biotechnology hubs of Cambridge, UK and Cambridge, Massachusetts in the United States. It is expected to expand to employ around 70 researchers. Scientists will operate in small, flexible teams, with the capability to make decisions quickly and effectively.

The Cambridge UK site is based at Granta Park and positions Pfizer in one of the strongest biotech regions in Europe. This unit will focus on neural and sensory disorders. The Cambridge, Massachusetts site is based at Pfizer's Research Technology Centre and will focus on endocrine and cardiac research.

Fig. 1 .
1diagram illustrating the search strategy for metaanalysis of class effect of ACEIs.

Fig. 2 .
2summary of all trials with composite primary endpoints; perindopril as active treatment vs comparators (best alternative practice).

Fig. 3 .
3summary of all trials with composite primary endpoints; all ACEIs as active treatment vs comparators.

Fig. 4 .
4Comparative effect of reduction in incidence of myocardial infarction; perindopril-based trials against comparator therapy.

Fig. 5 .
5Comparative effect of reduction in stroke; all ACEIs excluding perindopril against comparator therapy.

Fig. 6 .
6Comparative effect of reduction in mortality; perindopril-based trials against comparator therapy.

TABLE 1 .
1RECOMMENDATIONS ON COMPELLING INDICATIONS FOR A SPECIFIC DRUG CLASS3 

TABLE 2 .
2TRIALS INCLUDED IN META-ANALYSISAcronym 
Name 
Comparison (duration of follow up) 

Primary endpoint RR 
(p value) 
Patients 
ASCOT 11 
Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial 
Atenolol ± thiazide (bendroflumethiazide vs 
amlodipine ± perindopril (5.5 years) 

Composite: a,b 
10%; p = 0.1052* 

19 257 

EUROPA 12 
The EURopean trial On reduction of cardiac events 
with Perindopril in stable coronary Artery disease 

Perindopril 8 mg vs placebo (4.2 years) 
Composite: a,b,f 
20%; p = 0.0003 

12 218 

PROGRESS 13 
Perindopril protection aGainst REcurrent Stroke 
Study 

Perindopril 4 mg ± indapamide vs placebo 
(3.9 years) 

Fatal/non-fatal stroke 
28%; p < 0.0001 

6 105 

PEP-CHF 14 
Perindopril in Elderly People with Chronic Heart 
Failure 

Perindopril 4 mg vs placebo in elderly 
(1 year) 

Composite: a,d 
31%; p = 0.055 

850 

STOP-2 15 
Swedish Trial in Old Patients with hypertension-2 
study 

Atenolol, metoprolol, pindolol or HCTZ + amiloride 
vs enalapril, lisinopril, isradipine (4.5 years) 

Composite: a,b,c,f 
1%; p = 0.89, NS 

6 614 

ANBP2 16 
2nd Australian National Blood Pressure study 
group 

ACE inhibitors vs diuretics (enalapril vs HCTZ) 
(5 years) 

Composite: a,b,f 
11%; p = 0.05, NS 

6 083 

JMIC-B 17 
Japan Multicentre Investigation for Cardiovascular 
diseases -B 

Enalapril 5-10 mg/day or lisinopril 10-20 mg/day 
vs Nifedipine Retard 10-20 mg bd 

Composite: a,b,d,f 
1.05; p = 0.75, NS 

1 650 

SCAT 18 
Simvastatin/enalapril Coronary Atherosclerosis 
Trial 

Simvastatin vs enalapril vs placebo 
(47.8 months) 

Composite: a,b,c,d,e 
NS 

460 

ALLHAT 9 
Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering treatment to 
prevent Heart Attach Trial 

Chlorthalidone vs amlodipine vs lisinopril 
(6 years) 

Composite: b,f 
NS, p = 0.71 

33 357 

HOPE 19 
Heart Outcomes and Prevention Evaluation study 
Ramipril 10 mg vs placebo (4.5 years) 
Composite: a,b,c 
25%; p < 0.001 

9 297 

PART 2 20 
Prevention of Atherosclerosis with Ramipril Trial 
Ramipril 5-10 mg vs placebo (4.7 years) 
Composite: a,b,c 
NS 

617 

QUIET 21 
QUinapril Ischemic Event Trial 
Quinapril 20 mg vs placebo (3 years) 
Composite: a,b,d,e,f 
RR 1.04; p = 0.6, NS 

1 750 

ABCD 22 
Appropriate Blood pressure Control in Diabetes 
Nisoldipine vs enalapril (5 years) 
Fatal/non-fatal MI risk 
ratio 9.5; no p value, NS 

470 

CAMELOT 23 
Comparison of AMlodipine vs Enalapril to Limit 
Occurences of Thrombosis 

Amlodipine or enalapril vs placebo (24 months) 
Composite: a,b,c,d,e,f 
15%; p = 0.16, NS 

1 991 

AIRE 24 
Acute Infarction Ramipril Efficacy Study 
Ramipril 5 mg vs placebo (15 months) 
All-cause mortality 
27%; p = 0.002 

2 006 

INVEST 25 
INternational VErapamil SR/ trandolopril STudy Verapamil vs atenolol (plus HCTZ and/or trandolo-
pril) (24 months) 

Composite: a,b,c 
2%; p = 0.57, NS 

22 576 

TRACE 26 
TRAndolapril Cardiac Evaluation study 
Trandolapril vs placebo (24-50 months) 
Death -all cause 
22%; p = 0.001 

1 749 

PEACE 27 
Prevention of Events with Angiotensin Converting 
Enzyme inhibition trial 

Trandolapril vs placebo (4.8 years) 
Composite: a,b,e 
4%; p = 0.43, NS 

8 290 

PREAMI 28 
Perindopril and Remodelling in Elderly with Acute 
Myocardial Infarction study 

Perindopril 8 mg vs placebo (12 months) 
Composite: a,d,f 
38%; p < 0.001 

1 252 

CONSENSUS I 29 
Co-Operative North Scandinavian ENalapril 
SUrvival Study 

Enalapril vs placebo in severe heart failure (up to 
20 months) 

Mortality 
31%; p = 0.001 

253 

CONSENSUS II 30 
Co-Operative North Scandinavian ENalapril 
SUrvival Study II 

Enalapril vs placebo (6 months) (stopped early) 
Mortality 
NS 

6 090 

SOLVD I 31 
Studies Of Left Ventricular Dysfunction 
Enalapril vs placebo (> 3 years) 
Mortality 
16%; p = 0.0036 

4 228 

V-HeFT 32 
Vasodilator Heart Failure Trial 
Hydralazine/isosorbide dinitrate vs enalapril 20 mg 
(2.3 years) 

Mortality 
28%; p = 0.016 

804 

GISSI 3 33 
Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio della Sopravvivenza 
nell'Infarto Miocardico 

Lisinopril vs transdermal glycerol trinitrate (GTN) 
vs combination (6 months) 

Mortality 
6%; p = 0.03 

18 895 

DREAM 34 
Diabetes Reduction Assessment with ramipril and 
rosiglitazone Medication trial 

Ramipril vs ramipril + rosiglitazone vs placebo 
(3 years) 

Composite: a,f 
9%; p = 0.15, NS 

5 269 

CAPPP 35 
CAPtopril Prevention Project 
Captopril vs atenolol/ bendroflumethiazide 
(6.1 years) 

Composite: a,b,c 
RR 1.05; p = 0.52, NS 

10 985 

DIABHYCAR 36 
type 2 DIABetes, Hypertension, CArdiovascular 
events and Ramipril study 

Ramipril vs placebo in type 2 diabetes (4 years) 
Composite: a,b,c,f 
HR 1.03; p = 0.65, NS 

4 912 

UKPDS 37 
UK Prospective Diabetes Study group 
Captopril vs atenolol (11.1 years) 
Mortality 
NS 

758 

SAVE 38 
Survival and Ventricular Enlargement Trial 
Captopril vs placebo (42 months) 
Mortality 
19%; p = 0.019 

2 231 

ADVANCE 6 
Action in Diabetes and Vascular Disease: Preterax 
and Diamicron MR Controlled Evaluation Trial 

Perindopril + indapamide vs placebo (4.3 years) 
Composite: a,b,c,f 
9%; p = 0.04 

11 140 



TABLE 3 .
3ENALAPRIL/LISINOPRIL STUDIES COMPARED TO PERINDOPRIL OUTCOMES: OR This analysis combined the results of both drugs, as in at least two trials, either drug could be used or no separation of results can be performed. From these trials it is evident that their use would be synonymous or deemed equivalent.Outcome 

Enalapril/ 
lisinopril* 
Perindopril 
Primary endpoint (any event) 
0.97; p = 0.2085 0.82; p < 0.0001 
Myocardial infarction 
0.82; p = 0.0001 0.78; p < 0.0001 
Stroke 
1.05; p = 0.412 0.79; p < 0.0001 
Mortality 
0.99; p = 0.8466 0.89; p = 0.0008 
*
J Snyman acknowledges the design, analysis and drafts completed by Mark Bloom, Health Economics Manager, Servier Laboratories (Pty) Ltd, South Africa. This research article was funded by Servier Laboratories, South Africa.
Guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension. ESC Hypertension Guidelines. G Mancia, De Backer, Eur Heart J. 28Mancia G, De Backer. Guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension. ESC Hypertension Guidelines. Eur Heart J 2007; l28: 1462-1536.

European Heart Failure Guidelines. Eur Heart J. 18European Heart Failure Guidelines. Eur Heart J 1998; 18: 736-753.

The JNC 7 report. A V Chobanian, C G Bakris, H R Black, W C Cushman, L A Green, J Izzo, J Am Med Assoc. 289Chobanian AV, Bakris CG, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo J, et al. The JNC 7 report. J Am Med Assoc 2003; 289: 2560-2572.

Major outcomes in high-risk hypertensive patients randomised to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or calcium channel blocker vs. diuretic. The Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT). J T Wright, B R Davis, J Am Med Assoc. 288Wright JT, Davis BR. Major outcomes in high-risk hypertensive patients randomised to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or calcium channel blocker vs. diuretic. The Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT). J Am Med Assoc 2002; 288: 2981-2997.

Effects of ACE inhibitors, calcium antagonists, and other blood-pressure-lowering drugs: results of prospectively designed overviews of randomised trials. Lancet. 355Blood Pressure Lowering Treatment Trialists' CollaborationBlood Pressure Lowering Treatment Trialists' Collaboration. Effects of ACE inhibitors, calcium antagonists, and other blood-pressure-lowering drugs: results of prospectively designed overviews of randomised trials. Lancet 2000; 355: 1955-1964.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in patients with coronary artery disease and absence of heart failure or left ventricular systolic dysfunction. An overview of long-term randomised controlled trials. N Danchin, M Cucherat, C Thuillez, E Durand, Z Kadri, P G Steg, Arch Intern Med. 166Danchin N, Cucherat M, Thuillez C, Durand E, Kadri Z, Steg PG. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in patients with coronary artery disease and absence of heart failure or left ventricular systolic dysfunction. An overview of long-term randomised controlled trials. Arch Intern Med 2006; 166: 787-796.

Effects of a fixed combination of perindopril and indapamide on macrovascular and microvascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (the ADVANCE trial): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 370ADVANCE collaborative groupADVANCE collaborative group. Effects of a fixed combination of perin- dopril and indapamide on macrovascular and microvascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (the ADVANCE trial): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2007; 370: 829-840.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and coronary heart disease prevention. R Donnelly, G Manning, J RAAS. 8Donnelly R, Manning G. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and coronary heart disease prevention. J RAAS 2007; 8: 13-22.

Angiotensinconverting-enzyme inhibitors in stable vascular disease without left ventricular systolic dysfunction or heart failure: a combined analysis of three trials. G Dagenais, J Pogue, K M Fox, M L Simmons, S Yusuf, Lancet. 368Dagenais G, Pogue J, Fox KM, Simmons ML, Yusuf S. Angiotensin- converting-enzyme inhibitors in stable vascular disease without left ventricular systolic dysfunction or heart failure: a combined analysis of three trials. Lancet 2006; 368: 581-588.

Assessing the influences of a single study in meta-analysis. A Tobias, Stata Tech Bull. 47Tobias A. Assessing the influences of a single study in meta-analysis. Stata Tech Bull 1999; 47: 15-17.

Prevention of cardiovascular events with an antihypertensive regimen adding perindopril as required versus atenolol adding bendroflumenthiazide as required, in the Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trials -Blood Pressure Lowering Arm (ASCOT-BPLA): a multicentre randomised controlled trial. B Dahlöf, Lancet. 364Dahlöf B, for ASCOT investigators. Prevention of cardiovascular events with an antihypertensive regimen adding perindopril as required versus atenolol adding bendroflumenthiazide as required, in the Anglo- Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trials -Blood Pressure Lowering Arm (ASCOT-BPLA): a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2005; 364: 895-906.

Efficacy of perindopril in reduction of cardiovascular events among patients with stable coronary artery disease: randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial (The EUROPA study). K M Fox, Lancet. 362Fox KM, for EUROPA investigators. Efficacy of perindopril in reduc- tion of cardiovascular events among patients with stable coronary artery disease: randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial (The EUROPA study). Lancet 2003; 362: 782-788.

Randomised trial of a perindoprilbased blood-pressure-lowering regimen among 6105 individuals with previous stroke or transient ischaemic attack. Lancet. 358PROGRESS collaborative groupPROGRESS collaborative group. Randomised trial of a perindopril- based blood-pressure-lowering regimen among 6105 individuals with previous stroke or transient ischaemic attack. Lancet 2001; 358: 1033- 1041.

The perindopril in elderly people with chronic heart failure (PEP-CHF) study. Jgf Cleland, M Tendera, J Adamus, N Freemantle, L Polonsky, J Taylor, Eur Heart J. 27Cleland JGF, Tendera M, Adamus J, Freemantle N, Polonsky L, Taylor J. The perindopril in elderly people with chronic heart failure (PEP-CHF) study. Eur Heart J 2006; 27: 2338-2345.

Randomised trial of old and new antihypertensive drugs in elderly patients: cardiovascular mortality and morbidity the Swedish Trial in Old Patients with Hypertension-2 study (STOP-2). L Hansson, L H Lindholm, T Ekbom, B Dahlof, J Lanke, B Scherrsten, Lancet. 354Hansson L, Lindholm LH, Ekbom T, Dahlof B, Lanke J, Scherrsten B, et al. Randomised trial of old and new antihypertensive drugs in elderly patients: cardiovascular mortality and morbidity the Swedish Trial in Old Patients with Hypertension-2 study (STOP-2). Lancet 1999; 354: 1751-1756.

Second Australian National Blood Pressure Study Group. A comparison of outcomes with angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors and diuretics for hypertension in the elderly (ANBP2). N Engl J Med. 348Second Australian National Blood Pressure Study Group. A comparison of outcomes with angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors and diuret- ics for hypertension in the elderly (ANBP2). N Engl J Med 2003; 348: 583-592.

Comparison of nifedipine retard with angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors in Japanese hypertensive patients with coronary artery disease: the Japan Multicenter Investigation for Cardiovascular Diseases B (JMIC) randomised trial. Y Yiu, T Sumiyoshi, K Kodama, Hypertens Res. 27Yiu Y, Sumiyoshi T, Kodama K. Comparison of nifedipine retard with angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors in Japanese hyper- tensive patients with coronary artery disease: the Japan Multicenter Investigation for Cardiovascular Diseases B (JMIC) randomised trial. Hypertens Res 2004; 27: 181-191.

Long-term effects of cholesterol lowering and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition on coronary atherosclerosis. The simvastatin/enalapril coronary atherosclerosis trial (SCAT). K K Teo, J R Burton, C E Buller, Circulation. 102Teo KK, Burton JR, Buller CE. Long-term effects of cholesterol lowering and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition on coronary atherosclerosis. The simvastatin/enalapril coronary atherosclerosis trial (SCAT). Circulation 2000; 102: 1748-1754.

Effects of an angiotensin-convertingenzyme inhibitor, ramipril, on cardiovascular events in high-risk patients (HOPE study). S Yusuf, N Engl J Med. 342Yusuf S, for HOPE investigators. Effects of an angiotensin-converting- enzyme inhibitor, ramipril, on cardiovascular events in high-risk patients (HOPE study). N Engl J Med 2000; 342: 145-153.

Randomised, placebo-controlled trial of the Angiotensin-converting Enzyme Inhibitor, Ramipril, in Patients with Coronary or other Occlusive Arterial Disease (PART-2 Collaborative Group). S Macmahon, N Sharpe, G Gamble, A Clague, C N Mhurchu, T Clark, J Am Coll Cardiol. 36MacMahon S, Sharpe N, Gamble G, Clague A, Mhurchu CN, Clark T, et al. Randomised, placebo-controlled trial of the Angiotensin-convert- ing Enzyme Inhibitor, Ramipril, in Patients with Coronary or other Occlusive Arterial Disease (PART-2 Collaborative Group). J Am Coll Cardiol 2000; 36: 438-443.

The QUinapril Ischemia Event Trial (QUIET): Evaluation of chronic ACE inhibitor therapy in patients with ischemic heart disease and preserved left ventricular function. B Pitt, B O&apos;neill, R Feldman, R Ferrari, L Schwartz, H Mudra, Am J Cardiol. 87Pitt B, O'Neill B, Feldman R, Ferrari R, Schwartz L, Mudra H, et al. The QUinapril Ischemia Event Trial (QUIET): Evaluation of chronic ACE inhibitor therapy in patients with ischemic heart disease and preserved left ventricular function. Am J Cardiol 2001; 87: 1058-1063.

The effect of nisoldipine as compared with enalapril on cardiovascular outcomes in patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes and hypertension (ABCD). R O Estacio, B W Jeffers, W R Hiatt, S L Biggerstff, N Gifford, R W Schrier, N Engl J Med. 338Estacio RO, Jeffers BW, Hiatt WR, Biggerstff SL, Gifford N, Schrier RW. The effect of nisoldipine as compared with enalapril on cardio- vascular outcomes in patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes and hypertension (ABCD). N Engl J Med 1998; 338: 645-652.

Effect of antihypertensive agents on cardiovascular events in patients with coronary disease and normal blood pressure. The CAMELOT study: A randomised controlled trial. S Nissen, E Tuzcu, P Libby, P D Thompson, M Ghali, D Garza, J Am Med Assoc. 292Nissen S, Tuzcu E, Libby P, Thompson PD, Ghali M, Garza D, et al. Effect of antihypertensive agents on cardiovascular events in patients with coronary disease and normal blood pressure. The CAMELOT study: A randomised controlled trial. J Am Med Assoc 2004; 292: 2217-2226.

Effect of ramipril on morbidity and mode of death among survivors of acute myocardial infarction with clinical evidence of heart failure. A report from the AIRE study investigators. Jgf Cleland, L Erhardt, G Murray, A S Hall, S G Ball, Eur Heart J. 18Cleland JGF, Erhardt L, Murray G, Hall AS, Ball SG. Effect of ramipril on morbidity and mode of death among survivors of acute myocardial infarction with clinical evidence of heart failure. A report from the AIRE study investigators. Eur Heart J 1997; 18: 41-51.

A calcium antagonist vs a non-calcium antagonist hypertension treatment strategy for patients with coronary artery disease. The International Verapamil-Trandolopril Study (INVEST): A randomised controlled trial. C J Pepine, E M Handberg, R M Cooper-Dehoff, R G Marks, P Kowey, F H Messerli, J Am Med Assoc. 290Pepine CJ, Handberg EM, Cooper-DeHoff RM, Marks RG, Kowey P, Messerli FH, et al. A calcium antagonist vs a non-calcium antago- nist hypertension treatment strategy for patients with coronary artery disease. The International Verapamil-Trandolopril Study (INVEST): A randomised controlled trial. J Am Med Assoc 2003; 290: 2805-2816.

A clinical trial of the angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor trandolopril in patients with left ventricular dysfunction after myocardial infarction (TRACE). L Køber, C Torp-Pedersen, J E Carlsen, H Bagger, P Eliasen, K Lyngborg, N Engl J Med. 333Køber L, Torp-Pedersen C, Carlsen JE, Bagger H, Eliasen P, Lyngborg K, et al. A clinical trial of the angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor trandolopril in patients with left ventricular dysfunction after myocardial infarction (TRACE). N Engl J Med 1995; 333: 1670-1676.

Angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibition in stable coronary artery disease. The PEACE Trial Investigators. 351The PEACE Trial Investigators. Angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhi- bition in stable coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med 2004; 351: 2058-2068.

Effects of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition with perindopril on left ventricular remodeling and clinical outcome. Results of the Randomised Perindopril and Remodeling in Elderly with Acute Myocardial Infarction (PREAMI) Study. R Ferrari, Arch Intern Med. 166Ferrari R, for PREAMI investigators. Effects of angiotensin-convert- ing enzyme inhibition with perindopril on left ventricular remod- eling and clinical outcome. Results of the Randomised Perindopril and Remodeling in Elderly with Acute Myocardial Infarction (PREAMI) Study. Arch Intern Med 2006; 166: 659-666.

Effects of enalapril on mortality in severe congestive heart failure. Results of the Co-Operative North Scandinavian ENalapril SUrvival Study (CONSENSUS). N Engl J Med. 316CONSENSUS Trial Study GroupCONSENSUS Trial Study Group. Effects of enalapril on mortality in severe congestive heart failure. Results of the Co-Operative North Scandinavian ENalapril SUrvival Study (CONSENSUS). N Engl J Med 1987; 316: 1429-1435.

Effects of the early administration of enalapril on mortality in patients with acute myocardial infarction. Results of the Co-operative New Scandinavian Enalapril Survival Study II (CONSENSUS II). K Swedberg, P Held, J Kjekshus, K Rasmussen, L Ryden, H Wedel, N Engl J Med. 327Swedberg K, Held P, Kjekshus J, Rasmussen K, Ryden L, Wedel H. Effects of the early administration of enalapril on mortality in patients with acute myocardial infarction. Results of the Co-operative New Scandinavian Enalapril Survival Study II (CONSENSUS II). N Engl J Med 1992; 327: 678-684.

Effect of enalapril on mortality and the development of heart failure in asymptomatic patients with reduced left ventricular ejection fractions. S Yusuf, Solvd For The, Investigators, N Engl J Med. 327Yusuf S, for The SOLVD investigators. Effect of enalapril on mortal- ity and the development of heart failure in asymptomatic patients with reduced left ventricular ejection fractions. N Engl J Med 1992; 327: 685-691.

Effect of vasodilator therapy on mortality in chronic congestive heart failure. Results of a Veterans Administration Cooperative Study. J N Cohn, D G Archibald, M Phil, S Ziesche, J A Franciosa, W E Hartsen, N Engl J Med. 314Cohn JN, Archibald DG, Phil M, Ziesche S, Franciosa JA, Hartsen WE, et al. Effect of vasodilator therapy on mortality in chronic congestive heart failure. Results of a Veterans Administration Cooperative Study. (V-Heft). N Engl J Med 1986; 314: 1547-1552.

GISSI-3: Effects of lisinopril and transdermal glyceryl trinitrate singly and together on 6-week mortality and ventricular function after acute myocardial infarction. De Vita, C Fazzini, P F Geraci, E Tavazzi, L Tognoni, G Vecchio, C , Lancet. 343De Vita C, Fazzini PF, Geraci E, Tavazzi L, Tognoni G, Vecchio C. GISSI-3: Effects of lisinopril and transdermal glyceryl trinitrate singly and together on 6-week mortality and ventricular function after acute myocardial infarction. Lancet 1994; 343: 1115-1122.

Effect of ramipril on the incidence of diabetes. The DREAM trial investigators. DREAM trial investigators. 355DREAM trial investigators. Effect of ramipril on the incidence of diabe- tes. The DREAM trial investigators. N Engl J Med 2006; 355: 1-12.

Effect of angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibition compared with conventional therapy on cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in hypertension: the Captopril Prevention Project (CAPPP) randomised trial. L Hansson, L H Lindholm, L Niskanen, J Lanke, T Hedner, A Niklasen, Lancet. 353Hansson L, Lindholm LH, Niskanen L, Lanke J, Hedner T, Niklasen A, et al. Effect of angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibition compared with conventional therapy on cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in hypertension: the Captopril Prevention Project (CAPPP) randomised trial. Lancet 1999; 353: 611-616.

Effects of low-dose ramipril on cardiovascular and renal outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes and raised excretion of urinary albumin: randomised, double blind, placebo controlled trials (the DIABHYCAR AFRICA study). M Marre, M Lievre, G Chatellier, Jfe Mann, P Passa, J Menard, Br Med J. 495Marre M, Lievre M, Chatellier G, Mann JFE, Passa P, Menard J. Effects of low-dose ramipril on cardiovascular and renal outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes and raised excretion of urinary albumin: randomised, double blind, placebo controlled trials (the DIABHYCAR AFRICA study). Br Med J 2004: 329; 495: 1-6.

Risk factors for coronary artery disease in non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus: United Kingdom prospective diabetes study (UKPDS: 23). R C Turner, H Millins, Haw Neil, I M Stratton, S E Manley, D R Matthews, R R Holman, Br Med J. 316Turner RC, Millins H, Neil HAW, Stratton IM, Manley SE, Matthews DR, Holman RR. Risk factors for coronary artery disease in non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus: United Kingdom prospective diabetes study (UKPDS: 23). Br Med J 1998; 316: 823-828.

Effect of captopril on mortality and morbidity in patients with left ventricular dysfunction after myocardial infarction. Results of the Survival and Ventricular Enlargement (SAVE) trial. M Pfeffer, E Braunwald, L Moyé, L Basta, E J Brown, T Cuddy, N Engl J Med. 327Pfeffer M, Braunwald E, Moyé L, Basta L, Brown EJ, Cuddy T, et al. Effect of captopril on mortality and morbidity in patients with left ventricular dysfunction after myocardial infarction. Results of the Survival and Ventricular Enlargement (SAVE) trial. N Engl J Med 1992; 327: 669-677.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and calcium channel blockers for coronary heart disease and stroke prevention. P Verdecchia, G Reboldi, F Angeli, R Gattobigio, M Bentivoglio, L Thijs, Hypertension. 46Verdecchia P, Reboldi G, Angeli F, Gattobigio R, Bentivoglio M, Thijs L, et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and calcium channel blockers for coronary heart disease and stroke prevention. Hypertension 2005; 46: 386-392.

Mortality rates in elderly patients who take different angiotensinconverting enzyme inhibitors after acute myocardial infarction: A class effect?. L Pilote, M Abrahamovitz, E Rodrigues, M J Eisenberg, E Rahme, Ann Int Med. 141Pilote L, Abrahamovitz M, Rodrigues E, Eisenberg MJ, Rahme E. Mortality rates in elderly patients who take different angiotensin- converting enzyme inhibitors after acute myocardial infarction: A class effect? Ann Int Med 2004; 141: 102-112.

Effect of different angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors on mortality among elderly patients with congestive heart failure. L Pilote, M Abrahamovitz, M Eisenberg, K Humphries, H Behlouli, Can Med Assoc J. 17810Pilote L, Abrahamovitz M, Eisenberg M, Humphries K, Behlouli H. Effect of different angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors on mortal- ity among elderly patients with congestive heart failure. Can Med Assoc J 2008; 178(10): 1303-1311.

Therapeutic modulation of the nitric oxide: all ACE inhibitors are not equivalent. L Comini, T Bachetti, A Cargnoni, Pharmacol Res. 56Comini L, Bachetti T, Cargnoni A. Therapeutic modulation of the nitric oxide: all ACE inhibitors are not equivalent. Pharmacol Res 2007: 56: 42-48.

Effect of osteoporosis treatments on risk of non-vertebral fractures: review and meta-analysis of intention-to-treat studies. S Boonen, R F Laan, I P Barton, N B Watts, Osteoporos Int. 16Boonen S, Laan RF, Barton IP, Watts NB. Effect of osteoporosis treat- ments on risk of non-vertebral fractures: review and meta-analysis of intention-to-treat studies. Osteoporos Int 2005; 16: 1291-1298.

Different angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors have similar clinical efficacy after myocardial infarction. M L Hansen, G H Gislason, L Kober, Br J Clin Pharmacol. 65Hansen ML, Gislason GH, Kober L. Different angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors have similar clinical efficacy after myocardial infarc- tion. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2007; 65: 217-223.