MDJiyoon Park 
MDOk Hee Woo 
Ran Kyu 
MDCho 
Department of Radiology
Korea University Anam Hospital
SeoulKorea

MDBo Kyoung Seo 
Department of Radiology
Korea University Ansan Hospital
AnsanKorea


Department of Radiology
Korea University Guro Hospital
SeoulKorea


Department of Radiology
Korea University Guro Hospital
148 Gurodong-ro, Guro-gu08308SeoulKorea
p 1738-26371A1433D179E12C8335854EB86118390710.3348/jksr.2015.73.3.164Received May 11, 2015 Revised June 9, 2015 Accepted June 28, 2015
We report a case of recurrent sparganosis of the breast within 6 months following surgical removal of worms from the breast.The patient was referred to our hospital with a palpable mass in the right breast.On admission, breast ultrasonography revealed a tortuous tubular hypoechoic lesion with indistinct margins within a surrounding hyperechoic area, which strongly suggested sparganosis.We performed surgical excision and confirmed sparganosis.After 6 months, the patient detected a new mass in her right breast and visited our hospital.Breast ultrasonography revealed similar features in a different area of the same breast.We confirmed recurrent sparganosis surgically.Index termsBreast Sparganosis Recurrence Ultrasonography

INTRODUCTION

Sparganosis is an uncommon parasitic infection caused by the plerocercoid (second-stage) larvae of Spirometra erinacei (S. erinacei).The infection is transmitted by the ingestion of contaminated water or the consumption of raw or partially cooked fish, snake, or frog.Sparganosis is found worldwide, however, the majority of cases occur in East Asia, including Korea (1).

Once humans become infected, the larvae can invade the muscle, intestine, eye, brain, and/or spinal cord.Patients may present with a subcutaneous mass or lump and vague pain (2).Recurrent sparganosis depends on the location of the worm and potential incomplete removal (3).Here, we report a case of recurrent sparganosis of the breast within 6 months following surgical removal of worms from the right breast.


CASE REPORT

A 62-year-old female patient visited our hospital with a chief complaint of a palpable right breast mass.She reported eating raw snake meat as a child.On admission, sonography was performed with a high-resolution (10-13 MHz) linear array transducer and an iU22 unit (Philips Ultrasound, Bothell, WA, USA).

The scanning protocol included both transverse and longitudinal real-time imaging.Her breast ultrasonography revealed a tortuous tubular hypoechoic lesion with indistinct margins within a surrounding hyperechoic area, which strongly suggested sparganosis (Fig. 1).We surgically removed ivory-white, ribbon-like worms from the right breast and confirmed sparganosis.After 6 months, the patient detected a new mass in her right breast.Breast mammography revealed a lobulated, circumscribed, isodense mass, and subsequent breast ultrasonography showed similar features to those seen 6 months earlier, neverthe-  The longevity of S. erinacei is thought to be less than 1 year, however, some articles have reported finding a live worm after more than 10 years (10).Thus, any patient diagnosed with breast sparganosis should be followed for a certain period of time, since recurrence is possible, as seen in our case.Moreover, considering that sparganum larvae can penetrate anywhere in the body,

Recurrent

Breast Sparganosis: Clinical and Radiological Findings 여성 유방에 재발한 스파르가눔증: 증례 보고 jksronline.orgJ Korean Soc Radiol 2015;73(3):164-167less in a different area of the same breast (Fig.2).Once again, we surgically confirmed recurrent sparganosis.There was no evidence that the sparganum had invaded other tissues or organs such as extremities, intestine, brain, eyes, spine, pleura, or pericardium in this patient.DISCUSSIONBreast sparganosis is a rare disease, representing less than 2% of all cases of sparganosis (4).The ultrasonographic findings of breast sparganosis may be useful for pre-operative diagnosis and patient management.The majority of breast sparganosis cases show characteristic features on ultrasonography such as multiple elongated, tubular, hypoechoic structures with or without internal heterogenic echogenicity.Hyperechoic, perilesional fat is presumably produced by chronic inflammatory reactions.Color Doppler examination typically does not show vascular flow within the mass, but may evidence increased vascularity in patients with pain (5).In spite of characteristic sonographic findings, breast sparganosis can mimic malignancy, especially in patients with previous or current malignant disease (6).Complete surgical removal is the treatment of choice and provides a definite diagnosis.A previous report hypothesized that recurrent sparganosis depends on the location of the worms and potential incomplete removal (3).In the case of recurrent lower extremity and breast sparganosis, authors suggested the possibility of incomplete surgical removal of sparganosis in the upper medial portion of the right breast 2 years earlier, resulting in subsequent migration towards the left breast, and then distantly to the lower extremites


Fig. 1 .
1
Fig. 1.A 62-year-old woman with breast sparganosis.A, B. Grayscale coronal and sagittal ultrasonography reveals a tortuous tubular hypoechoic lesion with indistinct margins within a surrounding hyperechoic area in the right breast at the 9 o'clock position.C. Color Doppler ultrasonography shows increased peripheral vascularity of the lesion.D. Pathological examination demonstrates ivory-white, ribbon-like worms from the right breast, confirming the diagnosis of sparganosis.


Fig. 2 .J
2
Fig. 2. The same patient with recurrent breast sparganosis 6 months following surgery.A, B. Breast mammography reveals a lobulated, circumscribed, isodense mass in the right breast upper outer quadrant (arrow).C, D. Grayscale ultrasonography shows a tortuous tubular hypoechoic region in a different area of the right breast (at the 5 o'clock position).E. Pathological examination demonstrates ivory-white worms from the right breast, confirming the diagnosis of sparganosis.

Jiyoon Park, et al
고려대학교 구로병원 영상의학과,
고려대학교 안암병원 영상의학과,
고려대학교 안산병원 영상의학과

Some aspects of human sparganosis in Korea. S Y Cho, J H Bae, B S Seo, Korean J Parasitol. 131975

Multiple sparganosis in an immunosuppressed patient. H S Yoon, B J Jeon, B Y Park, Arch Plast Surg. 402013

Cases and literature review of breast sparganosis. M Koo, J H Kim, J S Kim, J E Lee, S J Nam, J H Yang, World J Surg. 352011

. H G Moon, E J Jung, S T Park, Breast sparganosis presenting as