Mb. Steven?Embolism of tlie Middle Cerebral Artery. 251 EMBOLISM OF THE MIDDLE CEREBRAL ARTERY


John Lindsay Steven 
Professor of Clinical Medicine
Glasgow University


M B 
Professor of Clinical Medicine
Glasgow University


Mb. Steven?Embolism of tlie Middle Cerebral Artery. 251 EMBOLISM OF THE MIDDLE CEREBRAL ARTERY



In the following paper I intend first to give an account of three cases of embolism of the middle cerebral artery, occurring recently in the practice of the Western Infirmary, in two of which, while acting for Dr. Joseph Coats, I had the opportunity of making the post-mortem examination; and, secondly, to refer briefly to some of the more important pathological and other points which they serve to illustrate.

For liberty to make use of the clinical records of the cases I am indebted to the great kindness of Professor Gairdner, Professor M'Call Anderson, and Dr. Gavin P. Tennent, in whose wards the patients were treated until the time of death.

Case I.?George C?, aged 23, a labourer, was admitted on the 24th January, 1883, to Ward II, under Professor M'Call Anderson, complaining of pain across the front of the chest, worst at the left side over the heart. Until three years ago he was perfectly healthy, never having been laid up, except occasionally by headache. At ' this time (three years ago), after an unusually hard day's work, at which he had freely perspired, he got a chill, and on the following day he was so ill with pains in his joints as to be unable to rise from bed. Nearly every joint in his body was attacked. The affected joints were swollen and painful, and remained so for a longer or shorter period. The pain and swelling shifted from joint to joint, all, however, being ultimately left with their mobility quite unimpaired. He perspired a great deal, particularly at night, and noticed that the sweat had a very sour and offensive odour. This attack confined him to bed for three months, and in all he lost by it about one year's work.

At intervals, since the illness described above, he has been troubled by pain over the cardiac region and by palpitation, and on several occasions, as when going up stairs or otherwise exerting himself more than usual, he has felt decidedly " blown " and short of breath.

On Wednesday, the 16th inst., eight days before admission, while at work, he was seized quite suddenly by a severe 252 Mr. Steven?Embolism of the Middle Cerebral Artery. spasm of pain over the region of the heart, which was so intense as to prevent his moving or attempting to breathe for a minute or two. In short, he felt as if he were about to die on the spot. He has never had any such severe seizure either before or since.

The family history is satisfactory; his father and mother are alive and well, the former aged 49, the latter 46. His three brothers and two sisters are strong and healthy; and of four who died young he can tell nothing. There is no history of rheumatism in any member of the family.

On admission the apex beat was found to be strong, heaving, and displaced considerably downwards and to the left, with a corresponding increase of the area of cardiac dulness to that side.

On auscultation a loud ventricular systolic murmur, indicative of extreme mitral regurgitation, was heard at the apex; there was also accentuation of the second pulmonic sound ; and marked dulness at the base of the left lung was noted.

The temperatures have on the whole been pretty normal, but during two periods after admission a very decided evening rise was observed. The first of these (corresponding with an attack of diarrhoea) extended from 7th March to 2nd April, and the second from 7th May to 26th May. During these intervals the temperatures at night were seldom below 100?, and on several occasions touched 102*4?.

During the first half of his residence in the Infirmary the amount of urine was often considerably above the normal, being frequently 80 ounces and once 100. During the latter half the amount was rather under normal, and for the last fifteen or sixteen days of life, so small that it could not be collected.

The specific gravity varied from 1010 to 1013, and it was acid in reaction.

Throughout the whole period of observation it presented a smoky appearance, and contained considerable quantities of albumen, blood, and tube casts.

For a month or two after his admission, so long as he remained quietly in bed and did not exert himself, he felt pretty well; and but little change was observed in his condition until the beginning of April, when he was again seized with several attacks of angina pectoris. For this a 1 per cent solution of nitro-glycerine was administered, beginning with 1 drop doses gradually increased to 4 or 5 every six hours. This treatment was discontinued on the 30th of April, as the attacks of angina had disappeared.

On the 23rd of May, after having complained of severe pain in the head for two days, he was suddenly seized with loss of power in the right arm and leg and right side of the face. Throughout the day he remained perfectly unconscious, although he was able to swallow fluids, but not solids. He recovered consciousness next day, and attempted to speak, but could not be understood. He lay in a very helpless condition until the 28th of May, when he began to recover the power of his right leg, but the right arm and the right side of the face presented not the slightest signs of improvement. The indistinctness of speech still continued, and no reliable information as to his state could be obtained from him, and it could not be determined accurately whether the impairment of speech was really aphasic or simply due to the inability to articulate. From this time he grew steadily worse, and died upon the 9th of June.

Upon the 12th of June, 1883,1 made a post-mortem examination in this case with the following result.

External appearances.?There was some oedema of the general subcutaneous tissue.

Chest?In both pleural cavities there was a considerable amount of red fluid, and the pericardium contained several ounces of clear, serous fluid. The heart was very considerably enlarged, weighing 20J ounces. The right ventricle was much dilated, and the tricuspid orifice easily admitted six fingers. The left ventricle was greatly hypertrophied and dilated. On the curtains of the mitral valve were numerous fringelike warty vegetations, which were more abundant on the anterior than the posterior curtain. The valve was not contracted, easily admitting three fingers. On the endocardium of the left auricle a large area of recent endocarditis was discovered, which had no relationship whatever to the valve, and on whose surface numerous vegetations were found. The aortic valve was competent, and a very slight line of recent endocarditis existed on its curtains. The tissue of the organ generally was pale and flabby.

The lungs were non-adherent, and, except for the presence of oedema, were normal in appearances.

Abdomen.?There was a very slight amount of fluid in the peritoneum.

The spleen was very much enlarged, and at its upper extremity there was a large, pale, soft infarction of a white or fawn colour, measuring If inch vertically, and 3 inches transversely. The organ itself was engorged with blood, and weighed 26J ounces.

The kidneys were much increased in size, weighing 12^ and 12J ozs. respectively, and were greatly discoloured and decom-posed. The capsule was slightly adherent, and on section the cortex was seen to be generally of a white colour, with numerous dark spots and streaks, the line where it joined the pyramids being somewhat ill defined.

The liver was slightly fatty, and the bladder healthy. The stomach and bowels were not examined.

Head.?There was nothing special to note concerning the membranes, base, or convolutions of the brain. On opening into the left lateral ventricle, an area of softening was observed in that portion of the corona radiata lying external to the corpus striatum. This area corresponded to a tract of brain substance which was supplied by a branch of the left middle cerebral artery, which was plugged by a large embolus. The plug was so large that it looked as if the main trunk had been occluded, but it was found that a bristle could be passed through the main stem, right past the embolus. In the anterior branch of the internal capsule, extending from before backwards for about an inch, was a small recent punctiform haemorrhage, dependent probably on a later embolic lesion.

The colour of the softened area was not very obviously different from that of the surrounding brain tissue.

The microscope revealed a generally granular condition of the renal epithelium, with frequent fatty metamorphosis, and a considerable amount of blood in the convoluted tubules.

In some situations the blood presented a brown and granular appearance?in others it was evidently quite recent.

Case II. Isabella M'L, pet. 15, was admitted to Ward VI, under Professor Gairdner, on the 25th May, 1883, complaining of swelling of the feet and legs, and of a pain across the lower part of the back, supposed by her to have been due to exposure to cold, about three weeks before admission.

The exposure took place upon Tuesday, the 8th May, and on Thursday, the 10th, she felt her legs stiff, and on examining them, found them swollen both at the knees and ankles. She had not up to this time experienced any shiverings, but on Friday, the 11th, she did so; at this time she was also very thirsty, but neither then nor since has she suffered from headaches.

She continued to go about the house as usual until the following Sunday, 13th May, when, feeling " tired and weary/' she remained in bed. At this time she first experienced pain across the loins, which has since continued, being specially severe at night, sometimes preventing sleep. She remained in Mr. Steven?Embolism of the Middle Cerebral Artery. 255 bed all the week, and on Sunday morning, the 20th May, when she awoke, her face was swollen to such an extent that her eyes were almost closed; but previous to this she is quite certain that the swelling was confined to her legs. This state of matters continued until her admission to hospital on Friday, the 25th May. When she was dressing to come to the Infirmary, she noticed that her body generally was swollen, so that her dress could not be fastened. During the last eight days she has suffered from a sore throat, which makes it difficult for her to swallow, but which does not appear to have any connection with the swelling of the body.

During childhood, she says, the " spinal cord in her back was wrong," and for a time she was unable to walk, but since this, until the onset of the present illness, she has always been strong and well. On questioning, she admits that she had scarlet fever about seven years ago, the attack, however, having been a very slight one. The face is now, 28th May, little if at all swollen, but there is very considerable oedema of both feet and legs. There is also considerable effusion of fluid into the left knee joint, without any pain. The integument of the thorax is also oedematous, especially posteriorly. Although the abdomen is distinctly enlarged, and bulges somewhat in both flanks, there is no reliable evidence of fluid in the cavity of the peritoneum. Pressure over the lumbar region on each side produces pain.

There is an abnormally marked curvature of the sternum in its upper part, and at the lower portion of the dorsal region of the spinal column there is a prominent " lump," evidently an angular curvature of the spine.

Percussion over both apices gives a good note, but as the bases are approached (on the right side, anteriorly as well as posteriorly), distinct dulness is obtained. At both apices there is some degree of puerile breathing, but the respiratory murmur is free from rale. In front, on the right side, from a short distance below the clavicle, loud muco-crepitant r&les are heard, similar, but much finer, rales being heard at the right base behind on deep inspiration, although both here and at the left base the respiratory murmur is scarcely heard during tranquil breathing, and the vocal fremitus is absent.

The cardiac impulse is felt, only when the patient lies on her left side, in the third intercostal space, and distinctly less so in the fourth. The cardiac sounds are indistinctly heard in the anatomical situation of the apex, being much more distinct over the area of impulse. There is a suspicion of peri-cardial effusion, but the evidence of this is not quite reliable. No murmur or abnormality of the sounds is made out.

The tongue is, on the whole, clean; the bowels regular; and the pulse, 120 per minute, is small and easily compressed. The urine collected on the 25th and 26th May measures 40 and 57 ounces respectively, contains abundant albumen, but no blood, and throws down a whitish deposit containing hyaline, fatty, and granular tube-casts.

8th June, 1883.?To-day Dr. Middleton examined the case, and made the following note :?

Last Sunday morning, 3rd June, 1883, between 10 and 11 A.M., the nurse noticed that the patient was paralysed on the right side, her attention not having been drawn to the girl by any cry or sign; nor is it possible to determine whether there was any loss of consciousness, for, though her speech is little if at all affected, there is evident reluctance to speak, and this appears to have become more and more marked. There is now complete paralysis of the right arm and leg. The face presents, on the right side, distinct loss of expression. The tongue is protruded to the right of the middle line, and the left angle of the mouth is drawn upwards. In taking liquids, there is some dribbling on the right side of the mouth, and on testing with the finger inside the cheek, there is absolute loss of power in the right buccinator. There is little if any difference in the wrinkling of the brow on the two sides, and both eyes are capable of normal movement. The right nostril is slightly less dilated than the left, and the uvula is directed towards the paralysed side, there being also, if anything, slight flattening of the right arch of the palate.

Weber's test is applied, but not with great attention to detail. There is evidently on the paralysed side in the upper limb some inability to distinguish the two points as two, at ordinary distances from each other; and although she distinguishes the head from the point of a pin, she fails to locate exactly the site of contact, pointing to the fingers when the back of the hand is touched. There seems to be no impairment of the sense of taste. The pupils are equal, slightly dilated, and movable. The speech is clear but low; and, although she appears listless and dull, there is no evident impairment of the mental faculties. The tongue is now much furred and the breath very offensive; the bowels are loose.

Except that the bronchitic rales are somewhat more abundant examination of the chest does not reveal any change.

13th June, 1883.?To-day Dr. Gairdner, along with Dr.

Middleton, made a careful examination of the heart in this case with special reference to the question of pericardial effusion. As the result of this, the presence of pericardial effusion was found to be extremely improbable. The quality of the first sound in the third interspace was doubtful, but the nature of the alteration could not be made out?Dr.

Middleton inclining to think there was a V. S. murmur, while Dr. Gairdner almost suspected an A. S. The condition of the abdomen at this time was taken as almost normal, with perhaps a little dulness in the flanks, but no swelling. The pulse could be easily counted at the heart, but was with difficulty, if at all, appreciable at either wrist. The extremities were cold; and the oedema of the lower limbs had subsided somewhat on the left, but not on the right side. lJfth June, 1883.?This morning, at G a.m., Dr. Stewart, house physician, was called to this patient on account of severe pain (without physical signs) to the left of the umbilicus, which was relieved by chloroform fomentations. Towards noon she became slightly comatose, and at 1*45 P.M. she died in a state of profound coma.

On the 15th June, 1883, I made a post-mortem examination of this case, of which the following is an account. External appearances.?There is slight oedema of the ankles ; and upon the front and inside of both thighs there are well marked linese albicantes. Upon opening the abdominal cavity a considerable quantity of a brown turbid fluid escapes.

Chest.?There is a small quantity of clear fluid in the pericardium. The heart, weighing 7J ounces, presents a slight dilatation of the tricuspid orifice, which admits four fingers; and also a few small warty vegetations on the mitral curtains, one of those being of considerable size, and presenting a broken appearance as if recently lacerated.

The lungs are oedernatous, and show considerable hypostatic engorgement, but otherwise present nothing remarkable.

Abdomen.?On the peritoneal covering of the intestines, and also on that of the internal surface of the abdominal wall, there is an abundant recent exudation of fibrin.

The spleen is somewhat enlarged, weighing 8^ ounces, and on its convex surface an area (corresponding to the base of a large recent hsemorrhagic infarction) is found covered by dense fibrinous deposit. The infarction is of a wedge shape and of a reddish-brown colour. In one of the vessels at the hilus an embolus is discovered, with a long but much thinner thrombus added to it.

The kidneys are very much enlarged, weighing respectively 10J and 11 ounces. The capsule is non-adherent, and the No. 4.


S

Vol. XX.

surface is pale with, scattered over it, numerous intensely injected vascular networks. The cortex is very pale, increased in thickness, and not separated from the pyramidal portion by any well marked line of demarcation. The pyramids are red in colour. In one of the kidneys a small comparatively recent infarction was discovered.

The liver, weighing 59 ounces, is very slightly hypersemic.

The stomach and intestines are healthy, except for the layer of recent fibrinous exudation on their peritoneal surfaces? the cause of the peritonitis having in all probability been the infarction of the spleen, in the neighbourhood of which it was most intense.

Head.?The dura mater is firmly adherent to the calvarium. On the external aspect of the brain nothing remarkable is noted ; but, on following the left middle cerebral artery up the fissure of Sylvius, an embolus is discovered in the main stem where it divides into two large branches. Just behind, and not at all involved in, the plug, a small branch is given off which is found to have a somewhat long course. It first gives oft* a branch to the temporal lobe, and then passes on to be finally distributed to the operculum and neighbour-


hood.

On laying open the hemispheres the corona radiata is found very distinctly softened in its middle region. The softening extends down to the neighbourhood of the corpus striatum, but this, as well as Broca's convolution, is not involved in it.

Case III.?Mrs. M., set 42, housewife, was admitted on 2nd July 1883, to Ward IX, under Dr. Tennent.

When brought into the ward she was found to be in a state of complete coma.

Her husband states that the illness began 4 days previous to her admission. On that day she was apparently in perfect health when she got up in the morning, and went about her household duties till the afternoon. She was then sitting on a chair, when her son, a boy of twelve, saw her try to rise and walk towards the bed, which she managed to reach, but the boy noticed that she dragged the'right leg after her.. She was, however, quite unable to get into bed without assistance, and during all this time she never spoke a word. After being put into bed it was noticed that she never moved the right arm, hand, or leg, and although at first evidently quite sensible, she gradually became quite unconscious. Since that Mr. Steven?Embolism of the Middle Cerebral Artery. 259 day she has steadily got worse and has passed water in bed; the bowels, however, have not been moved since the onset of the illness, nor has she taken any food with the exception of small quantities of beef tea.

Previous to this illness she was apparently a very healthy woman, her husband stating that, as long as he can remember, she was never a day in bed except during her confinements. She has 3 children alive and in fairly good health; one died in infancy, and she has had no miscarriages.

On admission, she was in a state of profound coma, and breathing very stertorously. The respirations were very irregular, and occasionally quite of the "Cheyne-Stokes" character. The right arm and leg were evidently paralysed, as she never moved them, but she moved the left occasionally, even when not spoken to or touched in any way. The arms of both sides, however, were very rigid, and when her left hand or arm was touched, she resisted very strongly.

The right pupil was contracted; neither pupil responded to light. The eye-balls were very slightly sensitive to touch. The tongue was dry and baked. The face and lips were slightly livid, and the whole body was covered by a cold sweat; the pulse 100, soft and easily compressed; temperature on admission 100? F. Auscultation of the heart could not be performed satisfactorily on account of the stertorous breathing. 3rd July, 1883.?At 9 o'clock a.m. Dr. Tennent made the following observations. The pulse, 92, is very soft and feeble, but steady and regular. The respirations, 52, are laboured and accompanied with much mucous throat-rattle. The conjunctivae are almost entirely insensitive, and the pupils, which are widely dilated, do not respond in the least to light. There is very slight divergence of both eyes, especially the left.

There is considerable lividity of the face, and she lies with the mouth widely open. Unconsciousness is complete ; and the temperature is 103*6?. The skin is slightly moist, with no rash; the cardiac sounds cannot be heard on account of the extreme pulmonary disturbance.

There is very considerable increase of the abdominal aortic pulsation, this being very distinctly visible as well as palpable, and it is also widely diffused all over the epigastrium. The percussion in front and at the sides is normal, as are also the areas of hepatic, splenic, and cardiac dulness. The radial arteries are perfectly straight, and there is no unusual prominence of the temporals.

Evening.?After the previous note was made the temperature was taken in the rectum and was 105? F. She gradually sank, and at 11 A.M. the temperature in the rectum was 107*4?.

At 11*30 A.M. she died, and the temperature being taken soon afterwards was still 107*4? F. Permission was not granted for an examination of more than the head in this case, and the following is Dr. Joseph Coats' account of the appearances observed. On removing the calvarium and dura mater, the two hemispheres present a very striking difference. The right is firm, and the sulci somewhat obscured?the left is soft and the sulci contain serous fluid.

On cutting into the hemispheres the left is found very markedly softened, the softening involving the basal ganglia and the entire middle and anterior part of the hemisphere. It is noted that in the softened districts the grey matter of the convolutions has a very pale colour, and it is imperfectly demarcated from the white substance beneath. The softened white substance is in some parts almost diffluent, and the walls of the lateral ventricle are quite irregular from the softening. The parts unaffected by softening are these?anterior part of hemisphere (supplied from the other side through the anterior communicating), posterior part of hemisphere, posterior part of thalamus opticus, cerebellum, pons, and medulla oblongata.

On examining the vessels at the base, a plug is found to occupy the internal carotid just after its exit from the skull. This clot is pale and adherent. It extends into the left middle cerebral and to the anterior cerebral, both of which it completely occludes at their origin and for a short distance onwards, the rest of the artery being distended with a dark, soft, recent clot.

The foregoing cases are typical examples of localized softening of the brain due to a very obvious cause; yet, although the condition is now well known and has been minutely described by many authorities, and apart from the fact that the three cases occurred in the routine work of the pathological department within as many weeks, they are interesting from a clinical, a pathological, and a statistical standpoint.

One of the first points of interest clinically is the question of diagnosis. In reference to the differential diagnosis between thrombosis and embolism on the one hand, and these affections and haemorrhage on the other, Nothnagel writes?" the diagnosis of haemorrhage, or of embolism or thrombosis, cannot in any case be unreservedly made. Under certain conditions it maybe established, to be sure, with a probability which borders on certainty, and indeed with greater positiveness?supposing all the characteristic symptoms to be present?in cases of softening than in those of hemorrhage. In other cases, the probabilities on the two sides may be equal, and the diagnosis can rest only on conjecture." * And Dr. Russell Reynolds remarks, " at the onset of the attack it may be impossible to distinguish the nature of the malady." *f" The cases which have been related in this paper corroborate these statements in every detail. In the first case, where there was a long standing and well recognised heart affection, suddenly complicated by the occurrence of hemiplegia, the diagnosis was almost certain: in the second, where acute Bright's disease was the prominent feature, and the heart lesion of a more doubtful nature, it was probable:?although in both the concomitant occurrence of embolism of the spleen leading to its enlargement was a strong corroborative point. It is interesting, however, in this regard to note the caution of Dr. Hammond who, having diagnosed cerebral embolism in a case of mitral regurgitation, found death to have resulted from haemorrhage into the corpus striatum, j Dr. J. Hughlings Jackson has also reported a similar case. ? In the third of our cases the similarity to what occurs in ordinary cerebral haemorrhage was most striking, so much so as to render a diagnosis between embolism and haemorrhage almost impossible.

With regard to the symptomatology of acute softening of the brain due to cerebral embolism, it is mainly of interest to consider the mode of onset and the progress of the condition. Russell Reynolds || and Nothnagel 1T state that acute cerebral softening may be ushered in by an apoplectic seizure, by convulsions, or by delirium, the latter, however, though sometimes met with (Hammond), being rather exceptional in cerebral embolism. In the first and third of our cases there was a typical apoplectic seizure; while in the second, it is extremely doubtful if the hemiplegia was preceded by any loss of consciousness whatever, and in connection with this, Nothnagel IF Loc. cit., p. 195. coma was either entirely wanting, or was replaced by dizziness and slight confusion of mind of only a few seconds' duration." With regard to the character of the coma in cerebral embolism there seems to be no special characteristic by which it may be distinguished from that occurring in haemorrhagic extravasation.

Gowers,* however, points out that in embolism it is less profound than in haemorrhage. In the first of our cases it was less profound and of shorter duration than in the third, in which it continued absolute till the time of death, six days after the onset of the attack; and, in connection with the duration of unconsciousness and the mode of death in the third case, it is interesting to note Nothnagel's remark that " death does not take place after so short an interval as in some cases of haemorrhage. Only a few cases are on record which have ended fatally within the first twelve hours."

With regard to aphasia, M. Dax, M. Broca, and Dr. Hughlings Jackson have done more, perhaps, than any others to fix the seat of the lesion in this interesting affection, and the latter was one of the first to show that the most frequent cause was plugging of the left middle cerebral artery by an embolus.")* In the first of our cases there was upon the recovery of consciousness a very distinct impairment of the power of speech, which was most probably, at the outset at least, aphasic, but concerning this no very accurate opinion could be formed, owing to the fact that the patient, until he died, was so ill as not to allow of any prolonged or minute examination. In the second, aphasia was quite absent, and this is to be associated with the fact, noted in the post-mortem, that behind the obstruction in the left middle cerebral a small branch was given off, which ramified in the region of, and supplied, Broca's lobe.

In reference to the progress of such cases, it is interesting to note that, in the first of those here related, the patient, five days after the onset of the attack, began to recover the power of his right leg. There are two possible ways in which this might occur?(1.) by restoration of nutriment to the brain by means of collateral circulation, although it is extremely doubtful whether the anastomoses are free enough to permit of this, in the majority of cases at least (Charcot); or (2.) by some alteration in the position or composition of the embolus, occurring before the brain tissue is irretrievably destroyed ?the latter I think being probably the explanation in our * A Dictionary of Medicine. Edited by Richard Quain, M.D. London : Longmans, Green & Co. 1882. P. 154. t Loss of Speech: its Association with Valvular Disease of the Heart, &c., Sc. Clinical Lectures and Reports, London Hospital. Vol I, p. 388. case.

As has been noted already, the embolus looked as if it occluded the main stem of the artery at a place where it divided into two branches, but it was found that a bristle could be pushed past the obstruction with considerable ease, thus leaving only one of the branches completely occluded. At the period of occlusion it is not at all improbable, then, that the main stem was plugged, and that afterwards, by contraction of the embolus, a partial restoration of the circulation occurred.

Since 1820, when the works of Lallemand and Rostan were published, the pathology of cerebral softening has received much attention at the hands of various observers. At first the condition was supposed to be due in the majority of cases to inflammation, and sometimes to senile change. Even at this early period, however, Rostan* and Abercrombie^f* insisted upon the fact that cerebral softening was often associated with calcification and obliteration of the arteries at the base of the brain, the latter suggesting " that this condition of the arteries of the brain may be a frequent cause of the ramollissement, especially of that form of the disease which occurs without marks of inflammation in persons much advanced in life, in the same wav as it leads to gangrene of the extremi-7 %/ O O ties." J Since then the connection between softening and lesions of the vascular system of the brain has every day been made more clear, and in 1847, on the publication of Virchow's first memoir on Embolism, its intimate relationship to this particular state was first established. Of great importance in the consideration of ramollissement due to cerebral embolism is an accurate knowledge of the distribution of the arteries of the brain, and for much of our information on this subject we are indebted to the labours of Professor Heubner ? and M. Duret. || The main point, as to which these authorities differ, is as to the degree of the anastomosis which takes place between the arteries supplying the cortex.

Heubner maintains that the communications are pretty free and take place by means of arteries of at least a millimetre in diameter, whereas Duret holds, and in this he is supported by Charcot,* that the anastomosis is not at all free, and that when it does occur it is through the medium of vessels only a fourth or a fifth of a millimetre in diameter. With this exception their results are similar; and, as it is the middle cerebral with which we are immediately concerned, we shall only consider in detail the distribution of this vessel. By its ganglionic or central branches it " supplies the entire nucleus lenticularis, a portion of the corpus striatum, the capsula externa, and the anterior branch of the capsula interna." It divides into four terminal branches, the first of which supplies Broca's convolution; the second and third supply respectively the ascending frontal and the ascending parietal convolutions ; and the fourth passes to the gyrus angularis and the first sphenoidal convolution.

Bearing in mind these statements with regard to the distribution of the middle cerebral, we are now in a position to consider whether the facts in the foregoing cases correspond to the description.

In the first case the softening was most noticeable in the In the second case the softening occupied the middle region of the corona radiata, but not the corpus striatum or Broca's lobe, and was more extensive than in the first, three out of the four terminal branches being occluded. The artery to Broca's lobe and neighbourhood was given off considerably proximal to the embolus, and so this area was not softened.

In the third case the softening affected the entire area ? supplied by the left middle cerebral, the whole artery being blocked, and also a considerable portion of the region supplied by the anterior cerebral. As will be seen from the report of the post-mortem the ramollissement in this case was of the most perfect kind.

In will thus be seen that in the cases just recorded, where different parts and different branches of the middle cerebral have been involved, we have a very strong corroboration of the correctness of the results of Duret and Heubner with regard to the cerebral circulation?and the evidence is all the more valuable because it is pathological evidence. It is of great interest also to note the great rapidity with which the most extreme softening was established in the third case, the entire duration of the affection being only about six days.

With regard to the source of the embolus, it is to be noted that in the first it was derived from the cavity of the left auricle or the curtains of the mitral; and in the second from the mitral curtains, the vegetations on which were torn 7 O looking. In reference to the third case, the source of the embolus is unknown, as permission was not granted to examine the body. It is worth while remarking, too, that all three cases occurred in the left middle cerebral.

I have thus drawn attention to some of the diagnostic and pathological questions illustrated by the cases which have been recorded; and, in conclusion, I think it may be interesting to draw up a short statistical table, showing the proportional relationship which cerebral embolism bears to other affections of the brain, as illustrated by cases observed in the pathological department of the Glasgow Western Infirmary since it was opened in 1874.

Out of 1,029 pathological examinations entered in the Infirmary reports since the opening of the institution, there have been recorded seventy-nine cases of disease of the brain and cerebellum (excluding injury by fracture of the skull or otherwise), a synopsis of which is given below. It will be understood that where more than one pathological condition was 266 Mr. Steven?Embolism of the Middle Cerebral Artery. 

remarks "
remarksquite a number of cases could be cited where the Cyclopaedia of Medicine, Ziemssen, English Edit., 1877. Vol. xii, p. 205. t A System of Medicine. Edited by J. Russell Reynolds, M.D., 1878. Vol. ii, p. 484. I On Diseases of the Nervous System. By Wm. A. Hammond, M.D.* 

New York, 1871. P. 133. 

? British Medical Journal. 29th Oct., 1870. P. 459. 
|| Loc. tit., p. 448. 




* Recherclies sur le Ramollissement du Cerveau. Paris, 1823 ; 2nd edition, p. 170. t Pathological and Practical Researches on Diseases of the Brain, &c. Edinburgh, 1828 ; pp. 23 to 25. X Practice of Physic. Cullen & Gregory. Edinburgh, 1829. Vol. ii, p. 306. ? Ernahrungsgebiet der Hirnarterien. Ctrlblt. f. d. Med. Wiss. 1872, No. 52. || Rech. anat. sur la circulation de l'enc^phale. Arch, de Phys. Normale et Pathol. 1874.


present, the case is entered under the head of the most prominent.Syphilitic, .Tubercular, Glio-sarcoma, Base of skull and brain, Indefinite, . Tubercular meningitis, . Atrophy,Cerebral haemorrhage, . 

. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 

21 

With miliary aneurisms, .... 

8 

/ Of middle cerebral, 

J ,, posterior ? 

J ? anterior ? 

V Indefinite 

Cerebral softening, 

. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 

10 

Due to disease of vessels and thrombosis, . 

6 

? 

embolism, 

..... 

3 

( Left middle cerebral, 

2 

< Left intl. carotid, mid. 

( and antr. cerebral, 

1 

Doubtful, 
Tumour, 


Mr. Steven?Embolism of the Middle Cerebral Artery.
Mr. Steven?Embolism of the Middle Cerebral Artery. 261
corona radiata, external to the anterior half of the corpus striatum, and was of limited extent. The branch of the Svlvian which was occluded was the second of the four %/ terminal ones, and the ramollissement was mainly observed in the region of its distribution?viz., the neighbourhood of the ascending frontal convolution. The first branch, or that which goes to Broca's lobe, was not all involved (but it, as well as the main trunk of the Sylvian, may quite possibly have been partially or wholly obstructed at the outset, as the plug was a large one), and the clot was far beyond the place of origin of the ganglionic branches. The basal ganglia were not affected, except in one situation?viz., the anterior branch of the internal capsule, where there was a small punctiform haemorrhage, which was probably due to a recent embolic lesion of one of the ganglionic branches. As has already been mentioned and commented upon, in this case there was a certain degree of recovery in the leg after a few days. The case, therefore, might quite well be quoted in favour of the view that the collateral circulation of the cerebral cortex is somewhat free (Heubner's view); but, although this position is quite tenable, I am rather inclined, as I have said, to regard the improvement as probably due to some alteration in the embolus itself, permitting of a re-establishment of the circulation. * The Localisation of Cerebral and Spinal Diseases. New Syd. Soc. Trans. London, 1883 ; p. 55.
From the table given above, it will be seen that out of seventy-nine cases where the brain was examined after death, cerebral embolism occurred only three times, and it is certainly a striking coincidence that the three cases occurred during last summer within three weeks of each other.