Glasgow 
Society 
was brought to the Dispensary of the Royal Hospital for Sick Children ten days ago by a sister of the mother, with the statement that, though the child was now 19 months old, he had never lost any of his "babyish ways."During the first few months of the child's life, nothing unnatural was noticed beyond the cry, which the aunt said had always been recognised as being peculiar. This statement however, was made in answer to a direct question. In this connection it is to be noted that the child had the " snuffles," though not in a very pronounced form, from the time of his birth.When 3 months old the child met with a slight accident. The aunt was trying to amuse him by "throwing" him up in the air, and in doing this the head of the child struck a gas bracket.There was a wound produced, but very slight, judging from the small superficial cicatrix now to be seen. Some time after this it was noticed that the child was not developing as he should, and the friends wondered if it were possible that this slight accident could in any way be connected with this altered condition.Though he was able to recognise his mother and aunt, among strangers, yet he seemed to take little interest in any

\ toys or anything which would be expected to amuse him. He became gradually more dull and languid, and it was only occasionally that he could be made to laugh. As he grew older no improvement was observed, though he slept and took his food fairly well. Only occasionally was there any vomiting. The bowels have tended to be a little constipated.

With regard to the present condition, the whole body of the child is " dwarfed and heavy looking," due to some degree of arrested development. Though 19 months old, the child only weighs 14 lb., and is 23 inches long. A healthy child at 12 months would weigh more, and be considerably longer.

The expression of the face has all the characters of that of a cretin. The eyes are wide apart, the bridge of the nose flat, the nose itself upturned. The eyelids are swollen, and apparently cedematous, the skin having a slight waxy appearance. The palpebral fissures are thus encroached upon, and smaller than natural. The cheeks are pale, waxy, and heavy looking, with a tendency to the presence of eczema. The mouth is, as a rule, somewhat open; the lower lip is thick, swollen, and everted ; the tongue is enlarged, though not protruding, while the teeth are absent.

The circumference of the head round forehead and occiput measures 17| inches. As regards the shape, it is narrow anteriorly and broad posteriorly ; the anterior fontanelle is very patent. The veins of the scalp are considerably dilated. The scalp itself is dry and scurfy, while the hair is rather course and of a brown colour, but not dark.

The neck is short and thick, and the supraclavicular spaces well tilled with adipose tissue. If the head be allowed to hang backwards, the trachea can be felt between the muscles of the neck.

In the upper dorsal and interscapular spaces there is no marked fatty development, nor the presence of any silky hair.

The shape of the thorax is normal. The abdomen is markedly protuberant, and a small umbilical hernia is present. Any lordosis present is difficult to determine, on account of the child requiring to be supported by the armpits.

The limbs are short, broad, and stumpy, with a slight degree of curvature, but there is no enlargement of the epiphyses of the long bones. The hands and feet are broad and flat, and covered with thickened skin.

The skin over the body generally is dry, and in some parts there is fine desquamation present?for example, over left upper arm. In connection with this dry condition of the skin is to be noted the fact that though the child perspires freely over the head, little or no perspiration of the body ever takes place.

The scrotum is rather large, and the skin of it thick. There is no inguinal hernia. Temperature taken once was 98*2 F. (rectal); urine not obtained. The cry of the child is peculiar, and like that of the cretin. Hearing and sight, tested roughly, seem normal. Heart normal. On examination, the lungs show presence of a slight bronchial catarrh. k Family History.?The mother was born in Lancashire, but never resided there for any length of time. Father was of -Irish descent, but resided mostly in England. This is the third child of the marriage, and the only one alive. First died at 18 months of age of diphtheria. The second died at 2 years of measles and inflammation of lungs. The mother had one miscarriage before the birth of the patient. But no further indication of specific disease could be obtained, either as affecting the mother or child.

No goitrous affection has been known to exist either in the family of the mother or father. M. C., aged 2 \ years, was admitted to Glasgow Royal Infirmary on 10th June, 1895, presenting the well marked signs of cretinism.

The child is stunted in its growth; the face is broad and heavy, and has the appearance of oedema; the skin is slightly glazed and pale, except over the most prominent parts of the cheeks, where there is a red flush; there is no decided yellowness of the skin. The nasal bones appear depressed, but the tip and nostrils are unduly broad.

The lips are large, thick, and everted, but there is no cyanotic tint. The mouth is constantly open, and the tongue, which is large and flabby, protrudes, whilst saliva dribbles from the corners of the mouth. There are only four teeth? two incisors above, and two below. The cheeks are large and heavy, and there is a large development of tissue in the submental region and round the neck. The division between the head and the trunk is marked by a groove. The scalp presents a tendency to scaliness. The hair is not easily extracted, and though rather thin, there is no actual baldness.

The anterior fontanelle is unduly open. The thyroid gland cannot be felt.

The skin of the trunk and limbs is dry and somewhat scaly. Over the chest, abdomen, and front of the legs and arms there is a brownish marling, whilst some of the superficial veins of the chest and neck are unduly well marked.

In the erect posture there is well marked lordosis; the abdomen, and especially the umbilicus, is prominent. The limbs are obviously enlarged, and of firm consistence. No pitting on pressure can be elicited anywhere. The child can neither sit nor stand without support, and cannot make any attempt at walking.

She is very drowsy, and is greatly wanting in intelligence. She has some difficulty in taking food, on account of the size of the tongue. When disturbed she cries greatly, and the cry is hoarse and deep in tone for a child of her age.

Protrusion of the tongue seems to have been first observed about the age of six months, and she has always been a "puffy" child; but the mother has not been of an observant nature, so that the history is very defective.

When between six and nine months old she was affected with abscesses on both sides of the neck, and these had to be opened. Otherwise she had been a healthy child, and the mother regarded the protrusion of the tongue as more important than the facts that she could neither walk nor talk. During her pregnancy the mother was far from well, but her complaint was vague, chiefly griping pain in the abdomen.

The labour was long and severe, but the child was born without the aid of instruments. The mother has had three other children, who are alive and healthy. No history in the family of any similar case.

On 17th June she was put upon \ gr. of thyroid tabloid twice daily, the dose being increased to ? gr. on 27th June,, and to 1 gr. on 9th July, this dose being maintained till 17th September, when it was discontinued on account of an eczematous eruption over the body, and a rise of temperature which had been going on for several days. Thyroid was. resumed in the dose of 1 gr. daily on 10th October.

The effect of treatment has been highly satisfactory. The aspect is now that of an intelligent child, and she is very much stronger, though she cannot yet stand without support. She readily sits up in bed, and, with slight support, she walks in a very slow and deliberate manner. She has grown taller^ but has lost weight. Simultaneously with the loss of weight there has been a great diminution in the girth of the limbs. The thigh has fallen from 9 in. to 8 in., the leg from 8J in. to 6J in., the upper arm from in. to 5J in., and the fore-arm from 6 in. to 5J in.

The temperatures during treatment have varied considerably. For a long time it was normal or subnormal, with an occasional rise to 100?. Later on, several irregular attacks of pyrexia occurred, with nothing beyond the eczematous rash or a little catarrh to account for them, unless they were associated with teething. She has now got all the incisors and two anterior molars in each jaw.

The tongue is now no longer protruded unduly, and the lips are not everted.

During her residence in hospital a little albumen has been observed in her urine, but never any sugar.

She has not yet acquired the art of speech.

Dr. Finlciyson, in discussing the subject, reminded the members that he had brought a case before the Society some time ago. It was under treatment for some time, and greatly improved. Six or seven months after discharge it was searched out at home, and it was found the people were not well off, the treatment had not been carried out, and the feeding was not satisfactory. It was again admitted to hospital, and the treatment resumed. It was apathetic at first, but soon became active and energetic, and showed fight with the other children in the ward. This was not a favourable case for continuous treatment, as the child could not be properly supervised on discharge on account of living at a distance from hospital. In another case, 22 months old, subjected to similar treatment, but more favourably situated for supervision, a great change took place, and improvement was still going on. In another young child, living near the Western Infirmary, the same treatment was adopted, and at present this child is taking thyroid extract once a week. The weight has diminished,
No. 2. I Vol. XLV.
the belly has become less, the tongue is now within the mouth, and it is now able to stand, although before treatment it could not even sit, and a remarkable transformation has taken place in the intelligence. He agreed with the diagnosis in Dr. Middleton's case, as the patient even now presented the characters of the disease which were brought out in the photographs taken earlier in the case. With regard to Dr. Ness's case, it was a cretinoid case, but a mild form; it might be described as cretinism complicated with a syphilitic form of rickets. The child was by no means helpless, as it could sit up, and the tongue did not protrude as it does in marked cases.

Dr. Robertson said that the cases described by Drs. Middleton and Finlayson were peculiarly gratifying, as showing what can be done now as compared with the past, when such cases would simply have been sent to institutions as hopeless. Apparently those cases of cretinism which approached the myxcedematous type were most successfully treated with thyroid extract. As regards Dr. Ness's case, it was no doubt cretinous, but he quite agreed with Dr. Finlayson's remarks. There seemed to be three types of the disease?viz., (1) simple cretins, (2) semi-cretins, (3) cretinous. In this case the child was still young, and the condition might yet progress to a fuller type. We are quite in the dark as to the use of the thyroid gland, and apparently either atrophy or hypertrophy of the thyroid gland gave rise to the condition. In either case the secretion is not supplied to the system. Thyroid gland may supply this want primarily, or it may act as a cerebral stimulus. In ordinary cases of illness, such as fevers, great changes have been known to take place in imperfectly developed children. In asylum practice the thyroid extract has been tried, apparently with good results. Dr. Bruce, assistant to Dr. Clouston, treated 60 cases, and 23 recovered. Many of these cases had fallen into a chronic condition. In these cases something may have been supplied which was wanting, and the cerebral cortex may have been stimulated.

As the members well knew, he had used other means to stimulate the cortex, such as hot water, at a temperature of 110? F., round the head, and cerebrin from fresh sheep's brains. These probably acted as a stimulus to the brain, and it may be supposed that thyroid extract acts in a similar manner.

Dr. Lindsay Steven objected to the phrase " syphilitic form of rickets."

Mr. Maylard hoped that Dr. Ness would bring the case before the Society after a course of treatment. A quarryman, aet. 55, was admitted to the Western Infirmary on 14th October, 1895. He came complaining of cough and expectoration of yellow matter, with pain and fulness in the epigastric and hepatic regions.


III.?A SPECIMEN OF A HEART AND PERICARDIUM FROM

The severe illness seemed to date back three months, when his stomach ?ot bad. He had been troubled with winter cough for twenty years. On examination before admission, it was supposed at first that the case might be one of bronchitis and emphysema, with unusual prominence of the liver, from depression of its upper surface and from congestion. In view of this provisional diagnosis, and of the facts of the "postmortem examination, the physical signs found on admission by Dr. Clow, the resident physician, are very interesting. He found comparative dulness at the right back, reaching to the angle of the scapula, with diminished vocal resonance and breath-sounds, and with tenderness on percussion there. Otherwise the only signs were those of bronchitis and emphysema, with epigastric pulsation.

Examination of the liver showed plainly that it was enlarged beyond what was supposed at first, and during his three weeks' stay in the ward its growth was quite notable, and obscure irregularities of the surface and edge became very plain. Peritoneal friction sounds and fremitus were easily demonstrated to the students, the explanation postmortem being found in a piece of omentum which was adherent to the anterior surface of the liver.

After admission to the wards, the cough, which had been very loud and of an extremely harsh, hawking character, became less, and the expectoration was also less. On the other hand, the pain in the liver and stomach region became 132 .


Meetings of Societies.

worse and worse, requiring repeated subcutaneous doses of morphia to procure relief. The temperature was not high, but reached 100? on two or three occasions. He wasted visibly. There was but little vomiting, and that only a few days before death. Jaundice did not supervene, although the colour of the patient was very dingy, and quite suggestive of malignant disease. He died on 3rd November.

The liver was of enormous size, and weighed nearly 20 lb. It was a mass of cancerous growths. A large mass of glands existed in the porta of the liver; but no cancerous disease was found in the stomach, pancreas, or intestine. The lower lobe of the right lung was condensed, and presented large drops of creamy pus, as if from bronchiectasis. The obstruction to the tubes was found in the presence of a cancerous tumour, measuring 3 by centimetres, involving the bronchus going to that part. Some small cancerous nodules were found in the condensed portion of the lung. A mass of hard, somewhat calcareous, glands was found at the root of the lung. The edges of the lungs were somewhat emphysematous, and the heart slightly enlarged. The physical examination is very strikingly suggestive of cancer of the lung, now that we know that such existed; but I confess it did not occur to me, and I supposed the signs to indicate one of those partial consolidations which so often accompany bronchitis and emphysema. If the idea had occurred to me, it would, no doubt, have been at once set aside as extremely improbable, inasmuch as secondary deposits in the liver from disease in the lung are very unlikely to occur, although in this case this seems to have been the sequence of events.

Dr. Coats made a preliminary objection to the term "deposits in the liver" as used in the billet, as the term tended to perpetuate a radically false idea. At one time a person suffering from cancer was regarded as having something in his system which had to be deposited, but the fact was that, although the first germs were deposited, yet the lesion itself was a tissue the result of vigorous growth. The case itself proved interesting and peculiar. Permission was given to examine only the abdomen, where the primary growth was looked for, but not being found, the diaphragm was cut through and the lower lobe of the right lung was found condensed. The bronchiectasis, with distinct purulent bronchitis, suggested a tumour at the root of the lung. Cancer of the lung is very uncommon as a cause of secondary tumour in the liver. In his experience, secondary tumours have been .more frequently found in the brain substance, and in the bones. It thus became a question how infection passed from the lung to the liver. The appearances, microscopically, in the liver showed that the infection had arrived there by the portal vein, as the new formation was at its onset in the hepatic capillaries and portal vein, but it seemed a long way round from the lung to the portal vein. There were indications of the path of infection afforded by the condition of the lymphatic glands of the abdomen and front of the vertebral column; these were enlarged and infiltrated with cancer, and the portal vein had apparently conveyed infection from these enlarged glands to the liver. On the other hand, the lymph channels of the lung have a connection with the abdominal glands. Not unfrequently the carbonaceous matter of the lungs is found in the lymphatic glands of the abdomen. So it was in this case, showing that the pulmonary lymphatic circulation passed to the abdominal glands. How generally, and in this particular case, does the lymphatic circulation pass <from the lungs to the abdominal glands ? In this case, the glands at the root of the lung were in a shrunken cicatricial condition, of old standing and probably dating from infancy, and they were partly calcified. The usual channels were blocked, and so the lymphatic circulation was diverted into the abdominal channels, and the cancerous infection followed the same course. The cancer tissue was similar in the lung and the liver, and consisted of small cells with scanty stroma.

In the liver the small cells were in small nodules, showing the earlier stages, and in these the cells were crowded in the capillary blood-vessels.

Dr. Eben. Duncan said he saw a somewhat similar case last year in a patient who had suffered from lung affection for many years. The disease was regarded as a tubercular one, but in post-mortem examination it was discovered to be nothing of the sort. The patient had recurrent haemoptysis for twenty five years, and had repeated attacks of general congestion of the lungs, and had rales at the apices now and again. He was a robust man, and had no appearance of .cancerous cachexia. The patient died of haemoptysis, and at the post-mortem cancer was found at the root of the lung, which involved the right apex, the bronchus, and the oesophagus, and there was a secondary growth in the liver. The disease did not occlude the oesophagus. During life the patient hawked up bloody mucus. , Dr. Robertson was very much interested in the cases described by Drs. Finlayson and Duncan. He had wondered how the secondary deposits came about. He thought Dr. Coats had worked out the case thoroughly, and had satisfactorily explained the infection of the liver. He thought the term secondary deposits quite correct, for the secondary growths arose from small deposits in the liver. In Dr. Finlayson's case it was noted that the area over the base of the lung behind was tender on percussion. This was of peculiar interest as regards the probable segmentary relations of the thoracic viscera, a subject which had been skilfully treated by Head and Mackenzie. We frequently meet with cases where a patient after a heavy meal has severe pain in the epigastrium and great tenderness to touch, and as the pain subsides the tender area also ceases to exist; and so with disease or acute disorders of any organ we may have associated related hypersensitive areas.

Mr. Maylard said that what exercised his thoughts, apparently in common with others present, while he listened to Dr. Finlayson's case, was the mode by which the liver had become secondarily affected. Knowing that, anatomically, lymphatics pass from the surface of the liver through the diaphragm to the subpleural tissue, he thought it possible that infection might have taken place through these channels. Such a theory, however, appeared untenable from the fact that, as Dr. Coats states, no adhesion existed between the tumour in the lung and the diaphragmatic pleural surface. He thought that Dr. Duncan's case might possibly throw some light, inasmuch as in his case the oesophagus had been implicated in the primary growth. It was known that when carcinoma involved the lower part of the oesophagus secondary growths developed in the liver. This theory, however, appeared also useless, because Dr. Coats affirms that the lower part of the oesophagus in Dr. Finlayson's case was not involved. The case would present no difficulties if there had been a more general systemic infection; but the fact that the liver appeared, so far as the somewhat limited examination of the body indicated, the only organ involved, and this, too, to such an enormous and uniform extent, the only feasible explanation seemed to be infection through the portal system. Dr. Coats' explanation was a most ingenious one, and though somewhat difficult to imagine, yet seemed to offer the most reasonable solution of the problem.

Mr. H. E. Clark thought the case detailed by Dr. Coats an interesting one. The explanation of secondary formation was not the only possible one. There was another channel, namely, the communication between the subpleural lymphatics and those of the upper surface of the liver.

Dr. Hawthorne said he showed two cases of cancer last session where, secondary formation having occurred, the route of infection seemed fairly clear. In one (which is described at p. 96) the primary growth was in the lung, and the wide infection which followed indicated diffusion by the systemic circulation.

Dr. Coats said that in Dr. Hawthorne's cases the typical course had been followed, the brain and bones having become infected; but Dr.Finlayson's case, being special, required special explanation.

4
II.?A CASE OF SPORADIC CRETINISM. By Dr. Middleton.

Date .
DateWeight.10th June, 

2 st. 

0 lbs. 
25th 

? 

11th July, 

29 th 

? 

13th August, 

27th 

? 

12* 

11 

10 
11 

,, 

10J 

Date. 

Weight. 

10th September, 

23rd 

,, 

9th October, 

24th 

? 

7th November, 

st. 11 lbs. 

it 

10 

? 

io| ? 

10 ? 

? 

10 ? 




A CASE OF PERICARDITIS WITH PLEURITIC EFFUSION AND THROMBUS OF THE LEFT SUBCLAVIAN VEIN. By Dr. Eben. Duncan. In this case the cardiac valves and endocardium had not yet been examined, and the Chairman proposed that the subject should be again brought up when this examination had been made. IV.?A SPECIMEN OF CANCER OF THE LUNG WITH ENORMOUS SECONDARY DEPOSITS IN THE LIVER. By Dr. Finlayson.