IEEE PHOTONICS SOCIETY SECTION


Keran Deng 0000-0002-8024-4480
College of Physics and Electronic Engineering
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Photo-Electric Functional Materials and Laser Technology
Chongqing Normal University
401331ChongqingChina

Yangyi Liu 
Intelligent Policing Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province
646000LuzhouChina

Fan Yang 
Nuclear Power Institute of China
610041ChengduSichuanChina

Jian Huang 
College of Mechanical Engineering
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Manufacturing Equipment Mechanism Design and Control
Chongqing Technology and Business University
400067ChongqingChina

Lianghua Wen 
Faculty of Intelligence Manufacturing
Yibin University
644000YibinSichuanChina

IEEE PHOTONICS SOCIETY SECTION
399276732C7E1A7105D9877EE12688E110.1109/ACCESS.2024.3470554Received 6 September 2024, accepted 26 September 2024, date of publication 30 September 2024, date of current version 16 December 2024.INDEX TERMS Super-resolution microscopy3D topography measurementMirau interferometryphotonic nanojetbroadband interferometry
With the rapid development of the information era and super-precision fabrication technology, micro/nano technology has already become one of the most important modern scientific directions.To quantitatively characterize the defects, uniformity, quality and performances of micro/ nano devices, three-dimensional topography measurement plays a key role and has become increasingly 6important.In this paper, we proposed a microsphere-aided Mirau-based broadband light interferometry method to achieve super-resolution 3D topography reconstruction.We numerically and experimentally demonstrated that dielectric microspheres, which can introduce the phenomenon of photonic nanojet, could break the optical diffraction limit and achieve super-resolution microscopy under white light illumination.The subwavelength samples, which could not be detected by conventional microscopy, were clearly visualized by the proposed microsphere-aided microscopy.Furthermore, we applied the advanced Stoilov five-step phase shifting method to reconstruct the 3D topography.The experiment results demonstrated that our proposed microsphere-aided broadband light interferometry method could successfully reconstruct the 3D shape of nanoscale cylinders with the feature size of 228 nm and height of 150 nm with an error of 2%.As microsphere is a low-cost, easy-to-use, and super-resolution imaging method, it bears great potential to be widely applied in both scientific and industrial areas.We believe that our proposed super-resolution three-dimensional topography measurement using microsphere-aided broadband light interferometry will be of great interests in semiconductor, material, laser eavesdropping, extreme fabrication and biomedical applications.

I. INTRODUCTION

Three-dimensional topography measurement of micro/ nano structure is an area with growing interests and needs, as it plays a key role in observing device performances and characterizing the defects, uniformity and quality of micro/ nano devices [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6].Because of its highaccuracy, non-invasive, and fast-speed method, topography measurement based on broadband light interferometry has been widely used in several domains such as semiconductor, optical film, and microscale metal surface [7], [8], [9], [10], [11].Although broadband light interferometry measurement system has a high axial resolution below nanometer, its lateral resolution is limited by the numerical aperture (NA) of the used objective.Due to the so-called diffraction limit, the imaging resolution of a conventional optical system is restrained to around half of the illuminating wavelength λ.To this date, several techniques have been realized to break the diffraction limit, including solid immersion lenses, nearfield scanning probes, confocal fluorescence microscopy and negative index materials [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17].STED super-resolution microscopy, PALM, and Storm super-resolution microscopy are using fluorescence to construct the images, and thus these methods are mostly applied in biomedical area rather than non-biology areas.Nevertheless, these methods are extremely difficult to be combined with broadband light interferometry measurement systems for 3D topography measurement because of their complicated engineering designs or variety of technical limitations.

Recently, there has been a rapidly developing label-free super-resolution optical microscopy technique using a dielectric microsphere to reach a subwavelength resolution at visible wavelengths.Utilizing an optically transparent microsphere with an index of 1.46 and a size of 5 µm, Z. Wang initially demonstrated its super-resolution capability under white light illumination.The microspheres were simply placed on the top of the object surface [18].The microsphere-assisted microscopy is a fast, wide-field, simple and label-free method.They used a transmission-mode widefield optical microscopy system with a conventional objective lens with a NA of 0.9 to reach a resolution of between λ/8 and λ/14.Later on, Yan et al. reported a microsphere-assisted scanning laser confocal nanoscopy to realize a later resolution of 25 nm in visible light [19].Darafsheh et al. experimentally showed that barium titanate glass microspheres (n ∼1.9-2.1) with diameters in the range 2-220 µm can be also used for super-resolution imaging of liquid-immersed nanostructures [20].Yang et al. studied that the super-resolution capability of a dielectric microsphere is governed by the waist of its photonic nanojet [21].Photonic nanojet, which is a scattered beam of light with a high-intensity main lobe and very narrow waist, can exist from such microparticles and produce a sharp focus [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27].More recently, M. Hong realized a sub-50 nm optical imaging resolution with a 10× objective lens using a high refractive index hyper-hemi-microsphere.By accurately tailoring the thickness of hyper-hemi-microsphere, it can resolve ∼50 nm feature with higher image fidelity and contrast compared with liquid immersed high refractive index microspheres [28].

As microsphere-assisted super-resolution optical microscopy is low-cost, easy-to-use, and quite compatible with other optical measurement systems, there are emerging studies of microsphere-aided 3D topography measurement in the visible range.F. Wang proposed three-dimensional superresolution microscopy via a microsphere superlens based on Linnik white light interferometry method.They used two objectives and BaTiO 3 microspheres randomly placed on the samples, realizing super-resolution 3D reconstruction with a lateral resolution of 50 nm and axial resolution of 10 nm [29].Later on, Kassamakov et al. also demonstrated the super-resolution 3D optical profiling capability of the microsphere-assisted interferometry method, presenting the constructed results on Blu-ray Disc and other grating structures [5], [30], [31].Recently, there has also been some reports of the 3D topography measurement using dielectric microspheres, reaching a high-resolution 3D reconstruction [2], [22], [29], [32], [33], [34], [35].In another modality, Z. Xie developed microsphere-assisted structured illumination microscopy to achieve 3D super-resolution reconstruction.In their experiment, a sinusoidal pattern produced by digital micro-mirror devices (DMD) was projected through the silica microsphere onto the sample.They could complete the 3D mapping of the samples with an enhanced lateral resolution [36].


II. SUPER-RESOLUTION OPTICAL MICROSCOPY USING DIELECTRIC MICROSPHERES

In this paper, we proposed a super-resolution threedimensional topography measurement using microsphereaided broadband light interferometry, which is based on the Mirau interferometry modality.We first numerically analyzed the focusing properties of a silica microsphere with a diameter of 10 µm using the finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) numerical method.The light source is set to be a linearly polarized propagating plane wave with the wavelength of 600 nm.The photonic nanojet, which is a narrow-focused highly intense electromagnetic spot with sub-wavelength lateral size, can be generated by dielectric microparticles.The size of the photonic nanojet is highly related to its imaging resolution of the microparticle.In the simulation result, we can see that a photonic nanojet is produced at the backside of the microsphere, as shown in Fig. 1.The corresponding full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the focusing spot is calculated to be 210 nm (0.35 λ), which is below the half wavelength.Obviously, the formation of photonics nanojet by a microscale particle does not follow the laws of geometrical optics.The photonics nanojet is around 1.2 µm long at the position of 0.5 µm away from the microsphere surface.In principle, the imaging resolution and magnification of the microsphere lenses are fundamentally related to their focus properties.The super-resolution capability is mainly governed by its spot waist (photonics nanojet).There are actually more ways to realize microsphere-assisted super-resolution microscopy by different materials, different diameters or even different immersion media [24], [27], [33].

Moreover, we have conducted a simulation regarding the focusing and electric field intensity distributions of a 10-µmdiameter sphere.In the simulation, we have used different refractive indices to obtain the focusing properties.When the refractive index increases, the focal length of the microsphere will decrease.As the refractive index increases, the FWHM becomes smaller, owning a better lateral resolution.Nevertheless, as the refractive index increases, the focal intensity drops, causing a worse signal-to-noise ratio in the image.Consequently, the refractive index should be properly selected for both high resolution and high signal-to-noise ratio.

To experimentally demonstrate its super-resolution capability of a dielectric microsphere, we first developed a conventional wide-field optical microscopy in the visible range.We used a white-light LED source with the center wavelength of 600 nm and an objective with 100 X magnification and NA of 0.9 (Nikon LU Plan 100x BD).The microsphere was made of silica with the refractive index of 1.46 and diameter of 10 µm.In the experiment of two-dimensional super-resolution imaging, we prepared two different samples including nanoscale gratings with the feature size of 139 nm and nanoscale cylinders with the feature size of 168 nm.The feature sizes of the samples are far below the resolution limitation of the developed conventional microscopy system, so we cannot observe these structures by a conventional microscopy system.It should be noted that the microspheres were fabricated by CVD (Chemical vapor deposition) by a company named ''BaseLine Chrom Tech Research Centre, China''.The size will be deviated due to the fabricating errors and thus the diameter of the microsphere should be 10 ± 0.3 µm according their SEM (Scanning Electron Microscope) images, as shown in Fig. 2.

In the experiment, we have randomly placed a group of microspheres (multiple microspheres) in contact with the sample and got the super-resolution results, as shown in Fig. 3. Fig. 3 (a) presents the SEM (Scanning Electron Microscopy) image of the gratings with the linewidth of 139 nm, which is much smaller than the optical imaging resolution limitation in the visible range.Under conventional optical microscopy with an NA of 0.9, the nanoscale gratings cannot be visualized, as shown in Fig. 3 (b).Fig. 3 (c) shows the super-resolution imaging of the nanoscale gratings by the microsphere-aided microscopy.The inset shows the profile of the grating, where we can clearly discern the details of each line.Additionally, Fig. 3 (d) gives the SEM results of the nanoscale cylinders with the feature size of 168 nm, which is also below the optical resolution of the conventional method.We also used the conventional optical microscopy to detect the sub-wavelength structures, but still could not see the nanoscale cylinders as their sizes are much smaller than the resolving power of the conventional system, as shown in Fig. 3 (e).By using the proposed microsphereaided microscopy, the nanoscale cylinders can be noticeably resolved, as shown in Fig. 3 (f).From the 2D imaging results, we can see that microsphere-assisted microscopy can achieve super-resolution imaging below ∼0.25λ.It should be noted that the imaging quality is satisfying only in the center area of the microsphere, i.e., the imaging quality is blurred in the marginal area of the microsphere.


III. MICROSPHERE-AIDED 3D TOPOGRAPHY MEASUREMENT SYSTEM USING MIRAU-BASED BROADBAND LIGHT INTERFEROMETRY

Furthermore, we proposed a microsphere-aided 3D topography measurement system using Mirau-based broadband light interferometry.The system mainly contained a LED light source with the center wavelength of 600 nm, a collimated lens, a beam splitter with 50% transmission ratio, a 50X Mirau interferoscope, silica microspheres, PZT (Piezoelectric transducer) stage with a moving accuracy of 0.2 nm, a tube lens and a CCD camera with 576 X 768 pixels.The Mirau interferoscope (50X CF IC Epi Plan, Nikon) has an NA of 0.55 and a resolution of ∼500 nm under visible illumination.The system setup of the microsphere-aided Mirau-based broadband light interferometry is shown in Fig. 4. The broadband light collimated by a lens impinged on the beam splitter 183660 VOLUME 12, 2024 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE.Restrictions apply.and transmitted through the Mirau interferoscope.One beam reflected onto the mirror of the interference objective and another reached on the sample by passing through the microsphere.The two beams interfered with each other and then focused by a tube lens.The PZT stage axially scanned the sample with a stable step size.Finally, the CCD camera recorded all the interferograms with different scanning positions.

We used advanced Stoilov five-step phase shifting method to reconstruct the 3D topography measurement of the samples [37].Assuming that the phase shifting value is −2θ, −θ, 0, θ, 2θ, respectively, for five different scanning positions, the interfered intensities of those five interferograms can be expressed as
               I 1 (x, y) = I (x, y){1 + m(x, y) cos[ϕ(x, y) − 2θ]} I 2 (x, y) = I (x, y){1 + m(x, y) cos[ϕ(x, y) − θ]} I 3 (x, y) = I (x, y){1 + m(x, y) cos[ϕ(x, y)]} I 4 (x, y) = I (x, y){1 + m(x, y) cos[ϕ(x, y) + θ]} I 5 (x, y) = I (x, y){1 + m(x, y) cos[ϕ(x, y) + 2θ]} (1)
where I 1 , I 2 , I 3 , I 4 , and I 5 are the intensities for the 5 different scanning positions, I (x, y) is the background intensity, m(x, y) is the modulation of the interference fringes, x and y are the locations of the 2D inteferogram, ϕ(x, y) is the phase distribution of the interferograms.After solving Eq (1), we can get the relationship between the intensities and phase distribution, written as
tan(ϕ) = 2(I 2 − I 4 ) 2I 3 − I 5 − I 1 1 1 − [ (I 1 −I 5 ) 2(I 2 −I 4 ) ] 2
(2)

where we can get the phase distribution from the advanced Stoilov five-step phase shifting method.Finally, the height information of each pixel on the sample will be calculated using Eq (3).
h(x, y) = φ(x, y) 2π * λ 0 2(3)
where h(x, y) is the height information, ϕ(x, y) is the phase distribution, λ 0 is the center wavelength of the light source.

In the experiment, we set the axially scanning step size of 100 nm.The interferograms based on the microsphere-aided Mirau interferometry system were obtained in sequence, as shown in Fig. 5.The sample is of nanoscale cylinders with the feature size of 228 nm and height of 150 nm.After acquiring the interferograms of different scanning positions, the advanced Stoilov five-step phase shifting method was applied to recover the 3D topography of the measured sample.The super-resolution 3D reconstructed results are shown in Fig. 6 (a), where we can clearly see the structures below the diffraction limit and its 3D shape.To quantitatively analyze the reliability and accuracy of our proposed method, we plot the cross-section profile of the recovered 3D shape, which shows a 153 nm height, as shown in Fig. 6 (b).

To verify the measurement accuracy, we used a commercial profilometer (DektakXT, Bruker Company) with a resolution of 0.1 nm to compare the height information.The height of the nanoscale cylinders was measured to be 150 nm by the commercial profilometer, as shown in Fig. 7.In our proposed super-resolution three-dimensional topography measurement, the height of nanoscale cylinders was measured to be 153 nm.Therefore, the measurement error is ∼ 3 nm, which is 2% error compared with the original sample.We think the main reason for causing the measurement error is that the microspheres bring in optical aberrations.The optical aberrations including chromatic aberration will cause imaging distortions and therefore have negative influences on the phase reconstruction.Additionally, we also recovered another sample of nanoscale gratings with the feature size of 198 nm and height of 110 nm.The feature size of the grating is far below the resolution limitation of the used 50X Mirau objective with a numerical aperture of 0.55, whose resolution is around 545 nm.The 3D reconstruction results are displayed in Fig. 8 (a).The subwavelength structures can be clearly discerned by the proposed microsphere-aided broadband light interferometry method.We also measured the used nanoscale gratings by the commercial profilometer to demonstrate the height of 110 nm.The cross-section profile of the recovered 3D shape presents that the height of the structure is between 110 nm and 112 nm, as shown in Fig. 8 (b).The measurement error is ∼ 2 nm, which is 2% compared with the original sample.Similarly, the measurement error is mainly caused by the optical imaging aberrations caused by the microsphere.


IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

We have analyzed the parameters of photonic nanojet formed by a dielectric microsphere.The size of the photonic nanojet is highly related to the imaging resolution of the microsphereaided microscopy.In the simulation by FDTD method, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the photonic nanojet is ∼210 nm (0.35 λ), which is below the half wavelength.Then we developed a conventional wide-field 2D optical microscopy under white light illumination, and placed 10 µm silica microspheres on the sample.Although the feature sizes of the samples (nanoscale gratings with the feature size of 139 nm and nanoscale cylinders with the feature size of 168 nm.) are far below the optical resolution limitation, we can still clearly observe them using our proposed microsphere-aided microscopy.

Furthermore, we demonstrated a microsphere-aided 3D topography measurement system using Mirau-based broadband light interferometry, successfully reconstructing the sub-wavelength 3D shape.One sample is of nanoscale cylinders with the feature size of 228 nm and height of 150 nm.Another sample is nanoscale grating with the feature size of 198 nm and height of 110 nm.The feature sizes of the nanoscale cylinders and gratings are far below the resolution limitation of the used 50X Mirau objective 183662 VOLUME 12, 2024 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE.Restrictions apply.

with a numerical aperture of 0.55, whose resolution is around 545 nm.Cored on the microsphere-aided broadband light interferometry, we collected several interferograms by axially scanning the sample.Advanced Stoilov five-step phase shifting method was applied to reconstruct the 3D topography measurement.In the experimental results, the measurement error is ∼2% compared with the original sample.This is mainly due to the optical aberrations caused by the silica microspheres, which introduce the imaging distortions and thus have negative influences on the accuracy of 3D reconstruction.As super-resolution measurement using dielectric microsphere is easy-to-use and compatible with other systems, especially within white light range.We do not need to re-design the traditional broadband light interferometry system, we simply used its super-resolution capability of microsphere and dispersed microsphere onto the sample.

In this work, we numerically and experimentally demonstrated that microspheres could break the optical diffraction limit and achieve super-resolution microscopy under white light illumination.The structures with feature sizes below the conventional optical resolution constraint cannot be resolved by a conventional microscopy, but can be clearly visualized by the proposed microsphere-aided microscopy.Furthermore, we proposed a super-resolution 3D topography measurement using microsphere-aided broadband light interferometry.The system was based on a Mirau interferometer, introducing interference between sample arm and reference arm.We dispersed silica microspheres onto the sample, and axially scanned the sample with a PZT stage.A CCD camera recorded all the interferograms at different positions.We applied advanced Stoilov five-step phase shifting method to reconstruct the 3D topography measurement.The experiment results demonstrated that our proposed microsphere-aided broadband light interferometry method could successfully reconstruct the 3D shape of subwavelength structures.To demonstrate the resolution of our proposed super-resolution three-dimensional topography measurement, we used the profilometer to probe both the used nanoscale cylinders and nanoscale gratings.The height of the nanoscale gratings and nanoscale cylinders were measured by the commercial profilometer to be 110 nm and 150 nm, respectively.The 3D topography of nanoscale cylinders with the feature size of 228 nm and height of 150 nm was recovered with a measurement error of 2%.Another sample of nanoscale grating with the feature size of 198 nm and height of 110 nm was rebuilt with a measurement error of 2%.

As microsphere is a low-cost, easy-to-use, and super-resolution imaging method, it bears great potential to be widely applied in both scientific and industrial areas.We also believe that the proposed superresolution three-dimensional topography measurement using microsphere-aided broadband light interferometry will be of great interests in semiconductor, material, extreme fabrication and biomedical applications.

FIGURE 1 .
1
FIGURE 1. Numerical simulation of the light focusing by a silica microsphere with a diameter of 10µm.Electric field intensity |E 2 | distribution around the microsphere.The corresponding full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the focusing spot is calculated to be 0.35 λ at the illumination wavelength of 600 nm.


FIGURE 2 .
2
FIGURE 2. The SEM (Scanning Electron Microscope) image of the used microspheres.


FIGURE 3 .
3
FIGURE 3. Two-dimensional microsphere-aided super-resolution images of the gratings and nanoscale cylinders.(a) SEM (Scanning Electron Microscopy) image of the nanoscale gratings with the feature size of 139 nm, (b) conventional microscopy of the nanoscale gratings, which are not discerned.(c) Super-resolution imaging of the gratings with a 10-µ m-diameter silica microsphere under white light illumination.The inset shows the profile of the grating, where the red-dashed line marks.(d)SEM image of the nanoscale cylinders with the feature size of 168 nm, (e) conventional microscopy of the nanoscale cylinders, which are not resolved, (f) Super-resolution imaging of the cylinders by the proposed microsphere-aided method.The scale bar: 500 nm.The numerical aperture of the used objective is 0.9.


FIGURE 4 .
4
FIGURE 4. System setup of the microsphere-aided Mirau-based broadband light interferometry.The broadband light collimated by a lens impinged on the beam splitter and transmitted through the Mirau interferoscope.One beam reflected onto the mirror and another reached on the sample by passing through the microsphere.The two beams interfered with each other and then focused by a tube lens.Finally, the camera recorded all the interferograms with different scanning positions.PZT: Piezoelectric transducer.


FIGURE 5 .
5
FIGURE 5. Interferograms of the microsphere-aided broadband light interferometry system at different scanning positions.The sample is of nanoscale cylinders with the feature size of 228 nm and height of 150 nm.The scale bar: 2µ m.


FIGURE 6 .
6
FIGURE 6. Super-resolution 3D topography reconstruction of the nanoscale cylinders with the feature size of 228 nm and height of 150 nm.(a) The recovered 3D topography of the nanoscale cylinders using our proposed microsphere-aided broadband light interferometry, (b) the cross-section profile of the recovered 3D shape, which shows a 153 nm height.The rectangle in (a) illustrates the location of the presented profile.


FIGURE 7 .
7
FIGURE 7. The height measurement of the nanoscale cylinders by a commercial profilometer, showing 150 nm of the height difference.


FIGURE 8 .
8
FIGURE 8. Super-resolution 3D topography reconstruction of the nanoscale gratings with the feature size of 198 nm and height of 110 nm.(a) The recovered 3D topography of the nanoscale gratings using our proposed microsphere-aided broadband light interferometry, (b) the cross-section profile of the recovered 3D shape, which shows a 110 nm and 112 nm height.The rectangle in (a) illustrates the location of the presented profile.

The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ VOLUME 12, 2024
VOLUME 12, 2024   
Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE. Restrictions apply.
   VOLUME 12, 2024    Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE. Restrictions apply.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62305038 and Grant 62105047; in part by the Science and Technology Research Program of Chongqing Municipal Education Commission under Grant KJQN202200567; in part by the Special Funding for Postdoctoral Research Projects of Chongqing under Grant 2023CQBSHTB3135; in part by Sichuan Science and Technology Program under Grant 2023YFQ0093; in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Chongqing, China, under Grant 2024NSCQ-MSX4631; in part by the Intelligent Policing Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province under Grant ZNJW2022ZZQN003; and in part by Chongqing Normal University Initiation Grant under Grant 02060404/202111000341.
Threedimensional printed scaffolds with controlled micro-/nanoporous surface topography direct chondrogenic and osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. A Prasopthum, M Cooper, K M Shakesheff, J Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 1121May 2019

Three-dimensional microarchitected materials and devices using nanoparticle assembly by pointwise spatial printing. M S Saleh, C Hu, R Panat, Sci. Adv. 33Mar. 2017, Art. no. e1601986

A threedimensional topography measurement for micro-nano film buckling based on the focusing evaluation function. H K Jia, S B Wang, L A Li, X L Xue, Z M Guo, Phys. Proc. 19Jan. 2011

High-efficiency dynamic three-dimensional topography measurement using the phase shift generation method. Q Deng, Y Liu, F Zhu, J Hou, F Xiong, Y Zhang, Apr. 202411364Photonics

Nano-photonic metrics: Fundamentals and experimental demonstration. T Ohteki, S.-I Sakai, N Tate, Photonics. 98551Aug. 2022

Review of optical measurement techniques for measuring three-dimensional topography of innerwall-shaped parts. F Jiao, L Liu, W Cheng, C Li, X Zhang, Measurement. 202Oct. 2022. 111794

Five-step phase-shift-based multiwavelength averaging for extrinsic Fabry-Perot interferometric sensors. Z Liu, Q Yao, J Xia, G Liu, S Xiong, Q Hou, Photonics. 10101076Sep. 2023

Topography measurement of large-range microstructures through advanced Fourier-transform method and phase stitching in scanning broadband light interferometry. Y Zhou, Y Tang, Y Yang, S Hu, Oct. 2017Micromachines8319

Dimensional metrology of smooth micro structures utilizing the spatial modulation of white-light interference fringes. Y Zhou, Y Tang, Q Deng, J Liu, J Wang, L Zhao, Opt. Laser Technol. 93Aug. 2017

Accurate white light phaseshifting interferometry under PZT scanning error. W Chen, Y Xiong, J Chen, S Chen, Opt. Lasers Eng. 169Oct. 2023. 107728

Characterization of gap-plasmon-based metasurfaces with scanning white-light interferometry. I M Akhmedzhanov, D V Baranov, E V Zavedeev, R A Deshpande, S I Bozhevolnyi, J. Opt. Technol. 897378Jul. 2022

Enhanced detection of fluorescence fluctuations for high-throughput super-resolution imaging. W Zhao, S Zhao, Z Han, X Ding, G Hu, L Qu, Y Huang, X Wang, H Mao, Y Jiu, Y Hu, J Tan, X Ding, L Chen, C Guo, H Li, Nature Photon. 179Sep. 2023

Multiview confocal super-resolution microscopy. Y Wu, Nature. 6007888Dec. 2021

Super-resolution imaging via lenses with angular magnification. Y Zhou, Z Ma, D Liao, K Zhang, S Wu, J Ma, X Dai, Z Shang, Z Wen, G Chen, Adv. Opt. Mater. 129Mar. 2024. 2301362

SOFISM: Super-resolution optical fluctuation image scanning microscopy. A Sroda, A Makowski, R Tenne, U Rossman, G Lubin, D Oron, R Lapkiewicz, Optica. 7101308Oct. 2020

Near-field projection optical microscope (NPOM) as a new approach to nanoscale super-resolved imaging. A Sanjeev, D Glukhov, R S Rafeeka, A Karsenty, Z Zalevsky, Sci. Rep. 13115408Sep. 2023

Multi-pulse time delay integration method for flexible 3D super-resolution range-gated imaging. W Xinwei, L Youfu, Z Yan, Opt. Exp. 2367820Mar. 2015

Optical virtual imaging at 50 nm lateral resolution with a whitelight nanoscope. Z Wang, W Guo, L Li, B Luk'yanchuk, A Khan, Z Liu, Z Chen, M Hong, Nature Commun. 21218Mar. 2011

Microspherecoupled scanning laser confocal nanoscope for sub-diffraction-limited imaging at 25 nm lateral resolution in the visible spectrum. Y Yan, L Li, C Feng, W Guo, S Lee, M Hong, ACS Nano. 82Feb. 2014

Optical super-resolution by high-index liquid-immersed microspheres. A Darafsheh, G F Walsh, L Negro, V N Astratov, Appl. Phys. Lett. 10114Oct. 2012. 141128

Super-resolution imaging of a dielectric microsphere is governed by the waist of its photonic nanojet. H Yang, R Trouillon, G Huszka, M A M Gijs, Nano Lett. 168Aug. 2016

Label-free super-resolution imaging of adenoviruses by submerged microsphere optical nanoscopy. L Li, W Guo, Y Yan, S Lee, T Wang, Light, Sci. Appl.. 29e104Sep. 2013

Coupling nanowire quantum dots to optical waveguides by microsphere-induced photonic nanojet. S I Tsintzos, K Tsimvrakidis, J C Gates, A W Elshaari, P G R Smith, V Zwiller, C Riziotis, Photonics. 114343Apr. 2024

Super-resolution imaging with patchy microspheres. Q Shang, F Tang, L Yu, H Oubaha, D Caina, S Yang, S Melinte, C Zuo, Z Wang, R Ye, Nov. 20218513Photonics

Microsphere-assisted, nanospot, non-destructive metrology for semiconductor devices. S Kwon, J Park, K Kim, Y Cho, M Lee, Light, Sci. Appl. 11132Feb. 2022

Contrast enhancement of microsphere-assisted super-resolution imaging in dark-field microscopy. Y Zhou, Y Tang, Q Deng, L Zhao, S Hu, Appl. Phys. Exp. 108Aug. 2017. 082501

Influence of the background medium on imaging performance of microsphere-assisted super-resolution microscopy. A Darafsheh, Opt. Lett. 424735Feb. 2017

Sub-50 nm optical imaging in ambient air with 10× objective lens enabled by hyper-hemi-microsphere. G Wu, Y Zhou, M Hong, Light, Sci. Appl.. 12149Feb. 2023

Three-dimensional super-resolution morphology by near-field assisted white-light interferometry. F Wang, L Liu, P Yu, Z Liu, H Yu, Y Wang, W J Li, Sci. Rep. 6124703Apr. 2016

3D super-resolution optical profiling using microsphere enhanced mirau interferometry. I Kassamakov, S Lecler, A Nolvi, A Leong-Hoï, P Montgomery, E Haeggström, Sci. Rep. 713683Jun. 2017

Dielectric microspheres enhance microscopy resolution mainly due to increasing the effective numerical aperture. A Darafsheh, V Abbasian, Light, Sci. Appl.. 12122Jan. 2023

Microsphere-assisted microscopy: From 2D to 3D super-resolution imaging. P Montgomery, S Perrin, S Lecler, Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Transparent Opt. Netw. (ICTON). 20th Int. Conf. Transparent Opt. Netw. (ICTON)Jul. 2018

G Wu, M Hong, Optical microsphere nano-imaging: Progress and challenges,'' Engineering. May 202436

Microsphere-assisted interferometry with high numerical apertures for 3D topography measurements. L Hüser, P Lehmann, Appl. Opt. 5961695Feb. 2020

A review of microsphere superresolution imaging techniques. W Jiang, J Wang, Y Yang, Y Bu, Sensors. 2482511Apr. 2024

3D superresolution reconstruction using microsphere-assisted structured illumination microscopy. Z Xie, S Hu, Y Tang, X Liu, J Liu, Y He, IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 3122Nov. 15, 2019

He is currently a Lecturer and a Researcher with Chongqing Key Laboratory of Manufacturing Equipment Mechanism Design and Control, Chongqing Technology and Business University. His research interest includes the design the optical coherence tomography systems. LIANGHUA WEN received the Ph.D. degree in engineering and has extensive experience in adaptive optical signal and super-resolution research. He is currently a Professor and the Deputy Director of the School of Intelligent Manufacturing. J Li, L Zhong, S Liu, Y Zhou, J Xu, J Tian, X Lu, ' , He specializes in non-destructive testing techniques, including computed tomography (CT), optical coherence tomography (OCT), and microscopy. His work focuses on advancing imaging technologies to improve the accuracy and efficiency of non-destructive testing methods. JIAN HUANG received the Bachelor of Engineering degree in mechatronics engineering from Chongqing University, and the Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Optics and Electronics. ChinaMar. 2017744307School of Physics and Electronic Engineering, Chongqing Normal University ; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences ; Yibin UniversityHe is an Associate Professor with Sichuan Police College. His research interest includes non-destructive testing. FAN YANG received the Ph.D. degree in engineering and has made significant contributions to the field through his research and publications. He is currently a Professor with the Nuclear Power Institute of China. where he also serves as the Dean of the School of Automation and Electromechanical Engineering. He is a Guest Researcher with the Chinese Academy of Sciences and a member of the China Electronics Society. He is an Adjunct Master's Supervisor with China West Normal University. He is also a Reviewer for the National Natural Science Foundation of China