DEIXIS TYPES IN MARRYING (MADURESE CULINARY WRITING)


Afiifah Al Rosyiidah afiifah.rosyiidah@trunojoyo.ac.id 
Article History
Sastra Inggris Universitas Trunojoyo Madura
Sastra Inggris Universitas Trunojoyo Madura


Darul Hikmah darul.hikmah@trunojoyo.ac.id 
Article History
Sastra Inggris Universitas Trunojoyo Madura
Sastra Inggris Universitas Trunojoyo Madura


DEIXIS TYPES IN MARRYING (MADURESE CULINARY WRITING)
10.30996/parafrase.v22i2.7398Al Rosyiidah & Hikmah HAL: 254 -261 DOI: https://doi.org/10.30996/parafrase.v22i2.7398 PARAFRASE: JURNAL KAJIAN KEBAHASAAN DAN KESUSASTRAAN Oktober 2022, Vol. 22, No. 2, ISSN: 0854-6162 (cetak) /2580-5886 (elektronik) 254 During the data collection process, field notes are also used. The data are analyzed using an interactive model of data analysis, which includes data reduction, data display, and data verification/claim. The study's findings demonstrate that all types of deixes are found in Madurese Culinary Writings. Person deixis becomes the most frequent type of deixis including all data found, it has 70 data. The next position provides that place deixis is in the second position having 31 data. Then, discourse deixis has 21 data and time deixis has 13 data, and the lowest frequent type of deixis is social deixis having 6 data. Besides, the references found in this research: person deixes found are "I", "we", "us", "my" as first person deixes; "You" as second person deixis; "They", "it" as third person deixes which belong to person deixes; Place deixes found are "Serpang", "Bangkalan", "Arosbaya"; Time deixes found are "then", "after", "for 3-4 hours" ; discourse deixes found were "this", "that"; and the last, social deixes found are "the seller", "my parents".Deixis, Madurese Culinary Writings
Every speaker should comprehend deixis to enhance the quality of communication with the interlocutor. This study investigates kinds of deixis and their references found in Madurese Culinary Writings. The data source of the study is the students' Madurese Culinary Writings. It utilizes a qualitative research design. The data are gathered through observation and document review.

INTRODUCTION

Communication is a means to interact with human beings. Communication means an exchange of thoughts and feelings among human beings. Language is needed as a tool to communicate. In order to communicate well, it is necessary to have clear language skills that are easily accessible to others. Language has a reference system to make it easier for its speakers to communicate. However, the existence of this reference system sometimes causes perplexity and ambiguity. Look at the following example: "Sekarang bayar, besok gratis." (Pay Now, Free Tomorrow). This sentence is an example of a sentence written in a food seller's cart. At glance, it looks trivial, but when we look more deeply, of course we will ask "Will we be able to buy these foods for free tomorrow?". Certainly, the writing will be the same "Pay now, free tomorrow" on the next day. Then, when is "tomorrow"? The referent of the word "tomorrow" is still unclear and causes confusion. To understand a referent, speakers must understand about deixis because there is a close relationship between deixis and reference.

Deixis interpretation also involves contexts such as Pragmatics as the main subject of study. Pragmatics is a study of meaning conveyed by the speaker or writer, and enjoyed by the listener or reader (Yule, 1996). Furthermore, he simply defines deixis as a technical term that comes from Greek which means 'designation' through language.

A word is said to be deixis if the reference moves or changes, depending on who is speaking, when and where the words are spoken (Purwo, 1984). It can be said that a word is called deixis when it has a changing reference, depending on the context. In fact, almost all speeches contain deixis, both oral and written.

Deixis is a component of Pragmatics. Deixis, according to Yule (1996), is the term for language-based pointing. Deixis is a feature of human language in which the use of a particular expression determines its referential meaning (Williams, 2019). Knowing deixis makes it simple to utilize deictic words while speaking to an audience since it demonstrates the relationship between language and context. Person, time, place, discourse, and social deixis are the five categories of deixis that Levinson (1983) proposed.

To improve the quality of communication with the interlocutor, every speaker should understand deixis. Students as the educated generation should be taught and trained to be able to understand deixis and its referents well. One of the interesting media that can be used as a medium for learning deixis is through MARRYING (Madurese Culinary Writing).

MARRYING is one of the learning media that can be used in the classroom by exploring local wisdom of Madura. MARRYING is a writing written in English under the topic of Madurese local wisdom, especially Madurese culinary topic. There are several famous Madurese cuisines, including nasi bebek, nasi serpang, tajin sobih, sate lalat, and sewel.

The selection of Madurese culinary as a topic in this media will certainly provide added values for university students in Madura, which can bring a desire out to try the cuisines. Moreover, the students can appreciate and love one of the special culinary from Madura, where they live during their college years. In addition, it provides a positive value for the preservation and development of Madurese cuisines.

Deixis has been the subject of numerous prior investigations. Sebastian, et al. (2019) wrote their article entitled "Analisis Deiksis Pada Percakapan Mahasiswa Pendidikan Bahasa Indonesia Universitas Bengkulu". The result of their study shows that all types of deixis are found in the conversation, but those will be changed based on the context. Another research is "An Analysis of Deixis on Comment Speech by Indonesian Diplomat in United Nation (PBB) 75th General Assembly Meeting" 2020" written by Minkhatunnakhriyah et al. (2021). The result shows thirty-five deixis from comment speech of Indonesian diplomat. There were twenty-three personal deixis consisting of a first, second, and third person, seven spatial deixis, and five temporal deixis. The third previous research is similar on the object of the study, the title is "Analisis Sintaksis Teks Spanduk Usaha Kuliner Di Sepanjang Jalan Ahmad Yani Ungaran Barat" studied by Amalia (2019). The results of the study include: 1. the smallest unit in the form are phrases and the largest units in the form are free clauses (sentences). Syntactic units in the form of phrases, namely endocentric phrases: attributive, coordinative, and appositive; 2. the style of language used in existing data are hyperbole and personification, 3. syntactic units in the form of free clauses the core of subjectpredicate This study is practically on equal level with prior studies, but it stands out because it reveals Madurese local wisdom, it is Madurese Culinary Writing. Therefore, it is thought that conducting the research entitled "Deixis Types in MARRYING (Madurese Culinary Writing)" is important and worthwhile.


METHOD

In this study, different types of deixis are examined along with how they are applied in Madurese culinary writings. Thus, the descriptive qualitative methodology used in this study. By looking into the facts and continuing to describe, qualitative descriptive research, according to Creswell (2013), can be conducted. Students' Madurese culinary writings served as the source of data. There were six writings about Madurese culinary theme as the sources of data. Three of them were under the title "Nasi Serpang", and the rests entitled "Bebek Sinjay". To get the data, the researchers classified deixis into five types, namely person, time, place, discourse, and social deixis. These deixes types were based on Levinson's principles (1983) and used qualitative as methodology. Three steps were taken in the data analysis. The data were analyzed in three steps. Firstly, it was to find out the deixis use based on the theory of Levinson (1983). Secondly, to reveal the reference of deixis written by the writer contextually, and the last was to convey discussions and conclude the issue.


RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A. The Result of Pre-Test and Post-Test Writing Assessments for Procedural Texts

Were Given To The Students Some types of deixis are found in the selected writings, and 141 data which are classified on the types of deixis have been found. A table is used to display the data. The data are classified into types of deixis (Levinson, 1983), including: person, time, place, discourse, and social deixis. They are shown in Table 1. The table above shows that all types of deixis are available for the data found in the Madurese Culinary Writings. Based on the frequency of each type, it can be seen that all types of deixis are found in the source of data. Based on the data above, person deixis becomes the most frequent type of deixis including all data found, it has 70 data. The next position provides that place deixis is in the second position having 31 data of the total 141 data found. Then, discourse deixis has 21 data and time deixis has 13 data of the total data found, and the lowest frequent type of deixis is social deixis having 6 data of the total 141 data found.

The discussion about types of deixis are described below. As stated by Levinson (1983), there are five types of deixis: person, time, place, discourse, and social deixis. Each of data has been categorized into those types of deixis.


Person Deixis

According to Levinson (1983), the first person deixis is made up of the words "I," "me," "my," and "mine," as well as the plural pronouns "we," "us," and "ours," while the second person deixis is made up of the words "you," "your," and "yours," as well as the third person deixis's use of the singular pronouns "he," "his," "she," "her," "it," "its" and singular pronouns "they", "them", "their". Consider the instances below.

Extract 1 Nasi serpang is one of my favourite food that I have ever eaten.


Extract 2

After we arrived at Bebek Sinjay, I saw the place so crowded with many tourists. So, we have to make a line to order this cuisine.


Extract 3

After knowing what nasi serpang is, let us find out how to make it. First of all, let us prepare the materials needed.

In the sentences above especially in extract 1, the word "my" and "I" are categorized into first person deixis because singular pronoun "my" and "1" refer to speaker herself as first person. In extract 2, the word "we" is also categorized into first person deixis because plural pronoun "we" refers to the writer and her family who were visiting Bebek Sinjay restaurant. In addition, the word "us" in the extract 3 is categorized into first person deixis because plural pronoun "us" refers to the writer and the readers of her writing.

Here are some additional person deixis instances, focusing on second person deixis.


Extract 4

So, you can see that nasi serpang is almost the same as nasi campur, nasi amboina, and nasi nya' lette'.


Extract 5

If you want to know how to make nasi bebek, let see these steps below.


Extract 6

After you prepare the ingredients, you can do the steps for making nasi bebek.

From the above sentences, the word "you" is included into person deixis because pronoun "you" refers to second person or the readers of the writings. Pronoun "you" can be singular or plural pronoun.

The examples of third person deixis can be seen below.


Extract 7

Each region has its own culinary characteristics.


Extract 8

The way to sell it is simple, with a kind of small stall on the side of the road.


Extract 9

They chose to open a makeshift stall on the side of the road.

From some extracts above, there are the words "it", "its", and "they" as third person pronouns. The word "its" and "it" are categorized as third person singular pronouns. The word "its" on extract 7 refers to each region, while the word "it" on extract 8 refers to nasi serpang. In addition, the word "they" on extract 9 refers to the seller of nasi serpang.


Place Deixis

Place deixis is a reference given by the speaker to the location when the utterance takes place. In students' Madurese culinary writings, there are 31 data of the uses of place deixis. The following are some examples.


Extract 10

The seller of nasi serpang often sell their foods on the side of the main road.


Extract 11

Nasi bebek is one of delicious food from Madura.


Extract 12

Serpang is actually the name of Sabiyan village, Arosbaya, Bangkalan.


Extract 13

At that time, I went to Bebek Sinjay only with my parents. Some deictic expressions of place are used in the sentences above. In extract 10, The words "on the side of the main road" refer to the place where the seller of nasi serpang sell their food. The words "from Madura" written in extract 11 is categorized as place deixis. They refer to the origin of nasi serpang. Furthermore, the words "Serpang" and "Bebek Sinjay" written in extract 12 and 13, they refers to the place, not the name of the food, Serpang village and Bebek Sinjay restaurant.


Discourse Deixis

Discourse deixis is the provision of references by narratives to certain parts of the discourse that is being developed, for instances: this, that. Based on Levinson theory (1983), in the discourse deixis, the referent of speaker may point in the previous, at the point, and the next. Take a look on the following extracts.


Extract 14

So, I told my parents to travel together to Bangkalan in order to try this cuisine.


Extract 15

That is the uniqueness and delicacy of Sinjay duck rice that must be tried when visiting Madura.


Extract 16

That is why there is a taste of oil in it even though it is not fried. Extract 17 Then, this is what makes me until now often eat nasi serpang.

The words that indicate discourse deixis in the above sentences are "this" and "that". In extract 14, the word "this" points the discourse near the speaker in the speech event. It refers to nasi bebek sinjay. On the other hand, the word "this" in extract 17 does not refer to thing/food. It refers to a condition why the writer like to eat nasi serpang. The writer points this reason in the previous. The uses of the word "that" in extract 15 and extract 16 are almost same. They points reasons that stated in the previous. The word "that" in extract 15 refers to a reason why the reader must try Bebek Sinjay. Meanwhile, the word "that" in extract 16 refers to a reason why sambal pencit of Bebek Sinjay is oily even though it is not fried.


Time Deixis

Time deixis is a reference given by the speaker in the time when the utterance takes place, such as "today", "tomorrow". Moreover, as stated by Levinson (1983)  The bold words above are deictic expressions of time. "At that time" in extract 18 refers to the time when the writer's parents came to Bangkalan, then she asked her parents to visit Bebek Sinjay restaurant. The uses of time deixis in extract 19 and extract 20 are almost same. They refers to duration.: duration of cooking bebek sinjay and duration of stand in line to buy bebek sinjay.


Social Deixis

According to Levinson (1983), social deixis is the process of encoding social distinctions related to participant roles, particularly elements of the social interaction that holds between a speaker and an addressee or a referent. Here are some examples of social deictic expressions used in students' Madurese culinary writings.

Extract 21 My parents also seem very happy because this duck tastes so good, beyond their expectations.


Extract 22

The seller of nasi serpang often sell their foods on the side of the main road.

The words "my parents" and "the seller" are the examples of social deixis. According to Cambridge dictionary (2022), parent is a mother or father of a person, or someone who looks after a person in the same way that a parent does. In extract 21, my parents refer to the writer's mother and father. While, seller is someone who is selling something (Cambridge dictionary, 2022). The word "seller" in extract 22 refers to someone who is selling nasi serpang in Bangkalan. Both "my parents" and "the seller" are categorized as social deixis.


CONCLUSION

Based on the discussion above, the analysis of deixis in Madurese Culinary Writing (MARRYING) applies five types of deixis (Levinson, 1983): person deixis, place deixis, discourse deixis, time deixis, and social deixis. spatial deixis, and temporal deixis. The first person's personal deixis is dominantly used by the subject 'I' because it refers to the writer of Madurese Culinary Writing. Furthermore, place deixis points to some places in the writers' writing. Then, discourse deixis which the referent of writer may point in the previous, at the point, and the next. In addition, time deixis points to time context of writing. The lowest frequent type of deixis is social deixis, it points elements of the social interaction that holds between a writer and an addressee or a referent. Understanding deixis offers comprehending meaning inside the chosen linguistic situation.

Madurese Culinary Writing (MARRYING) is an interesting media to analyze. The use of this media in collaboration with the ability to understand deixis contextually in MARRYING can provide broad and comprehensive information for the interlocutor (reader). For further research, it is suggested that MARRYING is still used, especially as a medium in supporting efforts to promote the potency of Madura, not only at the text identification level, but also at a practical level, for example as a medium for promoting Madurese culinary tourism.

Table 1 .
1Types of Deixis Found in Madurese Culinary WritingTypes of Deixis (Levinson, 1983) 
Total 
Percentage 
Person (first, second, third) 
70 
50 % 
Time 
13 
9 % 
Place 
31 
22 % 
Discourse 
21 
15 % 
Social 
6 
4 % 
Total 
141 
100 % 



that time deixis is identified by adverbial of time. The following are the instances of time deixis used in Students' Madurese culinary writing.Extract 18 
At that time, I went to Bebek Sinjay only with my parents. 
Extract 19 
After that, cover the pan and cook on medium heat for 3-4 hours. 
Extract 20 
After waiting in line for a long time, finally Bebek Sinjay was ready. 


ParafraseVol. 22 No 2 Oktober 2022   

Analisis Sintaksis Teks Spanduk Usaha. S Amalia, Kuliner Di Sepanjang Jalan Ahmad Yani Ungaran Barat.University of DiponegoroUndergraduate ThesisAmalia, S. (2019). Analisis Sintaksis Teks Spanduk Usaha Kuliner Di Sepanjang Jalan Ahmad Yani Ungaran Barat. (Undergraduate Thesis, University of Diponegoro, 2019) Accessed from http://eprints.undip.ac.id/71021/

Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches. J W Creswell, Sage PublicationsLincolnCreswell, J. W. (2013). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches. Lincoln: Sage Publications.

. S C Levinson, Stephen C. Levinson PragmaticsLevinson, S. C. (1983). Stephen C. Levinson Pragmatics.

An Analysis of Deixis on Comment Speech By Indonesian Diplomat in United Nation (PBB) 75th General Assembly Meeting 2020. VELES Voices of English Language Education Society. M Minkhatunnakhriyah, D Nuruddin Hidayat, A Alek, 10.29408/veles.v5i1.30155Minkhatunnakhriyah, M., Nuruddin Hidayat, D., & Alek, A. (2021). An Analysis of Deixis on Comment Speech By Indonesian Diplomat in United Nation (PBB) 75th General Assembly Meeting 2020. VELES Voices of English Language Education Society, 5(1), 46-53. https://doi.org/10.29408/veles.v5i1.3015

Online Cambridge Dictionary. Accessed onOnline Cambridge Dictionary. (2022). Accessed on October 21, 2022. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/parent

Online Cambridge Dictionary. Accessed onOnline Cambridge Dictionary. (2022). Accessed on October 21, 2022. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/seller

Deiksis Dalam Bahasa Indonesia. B K Purwo, Balai PustakaJakartaPurwo, B. K. (1984). Deiksis Dalam Bahasa Indonesia. Jakarta: Balai Pustaka.

Analisis Deiksis Pada Percakapan Mahasiswa Pendidikan Bahasa Indonesia Universitas Bengkulu. D Sebastian, I Diani, N Rahayu, Jurnal Ilmiah KORPUS. 32Sebastian, D., Diani, I., & Rahayu, N. (2019). Analisis Deiksis Pada Percakapan Mahasiswa Pendidikan Bahasa Indonesia Universitas Bengkulu. Jurnal Ilmiah KORPUS, 3(2), 157-164.

Deixis and indexicals. N Williams, 10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling. 539Williams, N. (2019). Deixis and indexicals. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 53(9). https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004

Pragmatics. Yule , G , Oxford University PressYule, G. (1996). Pragmatics. Oxford University Press.