Use of Diode Laser 980nm in Gingival Depigmentation
December 2015 Mohammed Saleem (2015. 2015

Mohammed Saleem 
Mohammed 
Use of Diode Laser 980nm in Gingival Depigmentation

International Journal of Dentistry and Oral Health
1December 2015 Mohammed Saleem (2015. 201510.25141/2471-657X-2015-1.0019Received: October 31, 2015; Accepted: November 06, 2015; Published: December 23, 20157 Corresponding Author: Mohammed Saleem, Dental Surgeon, Laser specialist at Salamaty Polyclinic, Saudi Arabia.Bony TissuesBony ScaffoldsBone BiologyBone engineering


ISSN 2471-657X


Introduction:

Gingival hyperpigmentation is caused by excessive deposition of melanin in the basal and suprabasal cell layers of the epithelium. Although melanin pigmentation of the gingiva is completely benign, cosmetic concerns are common, particularly in patients having a very high smile line (gummy smile). Various depigmentation techniques have been employed, such as scalpel surgery, gingivectomy, gingivectomy with free gingival autografting, cryosurgery, electrosurgery, chemical agents such as 90% phenol and 95% alcohol, abrasion with diamond burs, Nd:YAG laser, semiconductor diode laser, and CO2 laser. The present case report describes simple and effective depigmentation technique using semiconductor diode laser(980nm) for gingival depigmentation, which have produced good results with patient satisfaction. [1] Clinical Case Study: Difficulty is Moderate 1. Outline of the Case:  


II. Laser parameters for gingival depigmentation:

III. Treatment delivery sequence: • Preliminary to patient delivery: Securing an operating room, define controlled area and place proper laser warning signs. Set up laser and test proper laser operation. Test fire laser, employing safety measures, using minimum power settings. In addition to fibre tip can be inspected to ensure a proper cleave has been carried out and the spot size is uniform. Supplies dispensed, equipment and sterile instruments arranged.

• Safety: Eye protection that compatible with diode laser 980 nm for patient and all team work. • Treatment sequence: * For gingival depigmentation in upper and lower anterior area from canine to canine *Laser setting 1 watt with contact mode uninitiated tip in c .w. *After scaling and polishing the laser tip angulated to the gingival tissue and slowly movement with removal of tissue depress and tip with gauze * After that, clean the area with normal saline IV. Post-operative instructions: • The surgical sites were shown to the patient and their appearance explained • Analgesic to relief pain after operation V. Prognosis: Good result with recurrent after 6 to 9 months. 3. Post-Treatment: I.Complications-types, events, management: • Mild pain can treated by the analgesic same like Paracetamol •Bleeding •But in this case no any complication


During Operation

Immediate after operation

Figure 1
1Figure 1 Figure 2 A. Full clinical description: 23 years old patient coming to treat his teeth with severe pain in upper left 4 andhave swelling (Figure.1). I. Medical History: No any medical problem • Dental History: The patient had several amalgam fillings in upper left 4,5,and 6. Composite filling in upper right 5. * Remaining root from history of fracture upper right . • Teeth occlusion: Good occlusion • TMJ: Normal structure and normal movement II. Radiographic exam (pre-treatment): III. Periodontal Charting: not required

Figure 2 A
2. Full clinical description: 23 years old patient coming to treat his teeth with severe pain in upper left 4 andhave swelling (Figure.1). I. Medical History: No any medical problem • Dental History: The patient had several amalgam fillings in upper left 4,5,and 6. Composite filling in upper right 5. * Remaining root from history of fracture upper right . • Teeth occlusion: Good occlusion • TMJ: Normal structure and normal movement II. Radiographic exam (pre-treatment): III. Periodontal Charting: not required IV. Soft tissue status: • General oral soft tissue * No any abnormality all tissues appear normal • Gingival soft tissue * Bleeding on probing * A lot of dental calculus and plaque * Deep gingival pigmentation • Hard tissue status: *There is impacted lower left and right No pain with percussion V. Any other tests B.Diagnosis: I.Provisional Diagnosis: Treatment of this case in 3 steps * Scaling and Polishing. * Re-treatment of upper left 4 R C T.* And I advise the patient to make laser for gingival pigmentation.• Final Diagnosis: I will use diode laser 980nm in for gingival depigmentation in upper and lower anterior area use fibre optic delivery system and with 1 w power with continuous wave • Treatment plan outline: must be taken to avoid thermal damage and control the carbonization • The tip with angle in gingival tissue 45 degrees • Slowly movement with removal of tissue debris and fibre tip with gauze • Care must be taken to avoid damage of gingival contour or interdental papillae Treatment alternatives: By scalpel and periodontal pack IV. Informed Consent: Treatment plan was fully explained and written consent form was signed by the patient
After 2 weeks (lower)After 2 weeks (upper)After 2 months (lower) After 2 After 2 months (upper)
Management of Gingival Hyperpigmentation by Semiconductor Diode LaserGeeti Gupta J CutanAesthet Surg. Management of Gingival Hyperpigmentation by Semiconduc- tor Diode LaserGeeti Gupta J CutanAesthet Surg. 2011 Sep-Dec;

. 10.4103/0974-2077.9125644(3): 208-210. doi: 10.4103/0974-2077.91256.