Design and experiment of a parallel dual-channel endwrapping soft pneumatic actuator


Sheng Lin 
Dalian Jiaotong University
116028Dalian, LiaoningChina

Ruizhi Sun 
Dalian Jiaotong University
116028Dalian, LiaoningChina

Tao Jiang 
Fuxin Zhongfu Light Metal Technology Co
123000Ltd, Fuxin, LiaoningChina

Dongliang Zhang 
Fuxin Zhongfu Light Metal Technology Co
123000Ltd, Fuxin, LiaoningChina

Youjia Sun 
Fuxin Zhongfu Light Metal Technology Co
123000Ltd, Fuxin, LiaoningChina

Design and experiment of a parallel dual-channel endwrapping soft pneumatic actuator
33DE2ED57A04BE5BF041497E8AE874C710.1088/1742-6596/2954/1/012042
Soft pneumatic actuators, due to their flexibility and ease of deformation, have great application potential in industries such as gripping and handling.The paper presents the design of a parallel dual-channel end-wrapping pneumatic gripper based on a PneuNet-type soft pneumatic actuator.The actuator's gripping force at the end is enhanced by utilizing two rows of chambers in the dual-channel body, while the wrapping chambers on both sides of the actuator's end increase the contact area between the actuator and the object being grasped, thereby effectively improving the gripping performance.The reliability of the actuator was verified through a combination of simulations and experiments.Compared to traditional PneuNet soft pneumatic actuators, the actuator designed in this study achieved an end gripping force of up to 1.94 N. Additionally, an experimental platform was constructed, and a pneumatic soft gripper with adjustable spacing was developed.Gripping experiments were conducted on sand molds and other fragile objects with delicate surfaces.The results demonstrated that the soft pneumatic gripper designed in this study applies to a wider range of gripping scenarios compared to mechanical grippers, providing greater gripping force and stability than conventional soft pneumatic grippers.

Introduction

In industrial production, manufacturing, logistics, and food processing, the application of mechanical automation is becoming increasingly widespread [1].In these scenarios, a large number of tasks involve the gripping and handling of target objects, which are currently mostly reliant on rigid endeffectors.However, these are not well-suited for items such as sand molds, food, or ceramics, as they often cause surface damage or deformation during gripping and handling.In this context, end-effectors made from new materials and designed with novel structures have demonstrated excellent performance in gripping and handling tasks [2].Unlike traditional rigid mechanical grippers, soft grippers offer safer gripping solutions [3].Soft grippers have been successfully applied in many engineering fields [4].They are made from a variety of materials, such as silicone rubber [5], dielectric elastomers, and shape memory alloys.Among these, soft pneumatic actuators have gained widespread application due to their high safety in gripping, low production costs, and ease of manufacturing [6].

Soft pneumatic actuators can be categorized into two types: multi-chamber actuators (PneuNet) [7] and fiber-reinforced actuators [8].The multi-chamber type is widely used in industrial production due to its large deformation capability, strong gripping force, and fast response time.Zhang et al. [9] designed a versatile pneumatic soft gripper that adapts to various gripping tasks by applying positive pressure to open the actuator and negative pressure to close it.Researchers at Purdue University IOP Publishing doi:10.1088/1742-6596/2954/1/012042 2 designed a soft actuator inspired by animal tendons that grips objects in a zero-pressure state by storing elastic energy [10].Wu et al. [11] proposed a soft gripper with independently controlled airways for the end chambers.By adding a row of trapezoidal chambers at both ends of the longitudinal chambers, the end actuator's contact area is increased, thereby enhancing the gripping force.Huang et al. [12] developed a reconfigurable pneumatic soft robot based on the PneuNet actuator, which adapts to different object sizes by actively extending or contracting when gripping irregular objects.Despite these advancements, many soft grippers still face limitations, such as insufficient gripping force, small end contact areas, and poor stability during gripping.

In response to some of the current challenges in soft actuator research, and to achieve stable gripping of objects with delicate surfaces, this paper proposes a parallel dual-channel end-wrapping pneumatic actuator.The actuator consists of two main components: a parallel dual-channel bending air chamber in the main body and wrapping air chambers on both sides.Pressure is applied to the parallel air chambers in the main body to induce bending and generate greater end force, thereby increasing the gripping capacity.Pressure is also applied to the wrapping air chambers at the end to enlarge the contact area, improving gripping stability.Additionally, the actuators are assembled into a soft gripper with adjustable spacing using a distance-adjustable clamp, allowing it to grasp objects in various scenarios.


Design and analysis

In this paper, we designed a novel pneumatic actuator inspired by traditional PneuNet actuators.The actuator primarily consists of two components: a parallel dual-channel bending air chamber in the main body and wrapping air chambers on both sides.The main body contains two parallel rows of 18 chambers, providing the basic bending function and end gripping force.The wrapping sections on both sides are composed of two chambers in series, offering additional stability and wrapping support.The outer walls of the four chambers located at the initial and end positions are reinforced to enhance the actuator's safety and reliability.Each side of the end-wrapping section contains two chambers of the same size as the main chambers and their outer walls are also reinforced.The actuator utilizes a dualchannel setup, with separate airways for the main air chambers and wrapping air chambers on either side of the central axis.This configuration improves the actuator's response time and stability.The overall dimensions of the pneumatic soft actuator are 162mm × 56mm × 32mm (L × W × H). Figure 1 shows this soft actuator, as well as different views of the actuator Finite element analysis (FEA) is a commonly used and relatively precise method for analyzing the deformation of objects.It is particularly important for the analysis and subsequent improvement of soft actuators, which undergo large hyperelastic deformations [13].In this paper, we performed finite element analysis on the actuator using Abaqus software.The Yeoh model was applied to assign hyperelastic properties to the model.The transverse and longitudinal contact interactions between the actuator's contact surfaces were defined.Next, the internal surface pressure, as well as the magnitude and direction of gravity, were specified.The analysis steps were set.The top of the actuator was constrained and fixed.The entire model was divided into tetrahedral mesh elements, eventually yielding the simulation results are presented in Figure 2. The simulation results show that when a pressure ranging from 0 kPa to 40 kPa is applied, the main bending chamber bends longitudinally while the wrapping chambers bend laterally.The bending behavior aligns with the design expectations.


Fabrication

The actuator also requires molds for manufacturing.In this study, a Raise3DPro3 printer was used to print the molds [14], which consist of chamber molds and base molds as shown in Figure 3a).The main material for the actuator is Dragon Skin 20 silicone.Compared to other types of silicone, it possesses superior physical properties and flexibility, making it widely used in various industrial applications.During the manufacturing process, Silicone A and B were mixed in a 1:1 ratio and thoroughly stirred in one direction for 5 minutes to ensure complete mixing.The mixture was then placed in a vacuum pump to remove any bubbles; otherwise, the presence of bubbles in the silicone could significantly impact the reliability of the actuator once it solidified.Before pouring the silicone into the assembled molds, the inner surfaces of the molds were coated with petroleum jelly to facilitate demolding.Finally, the silicone and molds were placed in a heating oven at 50°C to accelerate curing.After curing, the chamber layer was carefully demolded and bonded with the silicone cured in the base mold.The manufacturing of the actuator was thus completed as shown in Figure 3b).The final step involved connecting and assembling the two actuators with the device, resulting in the complete pneumatic soft gripper.


Experiment and result

Additionally, a force measurement testing platform was constructed.In the experiment, a ZMF-30type force sensor was used.The testing platform fixed the end of the actuator and applied pressure to measure the end force.First, the gravity reading was nullified, and then the pressure was adjusted using a pressure regulator.As the pressure increased, the reading on the force sensor also increased, as shown in Figure 4, ultimately providing the end force of the actuator as a function of the applied pressure.


Conclusions

Inspired by traditional PneuNet-type actuators, this study proposes a novel parallel dual-channel endwrapping soft gripper.Finite element simulation was used to assist in the design, determining the dimensions of the soft actuator and optimizing various details to ensure that the bending deformation of the main chamber and end-wrapping chambers met the initial design expectations.After manufacturing the soft actuator, its end gripping force was experimentally tested.Finally, a gripping testing platform was constructed to evaluate the gripping performance on fragile objects such as sand molds.The experimental results showed that by adjusting the distance between actuators and the air pressure, the gripper was able to handle objects of different weights and shapes with delicate surfaces.The main chambers of the actuator provided sufficient end-gripping force, while the end-wrapping section demonstrated excellent stability during the gripping process.The maximum end force of the actuator was 1.94N.The soft gripper's maximum gripping weight reached 1260g.This offers a new solution for gripping in various scenarios, particularly for handling objects with fragile surfaces in industrial and daily applications.Additionally, to further enhance experimental efficiency, establishing an accurate kinematic model of the actuator's bending movement would greatly benefit the overall research and is worthy of deeper investigation.

Figure 1 .
1
Figure 1.a) Schematic diagram of the soft actuator structure, b) Dimensions of the soft actuator.Finite element analysis (FEA) is a commonly used and relatively precise method for analyzing the deformation of objects.It is particularly important for the analysis and subsequent improvement of soft actuators, which undergo large hyperelastic deformations[13].In this paper, we performed finite


Figure 2 .
2
Figure 2. The pressure simulation results of the actuator under 0 kPa, 20 kPa, and 40 kPa conditions.The simulation results show that when a pressure ranging from 0 kPa to 40 kPa is applied, the main bending chamber bends longitudinally while the wrapping chambers bend laterally.The bending behavior aligns with the design expectations.


Figure 3 .
3
Figure 3. a) 3D-printed mold, b) Physical actuator.


Figure 4 .
4
Figure 4. a) Initial force measurement value, b) Maximum force measurement value.The novel soft gripper based on the PneuNet-type actuator proposed in this study was initially designed to handle sand molds.The length and width of the designed actuator also accommodate the gripping of most soft and fragile objects encountered in production and daily life.Once assembled with the fixture, the soft gripper can achieve various gripping methods by adjusting the distance between the actuators, allowing it to successfully grasp objects in multiple scenarios.The gripping experiments on various surface-sensitive objects are shown in Figure 5.The end force of the actuator provided effective gripping, while the end-wrapping areas ensured good stability during gripping.The results indicate that the new soft actuator proposed in this study demonstrates excellent gripping performance across a range of scenarios.


Figure 5 .
5
Figure 5. Gripping experiments.a) Screwdriver set, b) Ceramics, c-d) Sand molds of different sizes and weights.

AcknowledgmentsThis work was financially supported by the 2022 Liaoning Province Science and Technology key special project.The project title is Research and Development of Intelligent Casting Production Line Technology for Automotive Aluminum Alloy Castings.The project number is 2022JH1/10800020.
fabrication and control of soft robots. D Rus, M T Tolley, Design, 

. Nature. 52175532015

Multimode Grasping Soft Gripper Achieved by Layer Jamming Structure and Tendon-Driven Mechanism. B Fang, F Sun, L Wu, J]. Soft robotics. 922332022

Exploiting Mechanical Instabilities in Soft Robotics: Control, Sensing, and Actuation. A Pal, V Restrepo, D Goswami, Advanced materials. 202119e2006939

SOFT ROBOTICS. A 3D-printed, functionally graded soft robot powered by combustion. N W Bartlett, M T Tolley, J T Overvelde, 

. Science. 34962442015

Configuration detection and external force tuning for soft-bending actuators under position constraint. R Karimpour, Namdar Ghalati, M H Ghafarirad, H , Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. Part C. the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. Part C2022236

Soft Actuators and Robots that Are Resistant to Mechanical Damage. A C Martinez R V, Glavan, C Keplinger, Advanced functional materials. 24202014

Towards a Soft Pneumatic Glove for Hand Rehabilitation. P Polygerinos, S Lyne, Z Wang, 2013 IEEE/RSJ INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON INTELLIGENT ROBOTS AND SYSTEMS (IROS). 2013

Examining the Coiling Motion of Soft Actuators Reinforced with Tilted Helix Fibers. R Geer, S Li, 

PROCEEDINGS OF THE ASME CONFERENCE ON SMART MATERIALS, ADAPTIVE STRUCTURES AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS. 2017. 20182

Design and Analysis of a General Pneumatic Soft Gripper. Zhang Yaoyao, Liu Sheng, Xu Qingyu, 

Elastic Energy Storage Enables Rapid and Programmable Actuation in Soft Machines. A Pal, D Goswami, R Martinez, 

. Advanced Functional Materials. 1302020

Design and motion analysis of a bidirectional parallel-chamber soft pneumatic actuator. Y Wu, M Lu, L Ding, Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. Part C. the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. Part C2023

A variable structure pneumatic soft robot. W Huang, J Xiao, Z Xu, 

. SCIENTIFIC REPORTS. 1102020

Finite Element Modeling of Soft Fluidic Actuators: Overview and Recent Developments. M S Xavier, A J Fleming, Y Yong, 

. ADVANCED INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS. 202123

A review of 3D printing processes and materials for soft robotics. Y L Yap, S L Sing, W Y Yeong, 

. Rapid prototyping journal. 2682020