A perspective on inequities in the management of radiation dermatitis


Omolola Salako 
Debanjan Kundu 
Henry Ddungu 
Adaorah Enyi 
Corina Van Den Hurk 
Matthew Allsop 
Julie Ryan Wolf 

Department of Radiation Oncology
College of Medicine
University of Lagos
Nigeria


Department of Radiation Oncology
Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute
KolkataIndia


Division of Medical Oncology and Hematology
Uganda Cancer Institute
KampalaUganda


Department of Research and Innovation
Oncopadi Technologies Limited
LagosNigeria


Netherlands Comprehensive Cancer Organization
UtrechtNetherlands


Academic Unit of Palliative Care
Leeds Institute of Health Sciences



University of Leeds
Woodhouse, LeedsUK


Departments of Dermatology & Radiation Oncology
University of Rochester Medical Center
RochesterNYUSA

A perspective on inequities in the management of radiation dermatitis
4D90660DFA8459E94785795BE2591C65


Radiation dermatitis (RD) is a common adverse skin reaction experienced by approximately 95% of cancer patients who undergo radiation therapy (RT) either during or after treatment. 1The proposed pathophysiology is complex and related to disruptions in the skin's basal layer and ability to regenerate epidermal cells. 1 Its acute presentation can range from mild erythema, hair loss, and dry peeling to moist desquamation and severe ulceration.Secondary infections and healing by fibrosis are potential sequelae. 1 The maximum therapeutic benefit of RT may be limited by the occurrence of RD and may lead to early termination or discontinuation of cancer treatment. 1Despite advanced radiotherapeutic treatment planning, skin dose limiting techniques, and preventative treatments, RD is still very common.Additionally, there exists significant disparities in the clinical management of RD and its surrounding research.Critical areas that warrant further attention include considerations for people with darker skin tones, the influence of living in warmer climates, and the impact of care delivery and research in low-resource settings.This perspective piece explores and discusses these disparities further and highlights their implications.

There are limited published studies that explore the efficacy and tolerability of RD interventions across individuals with darker skin tones and those living in warmer climates.Current validated clinician-reported RD severity scales do not capture the differences in RD presentation in darker skin tones.Hyperpigmentation is not a component of the US National Cancer Institute -Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI CTCAE) or Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) and European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) radiation morbidity criteria for RD, despite clear evidence that erythema in darker skin tones is difficult to detect and often presents as increased darkening of the skin.As a result, RD may be underdiagnosed in people of color when using existing clinician-rating scales. 2 Despite evidence on the differential presentation of RD in people of color, studies often exclude skin tone as an influential factor.Instead, meta-analyses tend to show data based on the country of origin (e.g., Asia, North America, or the UK) but do not provide a breakdown by skin tone of individuals.Although research and data on the effect of warmer climates on RD is lacking, there do exist studies in atopic dermatitis (AD), a chronic inflammatory skin disease, that show warmer temperatures alter skin barrier and therapeutic response.It is reasonable to speculate that a similar difference in skin barrier and efficacy of treatment for RD in individuals living in warmer climates may influence the severity grade of RD.In order to advance strategies to prevent, standardize the reporting, and manage RD, we need to understand the effects of skin tone and environmental climates on the presentation, detection, and treatment of RD.

Behroozian et al., one of the largest systematic reviews conducted on acute RD, included 235 original studies from 1946 to 2023 to investigate the quality of evidence on the prevention and treatment of RD.This review highlighted the lack of data on RD in low-resource settings and less developed areas of the world. 1 The majority of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are conducted in high-income, western countries (primarily the USA, UK, and Canada), due to more robust funding, scientific infrastructure, information access, and increased access to essential research partnerships. 3Lower-income countries have limited resources and infrastructure to set up, fund, conduct, and support the necessary processes for large-scale clinical trials. 3Low-and middle-income countries (LMICs) bear a significant burden of cancer with poorer health outcomes when compared to high-income countries. 4This is further worsened by the chronic shortage of RT machines and radiation personnel.These limitations also impact the ability to conduct large-scale studies and the availability of effective interventions for RD, which often leads to early termination of RT. 1 It is crucial to recognize that RT is an essential treatment modality of cancer and this need does not only exist in high-income countries and Caucasian populations.Though numerous RCTs for RD exist, many enroll primarily Caucasian participants.A recent systematic review on barrier films for RD in breast cancer noted > 90% Caucasians across five RCTs which could have skewed results for the true effectiveness of the interventions. 5Additionally, whilst breast cancer incidence is relatively higher in high-income western countries with larger Caucasian populations, there is a disproportionate share of breast cancer deaths in LMICs. 6The highest mortality rates are in the Pacific Islands (Fiji), the Caribbean (The Bahamas), Sub-Saharan Africa (Nigeria) and Southern Asia (Pakistan), which have predominantly non-Caucasian individuals. 6here is a critical need for the inclusion of patient populations from lower-income countries in RCTs for RD and improved equitable access to effective oncology treatments and supportive oncology care.Furthermore, a better understanding of the treatment of RD in LMICs and across all skin tones is imperative to improve disparities in treatment-related adverse outcomes and potentially improve mortality rates.

RD management in LMICs and resource-limited environments may often be restricted to inexpensive options.Washing with mild soap or application of topical steroids are less costly modalities and utilize less resources. 1Although Behroozian et al. recommended both Mepitel film and photobiomodulation therapy (PBM) for the prevention of RD, neither of these modalities are widely used, especially in LMICs.One of the main reasons for the lack of implementation into routine care is cost.Each of these interventions may cost nearly or even more than $100 per course of RT, resulting in higher out-of-pocket costs for patients.Considering the GNI per capita of LMICs, the aforementioned costs would restrict access to these effective treatments. 4Data also suggests that current RD management approaches may be insufficient to cater to all of patients' needs, especially in terms of functional impairment related to the side effect. 7In addition, it is necessary to develop practical and feasible approaches to evaluate the effectiveness of treatments in the context of low-resource settings.

We highlight a palpable gap in literature regarding RT skin toxicity resources, a critical need for the inclusion of patients with all skin tones and representation of countries with warmer climates in clinical trials for RD, as well as the feasibility and applicability of the interventions in LMIC settings.Current evidence for RD treatment focuses primarily on fair-skinned patients, predominantly in high-income countries with access to expensive interventions.By addressing these disparities, we can promote inclusivity and global applicability in the RD field to ensure that all patients undergoing RT, regardless of skin tone and geographical location, have access to evidence-based treatments and receive the best care possible.



Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Asia-Pacific Journal of Oncology Nursing journal homepage: www.apjon.orghttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.apjon.2024.100582Received 15 August 2024; Accepted 27 August 2024 2347-5625/© 2024 The Author(s).Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of Ann & Joshua Medical Publishing LTD.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

AcknowledgementsAll authors are members of the Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer (MASCC).JRW and CvdH are co-Chairs of the MASCC Oncodermatology Study Group.Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing processThe authors did not use any tools/services of generative AI for writing of this manuscript.FundingThis study received no external funding.Declaration of competing interestThe authors declare no conflict of interest.
MASCC clinical practice guidelines for the prevention and management of acute radiation dermatitis: part 1) systematic review. eClinicalMedicine. T Behroozian, D Goldshtein, Ryan Wolf, J , 10.1016/j.eclinm.2023.101886202358101886

Radiation-induced skin changes after breast or chest wall irradiation in patients with breast cancer and skin of color: a systematic review. J M Purswani, C Nwankwo, P Adotama, 10.1016/j.clbc.2022.10.002Clin Breast Cancer. 2312023

Global mapping of randomised trials related articles published in high-impact-factor medical journals: a cross-sectional analysis. F Catal A-L Opez, R Aleixandre-Benavent, L Caulley, 10.1186/s13063-019-3944-9Trials. 211342020

Measuring global inequity in radiation therapy: resource deficits in low-and middle-income countries without radiation therapy facilities. S M Christ, J Willmann, 10.1016/j.adro.2023.101175Adv Radiat Oncol. 841011752023

Barrier films for the prevention of acute radiation dermatitis in breast cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. C S Dejonckheere, E Dejonckheere, J P Layer, 10.1016/j.breast.2023.07.001Breast. 712023

The global burden of women's cancers: an unmet grand challenge in global health. O Ginsburg, F Bray, M P Coleman, 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31392-7S0140-6736(16)31392-7Lancet Lond Engl. 3892017. 10071

Acute skin toxicity-related, out-of pocket expenses in patients with breast cancer treated with external beam radiotherapy: a descriptive, exploratory Study. J B Schnur, J G Zivin, Dmk Mattson, 10.1007/s00520-012-1435-6Support Care Cancer Off J Multinatl Assoc Support Care Cancer. 20122012