Cardiac Leiomyosarcoma Images in Cardiovascular Medicine Downloaded from
by guest on October 31, 2017

MD;Seth Goldbarg 
Naveenta Kumar 
Ba ; 
MDSamin Sharma 
Cardiac Leiomyosarcoma Images in Cardiovascular Medicine Downloaded from
by guest on October 31, 201710.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.637264Correspondence to Seth Goldbarg, MD, The Mt. Sinai School of Medicine, Cardiovascular Institute, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY Circulation is available at http://www.circulationaha.org e47
A 58-year-old woman was admitted to an outside hospital after an episode of syncope. She reported a 4-month history of progressively worsening dyspnea on exertion. There was no other significant medical history. Her blood pressure was 145/76 mm Hg, heart rate was 80 bpm, and oxygen saturation was 97% on room air. Cardiovascular examination revealed a grade III ejection systolic murmur, which could be heard loudest in the second intercostal space at the left sternal border. The ECG was notable for right ventricular hypertrophy. An echocardiogram revealed pulmonary stenosis with marked right ventricular hypertrophy and moderate tricuspid regurgitation. The patient was transferred to our institution for pulmonary valvuloplasty.On right heart catheterization, a large filling defect was visualized in the right ventricular outflow tract(Figure 1and Movie I), with a markedly elevated right ventricular pressure of 129/16 mm Hg and a significant pressure gradient across the right ventricular outflow tract (Ͼ100 mm Hg). Transthoracic echocardiogram with Doppler imaging confirmed the presence of a mass, which caused a significant obstruction to flow in the right ventricular outflow tract (Movie II). Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging with gadolinium contrast revealed a 4ϫ2-cm sessile vascularized mass originating in the right ventricular outflow tract that involved the pulmonary valve and extended to the pulmonary artery bifurcation(Figure 2).The mass was excised(Figure 3and Movie III) and the tricuspid and pulmonary valves were replaced. Histopathology revealed spindle cell pathology characteristic of a leiomyosarcoma(Figure 4). The patient was discharged home on postoperative day 24 in good condition.DisclosuresNone.From the Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Cardiovascular Institute, New York, NY. The online-only Data Supplement, consisting of movies, can be found at http://circ.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/115/4/e47/DC1. Figure 1. Right ventricular angiography reveals a filling defect in the proximal pulmonary artery, nearly obliterating the outflow tract.Figure 2. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the presence of a large, well-vascularized mass protruding from the proximal pulmonary artery into the right ventricular outflow tract.

A 58-year-old woman was admitted to an outside hospital after an episode of syncope. She reported a 4-month history of progressively worsening dyspnea on exertion. There was no other significant medical history. Her blood pressure was 145/76 mm Hg, heart rate was 80 bpm, and oxygen saturation was 97% on room air. Cardiovascular examination revealed a grade III ejection systolic murmur, which could be heard loudest in the second intercostal space at the left sternal border. The ECG was notable for right ventricular hypertrophy. An echocardiogram revealed pulmonary stenosis with marked right ventricular hypertrophy and moderate tricuspid regurgitation. The patient was transferred to our institution for pulmonary valvuloplasty.

On right heart catheterization, a large filling defect was visualized in the right ventricular outflow tract ( Figure 1 and Movie I), with a markedly elevated right ventricular pressure of 129/16 mm Hg and a significant pressure gradient across the right ventricular outflow tract (Ͼ100 mm Hg). Transthoracic echocardiogram with Doppler imaging confirmed the presence of a mass, which caused a significant obstruction to flow in the right ventricular outflow tract (Movie II). Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging with gadolinium contrast revealed a 4ϫ2-cm sessile vascularized mass originating in the right ventricular outflow tract that involved the pulmonary valve and extended to the pulmonary artery bifurcation (Figure 2).

The mass was excised (Figure 3 and Movie III) and the tricuspid and pulmonary valves were replaced. Histopathology revealed spindle cell pathology characteristic of a leiomyosarcoma (Figure 4). The patient was discharged home on postoperative day 24 in good condition.


Disclosures

None.   

637264 Figure 1 .
6372641From the Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Cardiovascular Institute, New York, NY. The online-only Data Supplement, consisting of movies, can be found at http://circ.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/115/4/e47/DC1. Correspondence to Seth Goldbarg, MD, The Mt. Sinai School of Medicine, Cardiovascular Institute, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029-6574. E-mail goldbash@post.harvard.edu (Circulation. 2007;115:e47-e48.) © 2007 American Heart Association, Inc.Circulation is available at http://www.circulationaha.org DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.Right ventricular angiography reveals a filling defect in the proximal pulmonary artery, nearly obliterating the outflow tract.

Figure 2 .Figure 4 .
24Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the presence of a large, well-vascularized mass protruding from the proximal pulmonary artery into the right ventricular outflow tract. Pathology revealed a highly cellular tumor with a high mitotic index typical for leiomyosarcoma.

Figure 3 .
3Surgical excision of the tumor required resection of extensive areas of local invasion.