The Clinical Content of Geriatrics


md, mrcp(uk)S G P Webster 
Department of Geriatric Medicine
Chesterton Hospital
Cambridge

Physician 
Department of Geriatric Medicine
Chesterton Hospital
Cambridge

The Clinical Content of Geriatrics

In spite of having been in existence for over 25 years as a specialty, geriatric medicine continues to have difficulty in projecting itself as a stimulating and satisfying section of medical practice. It is unfortunately true that geriatric medicine has many problems and unattractive features, mostly due to poor facilities and not to the nature of the work or the patients. It is also disappointing that these difficulties do not in themselves stimulate more doctors to take up the challenge that their correction presents. However, the problems of unsuitable accommodation are gradually being improved, owing to more enlightened attitudes in NHS administration and among the public. One only hopes that an increased social consciousness can be maintained in the face of financial stringency.Other aspects requiring improvement can be changed only by increased recruitment into the specialty. Only then can unacceptable features such as single-handed departments of geriatric medicine with hundreds of beds be abolished and the quality and quantity of junior staff be brought up to acceptable standards. We now have the ridiculous situation of general medicine with an enormous work-force and a shrinking workload (due to better primary care and the proliferation of sophisticated specialist departments), while departments of geriatric medicine have an increasing workload due to the rising proportion of the elderly in the population together with a totally inadequate work-force. We must therefore attempt to convert aspiring general physicians into muchneeded geriatricians and thus equip ourselves with the type of service demanded by the community's needs.The setting up of joint posts in general and geriatric medicine is, I believe, a practical and realistic way of bringing about the change in attitudes. It is from my experience in such an appointment that I have been able to make the following comparison between general and geriatric medicine.Patients and MethodsNew outpatients attending during the first half of 1974 have been reviewed. As the clinics were new, additional sessions and not retirement replacements, they all started without waiting lists. As I was completely new to the area my special interests were not known to the referring GPs. Four clinics were held each week ?two in general medicine and two in geriatric medicine. One in each specialty was held in Cambridge and the others at peripheral units in Huntingdon. Details were collected of each patient's age and significant diagnoses. Comparisons between young and old were complicated by the fact that the elderly frequently had several diagnoses due to multiple pathology; however, only major conditions causing significant symptoms were included. All patients under 65 years of age had only one diagnosis of significance but 75 per cent of patients over 65 years had two diagnoses included; even so, this meant ignoring many other ab-

In spite of having been in existence for over 25 years as a specialty, geriatric medicine continues to have difficulty in projecting itself as a stimulating and satisfying section of medical practice. It is unfortunately true that geriatric medicine has many problems and unattractive features, mostly due to poor facilities and not to the nature of the work or the patients. It is also disappointing that these difficulties do not in themselves stimulate more doctors to take up the challenge that their correction presents. However, the problems of unsuitable accommodation are gradually being improved, owing to more enlightened attitudes in NHS administration and among the public. One only hopes that an increased social consciousness can be maintained in the face of financial stringency.

Other aspects requiring improvement can be changed only by increased recruitment into the specialty. Only then can unacceptable features such as single-handed departments of geriatric medicine with hundreds of beds be abolished and the quality and quantity of junior staff be brought up to acceptable standards. We now have the ridiculous situation of general medicine with an enormous work-force and a shrinking workload (due to better primary care and the proliferation of sophisticated specialist departments), while departments of geriatric medicine have an increasing workload due to the rising proportion of the elderly in the population together with a totally inadequate work-force. We must therefore attempt to convert aspiring general physicians into muchneeded geriatricians and thus equip ourselves with the type of service demanded by the community's needs.

The setting up of joint posts in general and geriatric medicine is, I believe, a practical and realistic way of bringing about the change in attitudes. It is from my experience in such an appointment that I have been able to make the following comparison between general and geriatric medicine.


Patients and Methods

New outpatients attending during the first half of 1974 have been reviewed. As the clinics were new, additional sessions and not retirement replacements, they all started without waiting lists. As I was completely new to the area my special interests were not known to the referring GPs. Four clinics were held each week ?two in general medicine and two in geriatric medicine. One in each specialty was held in Cambridge and the others at peripheral units in Huntingdon. Details were collected of each patient's age and significant diagnoses. Comparisons between young and old were complicated by the fact that the elderly frequently had several diagnoses due to multiple pathology; however, only major conditions causing significant symptoms were included. All patients under 65 years of age had only one diagnosis of significance but 75 per cent of patients over 65 years had two diagnoses included; even so, this meant ignoring many other abnormalities. The results are shown in Table 1. Data for malignant and iatrogenic disease are included.

The standard pattern of general medical outpatient clinics was taken from the survey of Forsyth and Logan (1968), who had analysed 2,206 new patients attending    Fifty consecutive admissions to a geriatric assessment ward and a general medical ward were also compared during October and November, 1976 (Table 3).


Discussion of Results

The first finding was the small contribution made by confirmed pathological changes in patients under 65 years of age. Of the patients seen in the general medical clinics, 30 per cent were aged over 65 years. Of the remainder, 36 per cent had no physical abnormality detected, leaving only 44 per cent of the total clinic attendances, from which the 5 per cent with obesity as their problem might also be excluded. When Forsyth and Logan (1968) looked at age in-cidence in relationship to outpatient attendances in 1962 they found that the elderly were seen at the same frequency as their incidence in the population. They were disturbed by this finding in view of the increased demands known to be made by this age group in general practice and occupation of hospital beds. They surmised that this discrepancy might be due to GPs feeling that old people were 'unsuitable' to attend clinics and that any future increase in their attendances would indicate a change in attitude by doctors. The incidence of the aged in the present series of general medicine clinics is twice that of their proportion in the population, perhaps due to the more enlightened attitudes of GPs in East Anglia. The incidence of 36 per cent of younger outpatients with no detected physical abnormality might seem excessively high. However, when expressed as a percentage of the' total clinic attendance (irrespective of age), it falls to 27 per cent, which is the same rate reported by Forsyth and Logan in their survey. Todd (1978) also reported that in one-third of his general medical outpatients the presenting problem was of a psychological nature.

There was no difference between the variety of patients seen at the central as opposed to the peripheral general medical clinic. There were, however, slight differences in age distribution, more people aged 25 to 35 years and 75 to 85 years being seen peripherally and fewer aged 35 to 45, and 65 to 75 years.

Owing to the increase in the number of elderly patients attending the general medical clinic, it might have been expected that the incidence of musculo-skeletal disorders would have risen rather than fallen, compared with Forsyth and Logan's figures. Although the frequency of central nervous disease has risen in the general medical clinic, the change is slight and less than would have been expected. The rise in cardiovascular disorders is surprisingly high and would seem to be due to a higher incidence in both younger and older outpatients. However, an old person with symptomatic cardiovascular disease is more likely to be sent to a general medical than a geriatric clinic.

In the general medical clinic the most commonly occurring problems are psychological and psychiatric and these are found six times more frequently in the subjects under 65 years of age (see Table 1). None of the younger patients was significantly disabled by symptoms and no active intervention was required. However, in the 6 elderly patients, 2 were depressed, one requiring antidepressants and the other psychiatric in-patient treatment. The remaining 4 had dementia.

Of the psychiatric problems seen in the geriatric clinic (19 per cent of diagnoses compared with 27 per cent in general medicine) 45 per cent were due to depression and 55 per cent to dementia. The depressed patients were improved by drug therapy or attendance at the geriatric day hospital or local authority day care centre. Similar outpatient social support eased the problems of the demented and their helpers. The psychiatric load was therefore not only lighter in the geriatric clinic but it was also possible to be of more assistance.

Endocrine problems were more common in the general medical clinic, but this was not entirely due to the younger age of the patients, for elderly people with such disorders seem more likely to be sent to a general medical rather than a geriatric clinic.

Urogenital and respiratory problems seem to have a low incidence in general clinics, whatever the age of the patients seen, and the frequency is not significantly changed from the time of Forsyth and Logan's national study.

Malignant and iatrogenic disease were also more common among the elderly. In the general medical clinic 5 malignancies were found, and 4 of these were in patients aged over 65 years. In the geriatric clinics 12 examples were found in a smaller total attendance (see Table 1).

Iatrogenic disease was fairly uncommon in the young?

only single examples of contraceptive pill-induced jaundice and antibiotic-induced diarrhoea being detected. Self-inflicted disease such as obesity (5 cases) and alcoholic peripheral neuropathy (1 case) were found in younger people in the general medical clinic. In the same clinics, 2 elderly subjects had drug-induced symptoms?arrhythmias due to antidepressants and gastrointestinal symptoms due to digoxin overdosage (Table 1). In contrast there were 8 instances of disorder caused by prescribed medications in the 78 patients attending the geriatric clinic.

Twenty-three different diagnoses were made among the 50 patients admitted to the geriatric assessment ward compared with 17 to the general medical ward (see Table  3). Two common reasons for admission to the general firm?overdoses and myocardial infarction are underrepresented, as special units are responsible for the direct admission of many of those cases.

The length of stay on the geriatric ward is twice that of the general medical patients. This reflects the slower recovery of the old patients and the time and care needed to engineer their difficult discharge home, which requires liaison with social services and other supporters. The variety of work in both settings compares very favourably.

There are, however, differences, and the best preregistration experience would be gained from working in rotating posts in both departments, or in a job in a combined unit. Harrison (1978) was delighted to find that he had not abandoned intellectual satisfaction on moving from general to geriatric medicine. Table 3 shows the scope of the diagnostic challenge presented by geriatric patients. Further satisfaction is also available from attempting to solve patients' social problems and in helping to support them and their relatives through their final illnesses, but these rewards are more difficult to quantify.


Conclusions and Recommendations

Many doctors, not having had any direct contact with departments of geriatric medicine, assume that all they are missing is contact with demented old people devoid of any remedial or interesting pathology. I hope, however, that this article will allay their fears on all counts.

The demented account for only 17 per cent and these patients and their relatives can all be helped and management problems eased: this compares with the 27 per cent of patients in the general medical clinic with neurotic problems. The only diagnostic fields underrepresented in geriatric clinics are neurosis, cardiovascular disease and endocrinology. Gastrointestinal, musculo-skeletal and central nervous system disorders are all more frequent in those attending geriatric clinics. The spread of abnormalities is also more even in the geriatric clinics, with gut problems, musculo-skeletal disorders, psychiatric illness and neurological diagnoses all occurring at an incidence of between 18 to 20 per cent.

Smith and Irvine (1971) have already demonstrated that the variety of medical work on a geriatric ward can equal or surpass that of a general ward, and the comparisons in this paper support their claims. With the rising occupancy of hospital beds by the aged and the increased attendance by the elderly at general medical clinics, it would seem that our patients are bringing together general and geriatric medicine. It would therefore be a great shame if the attitudes of doctors tended to keep these two fields of medicine apart. If Journal of the Royal College of Physicians of London Vol. 13 No. 2 April 1979 freedom of movement by junior doctors between departments was encouraged by the arrangement of rotating posts, we might eventually produce the form of medical service required by our community. More doctors might then be attracted into the specialty of geriatric medicine. Others would continue to enter their chosen specialty, but with more insight and skills to help them deal more effectively with their elderly patients.

Table 1 .
1Incidence of Disorders in Main Systems Presenting at a Geriatric Clinic and General Medical Clinics.System disordered 

Geriatric clinic 

(78 patients, including 3 aged < 65 years) 

General Medical clinics (135 patients) 

95 patients < 65 years 
40 patients > 65 years 

Gastrointestinal 

Endocrine 

Musculoskeletal 
Cardiovascular 
Urogenital 
Psychiatric 

Central nervous 

Respiratory 

Malignancies 

iatrogenic disease 



Table 2 .
2Showing Percentage Representation of System Disorders in Various Groups.General Medical Clinic 



Table 3 .
380 hospitals in 9 regions scattered throughout the UK. Their figures are compared with this survey inTable 2.Fifty Consecutive Admissions, October-November 1976. (Average length of stay: general medical 12.9 days; 
geriatric medicine 28.4 days). 

Geriatric Assessment Ward 

Stroke 

10 

Chest infections 

6 

Carcinoma 

4 

Myocardial infarction 

3 

Diverticular disease 

2 

Macrocytic anaemia 

2 

Iatrogenic disease 

2 

Dementia 

2 

Osteoporosis 

2 

Transient ischaemic attacks 

2 

Congestive cardiac failure 

2 

Gastrointestinal bleeding 

2 

Left ventricular failure 

Complete heart block 
Hypothermia 

Ornithosis 

Hydrocephalus 

Osteoarthritis 

Tuberculous meningitis 

Gastric ulcer 

Epilepsy 

Acute leukaemia 

Cervical cord compression 

General Medical Ward 

Chest infections 
Overdoses 

G.I. bleeding 
Pulmonary embolus 
Myocardial infarction 

Deep vein thrombosis 

Stroke 
Diabetes 

Multiple sclerosis 
Hypercalcaemia 
Congestive cardiac failure 
Porphyria 

Left ventricular failure 

Complete heart block 
Hypothermia 

Carcinoma 
Parkinson's disease 



Gateway or Dividing Line?. G Forsyth, R Logan, Oxford University PressForsyth, G. and Logan, R. (1968) Gateway or Dividing Line? Oxford University Press.

Lancet, 1, 866. J F ; Harrison, B J Smith, R E Irvine, British MedicalJournal. 161. Todd, J. W.131417Gerontologia ClinicaHarrison, J. F. (1978) Lancet, 1, 866. Smith, B.J. and Irvine, R. E. (1971) Gerontologia Clinica, 13, 161. Todd, J. W. (1978) British MedicalJournal, 1, 417.