658712321C8A89D64A8DC975B7D7949E
The Cochrane Library.The single most reliable source of evidence in healthcareThe Cochrane Reviews highlighted below are available from the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (www.thecochranelibrary.com) Cochrane Reviews are regularly updated as new evidence emerges and in response to feedback, and the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews should always be consulted for the most recent version of the review.New tool aims to improve lung cancer prevention, screening, and treatmentAUGUST 11, 2025 -Experts have created a customizable, web-based tool that provides state and local leaders with tailored resources to reduce lung cancer mortality rates and advance treatment.The tool's development and features are described in an article published by Wiley online in CANCER, a peerreviewed journal of the American Cancer Society.Although lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer and cancer deaths worldwide, screening rates have remained low, leading to delayed diagnoses and care and ultimately resulting in high mortality rates.To reduce lung cancer deaths, the American Cancer Society National Lung Cancer Roundtable (ACS NLCRT) was founded in 2017 to unite public, private, and non-profit groups, with more than 200 leading patient advocacy organizations, professional medical societies, state and federal government agencies, cancer centers, academic institutions, health systems, health plans, and corporate associations joining together to lend their expertise.Among its 10 task groups, the State-Based Initiatives (SBI) Task Group was charged to provide states with tailored resources, best practices, and implementation strategies to address lung cancer, and to create a centralized, web-based tool.

The SBI Planning Tool was developed through meetings, interviews, and usability testing, and the website's content, layout, and navigability were reviewed biweekly.User feedback was also gathered through surveys.The developers made an effort to allow users to navigate the webpage towards tailored recommendations based on their needs because every state or region has unique challenges and assets dependent on existing work in lung cancer, availability of funds, policies in place, levels of provider engagement, and community perceptions.Also, as limiting interventions to better-resourced communities without including underserved areas could worsen geographic, demographic, and cultural disparities in lung cancer outcomes, a focus on health equity was integrated throughout the SBI Planning Tool.

"Before the ACS NLCRT was established, but more so after, state coalitions focused on public health initiatives to reduce lung cancer deaths have sprung up," said senior author Robert Smith, PhD, of the American Cancer Society."It is often said that 'all public health is local,' and the aim of the ACS NLCRT State-Based Initiatives Task Group is to give local leaders, health care professionals, and advocates the tools to efficiently and effectively develop tailored programs to advance lung cancer control in their state.Among the many achievements of the ACS NLCRT, the development of the SBI Planning tool ranks high on the list."

This article is part of CANCER's American Cancer Society National Lung Cancer Roundtable series.


Does a culturally tailored quality of life intervention benefit Latina breast cancer survivors and caregivers?

FEBRUARY 6, 2025 -A recent randomized controlled trial assessed the benefits of a group-based intervention that fosters communication and coping skills in a culturally tailored way for Latina breast cancer survivors and their caregivers.The results are published by Wiley online in CANCER, a peerreviewed journal of the American Cancer Society.

For the trial, investigators randomized 136 Latina breast cancer survivors and 136 caregivers from Washington, D.C., New York, NY, and San Jose, CA, to participate in an 8-session coping and communication intervention that reflects the cultural preferences and values of Latina/o people (70 pairs) or to receive usual care support services through community-based organizations (66 pairs).The intervention was developed by Nueva Vida, Inc., a community-based organization in Washington D.C., and the study was funded by the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute.

Among the patient-caregiver pairs in the intervention group, 71.4% attended at least 5 of the 8 sessions, demonstrating high engagement, with 82% of participants still in the program at 6 months.There were clinically significant improvements in breast cancer survivors' reports of anxiety and fatigue at 6 months after the intervention compared with reports by breast cancer survivors who used usual community resources; however, after adjusting for potentially influencing factors, the results were not statistically significant.

"Our close collaboration with 4 exceptional community-based organizations for this trial led to our success with recruitment and retention of Latina breast cancer survivors and their caregivers.Future research can seek to replicate our intervention and evaluate the intervention with other groups of breast cancer survivors and their caregivers," said senior author Kristi D. Graves, PhD, of Georgetown University.

Full Citation:"Randomized Trial of a Community-Based, Culturally Tailored Intervention: High Engagement Among Latina Breast Cancer Survivors." Katarina AuBuchon, Claudia Campos Galvan, Ysabel Duron, Ivis Sampayo, Migdalia Torres, Alejandra Hurtado-de-Mendoza, Charlene Kuo, Christina Rush, Maria Gloria Elliott, Jennie Santiago, Laura A. Logie, Astrid Jimenez, George Luta, and Kristi D. Graves. CANCER;Published Online: June 2, 2025(DOI: 10.1002/cncr.35842).

URL upon publication: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/cncr.35842Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration.Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Reproduced with permission

http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/cncr.35954

Full Citation: "The American Cancer Society National Lung Cancer Roundtable Strategic Plan: Addressing Planning for Lung Cancer Interventions at the State and Local Level through the Creation of the National Lung Cancer Roundtable Planning Tool."JessicaM.G.Olson, Jennifer R. Knight, Amy M. Copeland, Kerstin A. Ohlander, Katie H. Bathje, Hannah C. Burson, Cindy A.Domingo, Kelly A. Durden, Elizabeth Dickson-Gavney, Korey E. Hofmann, Timothy W. Mullett, Lauren S. Rosenthal, Ella A.  Kazerooni, Douglas E. Wood, and Robert A. Smith.CANCER; Published Online: August 11, 2025 (DOI: 10.1002/cncr.35954).Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration.Published by JohnWiley & Sons, Ltd., Reproduced with permission.
URL upon publication:
https://smj.org.sa Saudi Med J 2025; Vol. 46 (9)