Towards a climate change adaptation strategy for national parks: adaptive management pathways


Towards a climate change adaptation strategy for national parks: adaptive management pathways
Elsevier required licence: © 2018. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 1 under dynamic risk. 2Keyword: climate changenational parksadaptation, risk management, planning 20
3Government seeks to manage public protected areas, such as national parks, to conserve high-quality 4 wildlife habitats and provide essential ecosystems services at risk of permanent damage or extinction 5 from climate change. The complexity of the organizational structure required to deliver this breadth of 6 functions, coupled to uncertainty surrounding the onset and severity of climate impacts at local scale, 7 impedes planning for climate change. This paper describes the development of an adaptation planning 8 tool and its application in a pilot planning process for the National Parks and Wildlife Service, the 9 agency of the New South Wales (NSW) Government (Australia) responsible for management of 10 national parks and public conservation reserves. The process involved close engagement in knowledge 11 co-production in participatory workshops, and employed two complementary techniques, adaptive 12 pathways and risk assessment. It successfully elicited tacit knowledge of agency staff about the range 13 of interventions available, the need for management practices to evolve, and of discontinuities in 14 management pathways in a dynamic risk environment. Findings suggest that management effort 15 across the NSW reserve system will increase as climate risk rises. Consequently, government will need 16 to respond to increased demand for resources, for better targeting of those resources, and for 17 management innovation in how resources are deployed to support adaptation that is both 18 anticipatory and transformative. 19

Public protected areas, such as national parks, are specifically managed for biodiversity conservation of 27 native species and their habitats. Typically, biodiversity conservation is seen as a public good that offers benefits at a 28 range of temporal and spatial scales (Perrings and Gadgil 2003), and therefore traditionally falls to government to 29 service (Lockwood 2010, Berkes 2007. Public protected areas that contain high-quality wildlife habitats and provide 30 essential ecosystems services at risk of permanent damage or extinction from climate change will require 31 management intervention to maintain their biodiversity values (Cimato and Mullen 2010). Management that seeks 32 to limit the future damage from climate impacts rather than mitigate the underlying causes of climate change (i.e. 33 greenhouse gas emissions) is generally defined as anticipatory adaptation and is a distinct process from the 34 autonomous adaptation that occurs in biological systems leading to ecosystem change (Fankhauser et al. 1999; Smit 1 and Pilifosova 2003). While the effects of climate-induced species changes do not necessarily involve a decline in 2 ecosystem biodiversity (Vellend et al. 2017), the normative intent in national parks is to conserve the diversity of 3 native species rather than of species diversity per se. The focus on native species has led recently to the 4 development of approaches to conservation interventions that recognize the inevitability of ecosystem change 5 under future climate (Dunlop et al. 2013; Jones et al. 2016). For ecosystems, dynamic approaches to intervention 6 have been suggested that accommodate ecological change and biodiversity loss, that remain relevant and feasible 7 under a range of future trajectories, and that seek to conserve multiple societal values (Cimato and Mullen 2010; 8 Dunlop et al. 2013). 9

In New South Wales (NSW) Australia, management of national parks and public conservation reserves is 10 performed by the NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service (NPWS) (NSW Government 2016). Government has a 11 distinct role in climate adaptation, which includes adaptation of its own operations and creation of conditions that 12 encourage adaptive action in the community (Brooks and Adger 2005). Management of contemporary public 13 protected areas performs a range of functions, in addition to conservation of native biodiversity (Ayres 2016). The 14

functions of the NPWS range from fire and incident management (often as a statutory fire authority), pest and weed 15 control and maintenance of built assets (tourist centres, roads and fire trails, signage) to provision of tourism and 16 public amenity (recreation and nature experiences) and protection of cultural heritage assets (historic buildings and 17

sites, Aboriginal sites of significance). Some of these functions may be only indirectly related to conservation of 18 native species. In addition to coping with climate impacts across a range of NSW climatic zones and landscapes 19 (Jacobs et al. 2016, NSW Government 2015, NPWS has to plan adaptive actions for these multiple functions that will 20 be variously affected by changing climate. 21 Government agencies, in common with other types of organisations, are subject to a range of barriers that 22 restrict the planning, implementation and options for adaptation actions (Moser and Eckstrom 2010). These barriers 23 include conflicting timescales; substantive, strategic and institutional uncertainty; institutional crowdedness and 24 institutional void; institutional fragmentation; lack of awareness and communication, motives and willingness to act; 25 and, lack of resources (Biesbroek et al. 2013). Barriers can also form complex interdependencies that stymie 26 organizational change (Eisenack et al. 2014). An assessment of the barriers to adaptation for NPWS is beyond the 27 scope of this paper. However, while recognizing that significant planning has occurred within specific functional 28 areas (e.g. fire and incident management), it is likely that the complexity of NPWS's organizational structure and the 29 breadth of its functions coupled to uncertainty surrounding the onset and severity of climate impacts across 30 operational geographies have impeded whole-of-agency strategic planning for climate change. These issues often 31 elicit a collective view that the task is 'too big to tackle' ( The tool and process aimed to address the complex operational  2  realities of the organisation, incorporate uncertainty into the assessment process, engage participants (NPWS staff)  3 to help overcome barriers to adoption, and build capacity to use outputs in existing agency planning processes. 4 5 1 Methods 2   Two series of workshops were conducted consecutively with participants drawn from a broad range of policy,  3 planning and operations tasks across NSW NPWS (Figure 1). 4 5 Figure 1: Interrelationships among type of workshop (functional area and regional), scale (state, regional and 6 park) and existing policy and planning processes (e.g. Plans of Management (POMS)) in the pilot of a climate 7 adaptation planning process for NSW NPWS. Letters within symbols designate a functional area or region for The first series consisted of seven workshops with 'functional areas' of the agency. These functional areas are tasked 16 with centralised policy and planning at state and regional scale. The purpose of these workshops was to elicit 17 information on the broad suite of management options available to each functional area in response to the major 18 impacts of a changing climate. This information would then be synthesised into an adaption planning tool for use by 19 operational managers at the park (sub-regional) scale. Each of the workshops began with brief introductory 1 presentations on the aims of the project and a summary of climate projections for NSW (NSW Government 2015). 2 The project lead investigators (a professional researcher and a government project manager) jointly facilitated 3 workshop plenary sessions. A lead facilitator (researcher or government officer) and a scribe supported small group 4

sessions. In small groups of about 4-8, workshop participants performed four main tasks: 5

(1) Define the responsibilities of functional areas (summarised in Table 1) to gain an understanding of the 6 breadth of roles performed by NPWS. 7

(2) Visualise, as causal diagrams (Jonasson and Ionas 2008), the impacts of major climate drivers with a focus 8 on changes in rainfall and temperature, expressed as both extreme events (such as storm cells and 9 droughts) and incremental changes. Key event chains were extracted from the diagrams for a deeper 10 consideration of the management actions undertaken by NPWS functional areas in response to specific 11 impacts, and potential cross-dependencies with other climate actors within and external to NPWS. 12

(3) Develop an assessment matrix to understand how functional areas currently prioritise management 13

actions with respect to levels of climate risk. Risk was defined as the product of the probability and 14

consequence of an event (Hultman et al. 2010). The process allowed each functional area to frame risk 15 heuristically in relation to its specific role and operations, particularly where risk assessment was not 16 routinely incorporated in strategic planning of that group. 17

(4) Construct a matrix of adaptive pathways that incorporated the range of management options available to 18 each functional area. A pathways approach was used because it enables flexible planning under deep 19 uncertainty and helps prioritise adaptive actions in a dynamic risk environment (Kwakkel et al. 2015). This 20 process involved assembling a comprehensive list of management options, ordering the list according to 21 the degree of intervention associated with the action (for example, monitoring required less intervention 22 than asset decommissioning), and the use of tacit knowledge (Nonaka and von Krogh 2009) to determine 23 the levels of risk at which each management action would be implemented and discontinued. For 24 example, it may not be sensible to continue with repairs and maintenance to a built asset exposed to a 25 high level of risk. In addition, participants suggested adaptations to the action that might occur as risk 26 levels rose. For example, monitoring might change from low frequency, on-site inspection by staff to 27 higher frequency, remote sensing with rising level of risk. Leadership, strategy, frameworks and coordination to support regional delivery of pest management programs.


10

Customer experience (CED)

Develop and manage publications, content, brand, programs and communications.

Manage call centres, booking systems and oversee community partnership and volunteering.

Plan and develop visitor experiences, including NPWS Visitor Centres, delivering visitor and student educational programs and coordinating integrated customer and visitor interpretation programs.

12 Implement state-wide and regional tourism strategies; conduct visitor research; and coordinate and manage events and venues.


Heritage (HTG)

Aboriginal Heritage -provide state-wide, cross-government coordination and advice on Aboriginal heritage and Aboriginal Joint Management programs, strategies, policies, funding, projects and initiatives and deliver corporate programs and priorities.

Historic and World Heritage -provide advice and support in planning and conservation works in relation to historic heritage sites, precincts, objects, collections and investigations. Provide input into policies, strategies and systems to support historic heritage management in parks. Coordinate projects, programs and reporting for World Heritage Areas on NSW NPWS parks.


17

Park Assets Management (PSSB)

Lead the development and implementation of asset strategies and initiatives for fixed and mobile assets within NPWS. Provide asset policy, asset management systems, lifecycle and value management and leads acquisition, maintenance and disposal programs for mobile and fixed NPWS assets. Support park operations and incidents through management of mobile fleet and radio communication assets and provides expert support for high risk operations. Biodiversity and Wildlife -Provide leadership, strategy, frameworks and coordination to support regional biodiversity and wildlife activities (including threatened species) and implement wildlife programs on and off-park.

Reserve Establishment -Plan, assess, acquire and reserve strategic lands within the national park estate and provide tenure and land information services.

Landforms and rehabilitation -Deliver major rehabilitation programs and provide leadership, strategy, frameworks and coordination to support adaptive management across NPWS and regional delivery of environmental water, rehabilitation and geodiversity programs. Total 101 Table 1: NSW NPWS functional area groupings, their role in the agency and number of participants at functional 1 area workshops. 2


Regional workshops 3

The information from the functional area workshops was developed into a risk assessment tool which subsequently 4 informed a series of regional workshops. These workshops were held with regional NPWS staff representing a broad 5 range of roles at 10 locations covering 14 regions throughout NSW. The initial workshop in the regional series was 6 co-facilitated by researchers and government staff to test the process in a train-the-trainer setting. Thereafter, 7 government project staff facilitated the workshops. 8

Through the combination of plenary discussions and small group exercises, participants completed three 9 main tasks: 10

(1) Identification of key park values. For specific locations within the selected region, key park 'values' were 11

identified on region-wide geographical maps. Values could be broadly defined, for example, as a species of 12 importance to biodiversity, a significant built asset (NPWS building, infrastructure or heritage asset), a site 13 of cultural importance (indigenous or non-indigenous) or a rare landscape feature. 14 (2) Assignment of current risk and management actions. For selected key values, a level of current climate risk 15

was assigned based on the assessment matrices developed in the functional workshops as appropriate 16

(that is, the park assets matrix was used for buildings and infrastructure values, nature conservation 17 matrix for biodiversity values and so on). Participants then listed the management actions currently 18

implemented to protect the value. Using the adaptive pathways appropriate to the function of the value, 19

participants then compared their list against the comprehensive suite of actions identified as potentially 20 appropriate at the specified risk level. 21

(3) Identification of future risk and management options. Finally, participants were asked to consider the 22 change in management required should the climate risk to the value rise to the next highest category. For 23 example, the actions identified as required to manage a medium of level of risk to a coastal shell midden 24

were modified to now account for a high risk level. 25

The information generated in the regional area workshops was collated into a database and formed the 26 basis for a series of case studies of adaptive management under climate risk that encompassed most of the climate-27 threatened value-types throughout NSW NPWS reserves. It was envisioned that the database could be used as a 28

resource for knowledge sharing about management options across the NSW reserve system and to inform the 29 consideration of climate change in the development of management plans (Figure 1) 


13

Total 208 Table 2: Regions, locations and participation in NPWS regional workshops. 


Key management pathways and interdependencies 1

Key event chains were extracted from impact visualisations for consideration of the complexity of actions employed 2 to manage the event, and identification of interdependencies among NPWS functional areas and the public. For 3 example, for the customer experience (CED) functional area (Figure 3), sea level rise (SLR) that causes periodic or 4 permanent inundation of park assets triggers a complex suite of management actions. In the event of SLR-induced 5 beach erosion or campground inundation, CED staff erect signs and may restrict access to the public. Increased CED 6

resources are devoted to communications to update the NPWS website and social media pages and to manage 7 internal communications with other areas such as on-line accommodation booking services, and park assets 8 managers (PAB). CED manages external communications with the media and park volunteers. Other important 9 stakeholders such as park rangers and external commercial tour operators may also be notified of any cancellation of 10 public tours, for instance, during a high tide event. If Aboriginal artefacts are affected, then NPWS staff notifies Local 11

Aboriginal Land Councils (LALC's). SLR can also cause damage or loss of assets managed by PAB. Ongoing effects on 12 built assets may require adaptive retrofitting or rebuilding, to improve drainage and divert water away from the 13 asset. 14 15 16


Figure 3: A key impact chain (rectangles) for the customer experience functional area showing the complexity of 17 management operations/actors (ovals) involved in response to a sea level rise event. 18


Risk framing 19

Of the two components of risk, there was less variation among functional areas in the framing of 'likelihood' (or 20 probability); whereas the definition of 'impact' (or consequence) varied and was closely related to the role of each 21 functional area. Participants from functional areas unfamiliar with the application of climate change risk to their 1 operational roles initially struggled to define likelihood categories for current climate related events. However, after 2 discussion most settled on a generic framing of likelihood categories routinely used by the fire and incident 3 management functional area as, 1. Rare: theoretically possible but not expected to occur: 2. Unlikely: will not occur 4 in the majority (fewer than 50%) of situations; 3. Possible: equal chance of occurrence or non-occurrence; 4. Likely: 5 will occur in the majority (greater than 50%) of situations; and, 5. Almost certain: will occur in most to all situations. 6 Table 3 presents the impact categories from climate events as defined by three functional areas: Fire and 7

Incident Management (FIM), Nature Conservation (NC) and Heritage (HTG).FIM defined the impacts of fire in terms 8 of its effects on health and safety of public and staff, environment, and Aboriginal and non-indigenous culture and 9 heritage ranging from little or no impact (negligible) to wide-scale unrecoverable or permanent loss to values of 10 critical importance (catastrophic). NC considered impact not only in terms of species decline but also in relation to 11 the threat to agency resources and effort required to continue its role in biodiversity conservation.  The impact and consequence categories were then used to construct a standard 5x5 (five-colour) risk matrix 2 for each functional area (Cox 2008) to aid in the development of adaptive management pathways. assets. This action spans all risk levels from negligible through to extreme risk although, as risk levels rise, ongoing 7 maintenance and repair of assets would likely be prioritized in terms of costs. Other pathways implemented at the 8 low risk threshold include monitoring, communications, public and staff protection, and improvements to building 9 standards and design. Four management actions, building standards, building retrofits, building replacement and 10 relocation, and asset decommissioning formed a complex interconnected pathway of actions to adapt to the impacts 11 of climate as risk levels rose from low to extreme. This pathway links development of improved building standards 12

and their implementation in asset upgrades with the need for asset replacement and relocation to mitigate risk. The 13 pathway terminates with the closure and decommissioning of assets under extreme risk levels. 14 For PAB, management effort is greatest at medium to high risk levels as the largest numbers of pathways are in 15 operation to manage risk. This response was common across the range of functional areas. 


area. Black circles represent the beginning of a pathway or a disjunction along a pathway. Dotted lines uncertainty 2

about the continuation of a pathway at a certain risk level. 3


Regional workshops: tool implementation 4

The adaptive management pathways developed in the functional area workshops (Figure 4) formed a tool to aid 5 regional adaptation planning for climate change. Figure 5 illustrates the use of the Aboriginal and cultural heritage 6 pathways in a case study to assess management of an Aboriginal coastal shell midden potentially subject to sea level 7 rise. In this case, the current risk to the midden was assessed as low to medium (yellow band in Figure 5) with 8 generally minimal impact on the site but with some potential for damage and temporary loss of access during king 9 tide events. This level of risk called for management actions that included monitoring of impacts, recording of stories 10 and culture camps to conserve intangible aspects of heritage, and repairs to site damage. These actions were then 11 compared against the current management to determine any additional actions that should be in place now at the 12 site. Future management needs under climate change were then considered as the list of actions required to be 5 implemented to manage the site for the next highest risk category, that is medium-high (orange band in Figure 5). At 6 this level, the midden is at risk of severe damage or loss with concomitant loss of cultural connection and cultural 7 practices associated with the site, and change in the surrounding landscape. Management at this risk level requires 8 additional actions that may include deeper consultation with the Aboriginal community, cultural storyline 9 confirmation at another location, alternative methods to convey cultural meaning (e.g. geo-spatial applications for 10 story telling) and possible site 'ruination'. The list of additional future actions, in combination with frequency or level 11 of impact to the value, could then be factored into planning at this site. This task was completed for a range of value 12 types in selected National Parks to better understand future management effort from local to regional scale. Morehouse (2005) defined a model of knowledge co-production for climate assessments as the interaction of three 4 components -interdisciplinarity, interaction with stakeholders and production of usable knowledge -with successful 5 application achieved through an appropriate 'fit' between the state of knowledge production and application, 6 disciplinary and personal flexibility, and availability of resources. Our engagement with NSW NPWS suggested that it 7 is arguably one of the most complex areas of government service delivery. Its mandate stretches across a range of 8 scales and levels (e.g. Cash et al. 2006): spatial, temporal, jurisdictional, institutional and managerial. In addition, the 9 agency and its staff are integral to various social networks, internal and external to the organisation, and draw on 10 diverse knowledge domains to perform functions for society. This complexity is heightened in strategic planning for 11 the current and projected impacts of climate. We believe that the process we employed in this study is an example 12 of knowledge co-production because it: 13

• aimed specifically to gather, integrate and disseminate information relevant to regional planners and 14 decision makers with the users of that information (demonstrating 'fit'); 15

• was co-designed with agency staff to ensure it was culturally appropriate (demonstrating flexibility); and, 16

• incorporated close consultation with senior NPWS decision-makers to ensure their support for and 17 encouragement of participation by agency staff (securing resources). 18 19

Moreover, our approach 'flips' in orientation between phases combining a top-down-predictive approach to 20 understand high level agency functions (functional area workshops) with a bottom-up-diagnostic approach to 21 understand agency operations (regional workshops), thereby also satisfying contemporary guidance on good 22

practice for adaptation planning ( the use of standard likelihood-consequence risk matrices is contentious among quantitative risk researchers. These 38 matrices, particularly where they are used to rank options, have been criticised as both mathematically dubious (Cox 39 2008) and subject to often wide variation in assignment of ratings owing to differences in worldviews, beliefs and 40

psycho-social factors among individual risk assessors (Ball and Watt 2013). However, we used a qualitative approach 41 to development of a standard risk matrix from expert-derived heuristics, which proved useful as a device for 42 workshop participants to examine future management scenarios without the complexity of detailed climate 43 projections and statistical probabilities. Incorporation of simple risk heuristics facilitated the conversion of the lists of 44 management actions into an adaptive planning tool because it revealed the need for practices to evolve within 1 individual pathways (for example, changes in the way monitoring is conducted) and of discontinuities in pathways 2 requiring a change in the selection of actions under heightened risk. It is important to recognise that at sites where 3 multiple value types are co-located it is possible that multiple risks are in play (for example at a heritage site that 4 encourages heavy public visitation requiring extensive interpretive signage). This again reflects the complex 5 operational realities of the NPWS. 6

Anticipatory action by management to avoid exceeding disruptive thresholds of change is generally implicit 7 in adaptation planning processes (Kates et al 2012) and is a concept central to social-ecological resilience theory 8 (Nelson et al. 2007). Two types of thresholds have been identified (Lorenzoni et al. 2005): 9

• Type 1 thresholds relate to slow changes in climate that may eventually result in system damage and are 10 amenable to incremental approaches to adaptation. 11

• Type 2 thresholds relate to abrupt or catastrophic changes in climate that lead to 'dangerous' system 12 impacts unacceptable as a consequence of their scale and irreversibility and which call for transformative 13 responses. 14 Our process attempted to recognise both types of thresholds by presenting future projections of average 15 temperature and rainfall and also drawing on management experience of past extreme events (such as king tides, 16 east coast low storms, and bushfires). We deliberately focused on management triggered by incremental rather than 17 abrupt change in risk, framing adaptation planning in the current practice and lived experience of participants to 18 overcome institutional inertia (Lawrence and Haasnoot 2017). However, when viewed holistically across all 19 functional areas, our approach indicates that management effort will increase as climate risk rises becoming greatest 20 at medium to high levels of risk across all regions. Therefore, government will need to respond to increased demand 21 for resources, for better targeting of those resources, and for management innovation in how resources are 22

deployed. Within the NPWS, public reserve management will need to plan for Type 2 thresholds. Kates et al. (2012)  23 suggest that anticipatory transformational adaptation needed to respond to these thresholds may be difficult to 24

implement because of uncertainties about risks and benefits, the high costs of transformational actions, and 25

institutional and behavioural actions that tend to maintain business as usual. Our discussions with participants also 26 suggested that issues of scale may become increasingly important in planning for transformation. For example, at 27 state-scale the need for negotiation with the community around the prioritisation of values that can be conserved 28 and the acceptability of conservation methods (e.g. in situ versus ex situ) was an issue canvased during our 29

workshops. At region-scale, the capability to anticipate the necessary surge in intervention was considered critical 30 under a range of extreme climate events that, as risk levels rise, may simultaneously affect not only parts of NSW but 31 all of Australia. Finally, at local-scale, transformational adaptation will require NPWS staff to remain open to, and be 32 supported in, the adoption of new ways of working to ensure scarce resources are used most effectively. 33


Conclusions 34

Combining risk assessment with an adaptive pathways approach explicitly linked to management actions proved a 35 useful way to engage a broad range of decision makers in an area of government that is, arguably, one of the most 36 complex, climate sensitive and potentially contentious for service delivery. We believe the process not only makes a 37 significant contribution as a strategic planning tool for climate change adaptation in public sector conservation, but 38 also provides further empirical evidence to support the importance of co-production of knowledge at the policy-39 science interface (Lemos and Morehouse 2005). 40

The value of an engagement strategy such as the one used in this study lies, at least in part, in evaluation of 41 participant satisfaction with the process and outputs, the subsequent use of the information generated and, 42 ultimately, in the demonstration of a change in organisational thinking. Participant evaluation of the process 1 collected at the end of each workshop indicated that a clear majority (90%) of respondents agreed that they had an 2 opportunity to participate and input into the discussion. This coupled with the high levels of attendance and positive 3 feedback on the process gives us confidence in the robustness of our findings. 4

Since the delivery of the workshops, this process has been introduced to a variety of operational and strategic 5 planning contexts in NSW Government including long-term strategic planning for water, marine estate and 6

Aboriginal land management. At time of writing, for NPWS, this process has contributed to the development of a 7

draft Adaptation Strategy that sets out 4 main actions. These include: 8 1. A pilot project for including adaptation triggers into the NPWS operational systems; 9 2. A pilot project for including dynamic risk pathways in strategic planning, and formal Plans of Management for a 10 priority park; 11 3. Development of a comprehensive strategy for communicating adaptation decisions of NPWS to NSW 12 communities; and, 13 4. Continuation of support for Aboriginal Heritage risk management through the delivery of adaptation workshops 14

to Aboriginal communities of joint managed parks (NSW ALC 2016). 15

In addition, State of the Parks reporting (NSW Government 2015) will now include more detailed climate change 16 impact reporting to track recognition of specific climate change impacts (fire, floods, storms, SLR) rather than a 17 generic category of 'climate change' as an impact. We believe these initiatives by the NSW Government are 18

indicators of the utility of the information generated and of a change in organisational thinking that is attributable to 19 our workshop process. 20 


of anthropogenic climate disruption are expected to be wide-scale and devastating for ecosystems and 22 the services they provide to society (Parmesan and Yohe, 2003; Cardinale et al. 2012; Urban 2015; Grimm et al. 23 2016). While evidence is mounting that ecosystems are already affected (e.g. Hughes 2000; Pecl et al. 2017), there 24 remains uncertainty about the onset and severity of some impacts, which is problematical for planning societal 25 responses (for example sea level rise: Moser 2005; Spirandelli et al. 2016). 26


8 seven functional areas or 14 regions respectively. Functional areas were Pests and weeds (PW), Nature 9 conservation (NC), Strategy and services (ATS), Park assets management (PSSB), Heritage (HTG), Customer 10 experience (CED) and Fire and incident management (FIMS). Regional locations were Lower North Coast (LNC), 11 North Coast (NC), Western Region (WR), Far South Coast (FSC), Northern Tablelands (NT), South Coast (SC), 12 Northern Rivers (NR), Southern Ranges (SR), Metropolitan North East (MNE), Metropolitan South West (MSW), 13 Northern Plains (NP), Far West (FW), Central Coast Hunter (CCH), and Blue Mountains (BM) 14 Functional area workshops 15


coordination and delivery of state-wide fire and incident preparation, planning, response and recovery. ('Incidents' include rescue of marine mammals, natural disasters such as storms or flooding, and chemical or hazardous spills


Policy Team lead the development and interpretation of legislation, regulation and policy. Responsible for specialist support and integration services to NPWS and the Customer Service Division (CED). Lead strategic, operational and park planning across NPWS, including evaluating the 27 effectiveness and outcomes of park management programs and ensuring compliance with environmental impact assessment and public health requirements. The Community and Stakeholder Engagement Team (CaSET) engages the community of NSW and stakeholders in the management, awareness and enjoyment of national parks.

Figure 2 17 Figure 2 :
2172presents a typical example of impact visualisation from the functional area workshops. In this instance, the 3 effects of changes in temperature on pest and weed (PW) functional area were considered: gradual increases in 4 temperature; extreme heat events, and changed fire frequency and intensity. The direct effects of extreme heat 5 events included greater intensity and duration of heat-waves; changes in water availability; changes in the 6 distribution of species and changes to development patterns of plants (such as time of flowering and seed set) 7(Figure 2). Each of these direct effects is associated with a chain of 'downstream effects' of varying complexity.For 8 example, changes in the distribution of species may increase the invasiveness of pest and weeds and lead to an 9 expansion of their population size or range. Further indirect impacts include the emergence of new pest and weed 10 species and possible extinction of threatened species, which may in turn lead to a reprioritisation of organisational 11 monitoring and implementation programs and program budgets. Other indirect effects include changes to the 12 reproductive season of plants resulting in the need to alter seasonal implementation of control measures and 13 species responses to them. These changes may further affect fauna that rely on flowering plants and seeds for food, 14 such as pollinators or nectivorous bird species, which in turn may cause animal stress and lead to localised extinction 15 of sensitive species. 16 Example of direct (light red) and flow-on (grey) impacts of increasing temperature on pests and weeds 18 functional area. 19

3 Adaptive management pathways 4 Figure 4
344depicts adaptive pathways constructed from the range of management actions available to Park Assets 5Branch (PAB). At negligible risk levels, a single management action was identified: repair and maintenance of built 6

Figure 4 :
4Example of adaptive management pathways under dynamic risk developed for park assets functional 1

Figure 5 :
5Adaptation planning tool for 'values' in a national park utilising local knowledge of current climate 2 impacts, local climate projections and available management options under dynamic risk. Aerial images from 3 Google Earth. White dot is the hypothetical location of a shell midden potentially affected by future sea level rise. 4


and application of knowledge co-production has evolved into a model of good practice to integrate 2 science and policy in decision-making for climate change (Cash et al. 2006; Mastandrea et al. 2010). Lemos and 3


Jones and Preston 2011, Mastandrea et al. 2010). 23 Two complementary techniques were employed in the development of the planning tool: adaptive pathways 24 and risk assessment. The adaptive pathways concept emerged from the fusion of research on adaptive policymaking 25 (e.g. Walker et al. 2001) with that on adaptation tipping points and policy pathways (e.g. Kwadijk et al. 2010) to 26 support robust decision making under uncertainty. Uptake of the concept has been rapid and pathways approaches 27 have been applied in a variety of contexts and forms (Maru and Smith 2014), in particular for aspects of climate 28 adaptation planning including health (Few 2007), energy (Ren 2011), infrastructure (Smith et al. 2011), natural 29 disasters (Rosenzweig and Solecki 2014), and regional strategy (Jacobs et al. 2016). In our process, pathways were 30 explicitly linked to management practices in each NPWS functional area. When viewed collectively, these sets of 31 actions expose the complexity facing public reserve managers in attempting to navigate the array of possible 32 management options at specific sites with multiple values (such as national parks). 33 While incorporation of risk assessment in adaptation planning is recommended (Jones and Preston 2011) its 34 achievement, in practice, can be problematical. The difficulty people face in understanding uncertainty in relation to 35 statistical probabilities is well documented (Lee et al. 2015, Pidgeon and Fischoff 2011) and the formation of human 36 risk perception is complex and multifactorial (Helgeson et al. 2012, Hulme 2009, van der Linden 2015). In addition, 37


C. 2016. "Vibrant landscapes: encounters, ecologies, and politics of national parks in Australia." PhD diss., 23 Australian National University. Available from: http://hdl.handle.net/1885/110520 24 25 Ball, D.J., and J. Watt. 2013. "Further thoughts on the utility of risk matrices." Risk analysis 33(11): 2068-2078. 26 27 Berkes, F. 2007. "Community-based conservation in a globalized world." Proceedings of the National Academy of 28 Sciences 104(39): 15188-15193. 29 30 Biesbroek, G. R., J. E. M. Klostermann, C. J. A. M. Termeer, and P. Kabat. 2013. "On the nature of barriers to climate 31 change adaptation." Regional Environmental Change 13 (5): 1119-1129. 32 33 Brooks, N., and W. N. Adger. 2005. "Assessing and enhancing adaptive capacity." In Adaptation Policy Frameworks 34 for Climate Change: Developing Strategies, Policies and Measures, edited by B. Lim, and E. Spanger-Siegfried, I. 35 Burton, E. Malone, and S. Huq, 165-181. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 36 1 Cardinale, B.J., J.E. Duffy, A. Gonzalez, D.U. Hooper, C. Perrings, P. Venail, A. Narwani, G.M. Mace, D. Tilman, D.A. 2 Wardle, and A.P. Kinzig. 2012. "Biodiversity loss and its impact on humanity." Nature, D., W. N.Adger, F. Berkes, P. Garden, L. Lebel, P. Olsson, L. Pritchard, and O. Young. 2006. "Scale and cross-5 scale dynamics: governance and information in a multilevel world." Ecology and society. F., and M. Mullan. 2010. "Adapting to climate change: analysing the role of government." Defra Evidence 8 and Analysis Series,


In addition to the generic characteristics of assessments, a number of specific techniques have beenMoser 2014; Pidgeon and Fischoff 2011). Under such 
32 
conditions innovative approaches are needed that implicitly recognise uncertainty through the integration of 
33 
adaptive planning and climate risk management (Lawrence and Hassnoot 2017, Woodruff 2016; Walker et al. 2013). 
34 
Jones and Preston (2011) mapped the range of approaches to adaptation planning in two dimensions according to 
35 
their style of engagement with stakeholders (top down versus bottom up) and how they deal with time (predictive 
36 
versus diagnostic). However, they suggest approaches that combine these orientations and incorporate multiple 
37 
perspectives as offering greater flexibility in complex situations. 
38 

39 
suggested as useful additions to adaptation planning and assessment approaches to ensure uncertainty is explicitly 
40 
considered. These techniques include robust decision making (Lempert et al. 2006), real options analysis (Dobes 
41 
2008), and dynamic adaptive policy pathways (Haasnoot et al. 2013). In complex 'real world' situations, such as 
42 
adaptation planning for a multi-functional government agency, selection of techniques must be made pragmatically, 
43 
often requiring blending of theory and practice in bespoke, contextual processes that account for wide variations in 
44 
available data, staff knowledge and business systems, and that simultaneously seek to build organizational adaptive 
45 
capacity (e.g. Jacobs et al. 2014; Jacobs et al. 2015). 
46 
1 
adaptation planning process for the NSW NPWS. 


This project produced a large qualitative dataset. The results presented below focus on selected examples of 31 outputs from stages of the process and from individual functional areas to illustrate its efficacy as a tool for eliciting 32 local knowledge of management options and as an input to strategic planning of multi-functional public reserves for. 
30 

33 
climate change. 
34 
Regions 
Roles represented 
Number of 
participants 

Far South Coast and South 
Coast /Depot Beach (FSC) 

Strategic planning; fire management, area management, pest 
management, tourism, ranger, heritage, senior assets 
management, species recovery (shorebirds) 

29 

Central Coast Hunter and 
Lower North Coast / 
Newcastle (CC & LNC) 

Area management, bushfire management, strategic planning, 
fire management, operations coordination, ranger, park 
planning, assets management, coastal science, Aboriginal 
heritage conservation, wildlife management 

28 

Southern Ranges /Jindabyne 
(SR) 

Environmental management, ranger, tourism, strategic 
planning, fire management, pests and weeds management, 
field supervision, planning, regional management 

28 

Northern Plains / Narrabri 
(NP) 

Strategic planning, area management, ranger, assets 
management, fire management, heritage. 

18 

Northern Rivers/ Byron (NR) Ranger, area management, assets management, planning, 
'Saving our Species' program management; heritage, 
planning. pest and weed management. 

16 

North Coast/ Coffs Harbour 
(NC) 

Aboriginal heritage, regional management, threatened 
species management, ranger, fire management, area 
management, pest and weeds management, planning, 
program services delivery. 

20 

Metro North East and Metro 
South West/ Sydney (MNE 
& MSW) 

Visitor and tourism management, historic heritage curation, 
pest and weeds management, planning, area management, 
strategic planning, assets management, park rehabilitation, 
biodiversity and wildlife management. 

22 

Blue Mountains/ Blackheath 
(BM) 

Strategic planning, policy management, area management, 
ranger, assets management, fire management, Aboriginal 
heritage conservation, World Heritage conservation, retail 
management, pests and weeds management. 

21 

Western Rivers/ Griffith 
(WR) 

Strategic planning, ranger, area management, assets 
management, planning, executive management 

13 

Far West/ Broken Hill (FW) 
Strategic planning, ranger, area management, assets 
management, fire and incident management, World Heritage 
conservation. 




Fire and incident management: Health and safety, environment, Aboriginal and non-indigenous culture and/or heritageHTG defined 
12 
impact differently for tangible and intangible values. Typically, for tangible values the impacts ranged from little or 
13 
no loss of place or culture (negligible) to complete loss of values potentially leading to delisting of World Heritage 
14 
status at specific locations. Across the impact categories, intangible values were progressively diluted ranging from 
15 
acculturation (adoption of alternative cultures) under minor impact , to complete loss of culture, underpinning 
16 
cultural identity and spirituality in the landscape at catastrophic levels. 
17 

18 

Impact category 

Catastrophic 
Major 
Moderate 
Minor 
Negligible 

Unrecoverable / 
permanent loss in 
large numbers or of 
critical importance. 

Substantial over a 
long term to 
permanent loss 

Significant, medium 
to long term 
impacts or minor 
permanent loss 

Some impact, 
recover within a 
short timeframe 

Little to no impact 

Nature Conservation: Species decline, conservation resources and effort 

Species extinction/ 
Death of a staff 
member/ 
Government 
dismantles National 
Parks 

Rare/ Significant 
injury of staff/ Loss 
of agency credibility 

Localised extinction/ 
minor staff injury / 
Reduction in 
resources and 
funding 

Population decline/ 
Redirection of funds 

No detectable 
impact/ Failure to 
optimise outcomes 

Heritage: Tangible assets -historic buildings, collections, sites 

Loss of multiple 
significant cultural 
sites and access to 
sites/ loss of totem 
animal/ World 
Heritage site 
delisted 

Substantial loss of 
sites/ landscape 
change / loss of 
historic buildings or 
collections /WH* 
site damaged but 
recoverable 

Temporary loss of 
site access/ place 
disrespected/ minor 
or temporary 
damage to WH* site 

Minimal impact on 
cultural sites/ minor 
damage to a historic 
building or 
collection 

Little or no loss of 
place or culture. 
Heritage: Intangible assets -spirituality, culture and its practice 
Loss of culture/ 
underpinning 
identity/ spirit in the 
landscape 

Lack of interest in 
cultural practices 
and knowledge/loss 
of connection to 
place 

Landscape change 
but culture 
continues/ 
Temporary loss of 
connection to place 

Acculturation -
adoption other 
cultures -dilution of 
culture 

Little or no loss of 
place or culture. 



Table 3 :
3Framing by selected functional areas of the impact component of risk. 1

What's wrong with risk matrices?. L Cox, Risk analysis. 282Cox, L. 2008. "What's wrong with risk matrices?" Risk analysis. 28(2): 497-512.

Getting real about adapting to climate change: using 'real options' to address the uncertainties. L Dobes, Agenda: A Journal of Policy Analysis and Reform. 133Dobes, L. 2008. "Getting real about adapting to climate change: using 'real options' to address the uncertainties." 13 Agenda: A Journal of Policy Analysis and Reform. 15(3): 55-69.

Climate-ready conservation objectives: a scoping study. Gold Coast: 16 National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility. M Dunlop, H Parris, P Ryan, F Kroon, Dunlop M, H. Parris, P. Ryan, F. Kroon. 2013. Climate-ready conservation objectives: a scoping study. Gold Coast: 16 National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility.

Explaining and overcoming barriers to climate change adaptation. K Eisenack, S C Moser, E Hoffmann, R J Klein, C Oberlack, A Pechan, M Rotter, C J Termeer, Nature Climate Change. 410Eisenack, K., S.C. Moser, E.Hoffmann, R.J. Klein, C. Oberlack, A. Pechan, M. Rotter, and C.J. Termeer. 2014. 19 "Explaining and overcoming barriers to climate change adaptation." Nature Climate Change. 4(10): 867-872.

Weathering climate change: some simple rules to guide adaptation 22 decisions. S Fankhauser, J Smith, R Tol, Ecological Economics. 30Fankhauser, S., J. Smith, and R. Tol. 1999. "Weathering climate change: some simple rules to guide adaptation 22 decisions." Ecological Economics. 30(1999): 67-78.

Health and climatic hazards: framing social research on vulnerability, response and adaptation. R Few, 25 Global Environmental Change. 172Few, R. 2007. "Health and climatic hazards: framing social research on vulnerability, response and adaptation." 25 Global Environmental Change. 17(2): 281-295.

Dynamic adaptive policy pathways: a method for 28 crafting robust decisions for a deeply uncertain world. M Haasnoot, J H Kwakkel, W E Walker, J Ter Maat, Global Environmental Change. 232Haasnoot, M., J. H. Kwakkel, W. E. Walker, and J. ter Maat. 2013. "Dynamic adaptive policy pathways: a method for 28 crafting robust decisions for a deeply uncertain world." Global Environmental Change. 23(2): 485-498.

The role of knowledge, learning and mental models in public 31 perceptions of climate change related risks. J Helgeson, S Van Der Linden, I Chabay, Learning for Sustainability in Times of Accelerating Change. 32Helgeson, J., S. van der Linden, and I. Chabay. 2012. "The role of knowledge, learning and mental models in public 31 perceptions of climate change related risks." In Learning for Sustainability in Times of Accelerating Change, edited by 32

. A J Wals, P N Corcoran, Wageningen Academic PublishersWageningenWals, A.J. and P.N. Corcoran, 329-346. Wageningen:Wageningen Academic Publishers.

Biodiversity management in the face of climate change: a review of 22 years 35 of recommendations. N E Heller, E S Zavaleta, Biological conservation. 1421Heller, N. E., and E. S. Zavaleta. 2009. "Biodiversity management in the face of climate change: a review of 22 years 35 of recommendations." Biological conservation. 142(1): 14-32.

Biological consequences of global warming: is the signal already apparent?. L Hughes, Trends in Ecology & 1 Evolution. 152Hughes, L. (2000). "Biological consequences of global warming: is the signal already apparent?" Trends in Ecology & 1 Evolution. 15(2): 56-61.

Climate risk. N Hultman, D Hassenzahl, S Rayner, Annual Review of Environment and Resources. 351Hultman, N., D. Hassenzahl, and S. Rayner. 2010. "Climate risk." Annual Review of Environment and Resources. 35(1): 4 283-303.

Integrated regional vulnerability assessment of government services 7 to climate change. B C Jacobs, C Lee, D O&apos;toole, K Vines, International Journal of Climate Change Strategies and Management. 63Jacobs, B. C., C. Lee, D. O'Toole, K. Vines. 2014. "Integrated regional vulnerability assessment of government services 7 to climate change." International Journal of Climate Change Strategies and Management. 6(3): 272-295.

. B Jacobs, C Lee, S Watson, S Dunford, A Coutts-Smith, Adaptation Planning Process and Government. 10Jacobs, B., C. Lee, S. Watson, S. Dunford, and A. Coutts-Smith. 2016. "Adaptation Planning Process and Government 10

Adaptation Architecture Support Regional Action on Climate Change in New South Wales, Australia. SpringerHamburgIn Innovation in 11 Climate Change Adaptation edited by W. Leal FilhoAdaptation Architecture Support Regional Action on Climate Change in New South Wales, Australia." In Innovation in 11 Climate Change Adaptation edited by W. Leal Filho, 17-29. Hamburg: Springer.

An adaptive capacity guide book: Assessing, building and 14 evaluating the capacity of communities to adapt in a changing climate. B Jacobs, R Nelson, N Kuruppu, P Leith, Southern Slopes Climate Change Adaptation 15 Research Partnership (SCARP). Hobart, TasmaniaUniversity of Technology Sydney and University of TasmaniaJacobs, B., R. Nelson, N. Kuruppu, and P. Leith. 2015. An adaptive capacity guide book: Assessing, building and 14 evaluating the capacity of communities to adapt in a changing climate. Southern Slopes Climate Change Adaptation 15 Research Partnership (SCARP), University of Technology Sydney and University of Tasmania. Hobart, Tasmania.

Educational Technology 18 Research and Development. D H Jonassen, I G Ionas, 56Designing effective supports for causal reasoningJonassen, D. H., and I. G. Ionas. 2008. "Designing effective supports for causal reasoning." Educational Technology 18 Research and Development. 56(3): 287-308.

Incorporating climate change into spatial 21 conservation prioritisation: A review. K R Jones, J E Watson, H P Possingham, C J Klein, Biological Conservation. 194Jones, K. R., J. E. Watson, H. P. Possingham, and C.J. Klein. 2016. "Incorporating climate change into spatial 21 conservation prioritisation: A review." Biological Conservation. 194(2016): 121-130.

Adaptation and risk management. R N Jones, B L Preston, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate 24 Change. 22Jones, R. N., and B. L. Preston. 2011. "Adaptation and risk management." Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate 24 Change. 2(2): 296-308.

. J C Kwadijk, M Haasnoot, J P Mulder, M Hoogvliet, A Jeuken, R A Van Der Krogt, N G Van Oostrom, H , 27Kwadijk, J.C., M. Haasnoot, J.P. Mulder, M. Hoogvliet, A. Jeuken, R.A. van der Krogt, N.G. van Oostrom, H.A. 27

Using adaptation tipping points to prepare for 28 climate change and sea level rise: a case study in the Netherlands. E H Schelfhout, H Van Velzen, M J Van Waveren, De Wit, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change. 29. 15Schelfhout, E.H. van Velzen, H. van Waveren, and M.J. de Wit. 2010. "Using adaptation tipping points to prepare for 28 climate change and sea level rise: a case study in the Netherlands." Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change. 29 1(5): 729-740.

Transformational adaptation when incremental adaptations to 32 climate change are insufficient. R W Kates, W R Travis, T J Wilbanks, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 109Kates, R.W., W.R. Travis, and T.J. Wilbanks. 2012. "Transformational adaptation when incremental adaptations to 32 climate change are insufficient." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 109(19): 7156-7161.

Developing dynamic adaptive policy pathways: a computer-35 assisted approach for developing adaptive strategies for a deeply uncertain world. J H Kwakkel, M Haasnoot, W E Walker, Climatic Change. 1323Kwakkel, J.H., M. Haasnoot, and W.E. Walker. 2015. "Developing dynamic adaptive policy pathways: a computer- 35 assisted approach for developing adaptive strategies for a deeply uncertain world." Climatic Change. 132(3): 373- 36 386.

What it took to catalyse uptake of dynamic adaptive pathways planning to 1 address climate change uncertainty. J Lawrence, M Haasnoot, Environmental Science & Policy. 68Lawrence, J. and M. Haasnoot. 2017. "What it took to catalyse uptake of dynamic adaptive pathways planning to 1 address climate change uncertainty." Environmental Science & Policy. 68(2017): 47-57.

Predictors of public climate change 4 awareness and risk perception around the world. T M Lee, E M Markowitz, P D Howe, C Y Ko, A A Leiserowitz, Nature Climate Change. 511Lee, T.M., E.M. Markowitz, P.D. Howe, C.Y. Ko, and A.A. Leiserowitz. 2015. "Predictors of public climate change 4 awareness and risk perception around the world." Nature Climate Change. 5(11): 1014-1020.

A general, analytic method for generating robust 7 strategies and narrative scenarios. R J Lempert, D G Groves, S W Popper, S C Bankes, Management Science. 524Lempert, R. J., D.G. Groves, S.W. Popper, and S.C. Bankes. 2006. "A general, analytic method for generating robust 7 strategies and narrative scenarios." Management Science. 52(4): 514-528.

Good governance for terrestrial protected areas: A framework, principles and performance 10 outcomes. M Lockwood, Journal of Environmental Management. 913Lockwood, M. (2010). "Good governance for terrestrial protected areas: A framework, principles and performance 10 outcomes." Journal of Environmental Management. 91(3): 754-766.

Dangerous climate change: the role for risk research. I Lorenzoni, N F Pidgeon, R E O&apos;connor, Analysis. 136RiskLorenzoni, I., N.F. Pidgeon, and R.E. O'Connor. 2005. "Dangerous climate change: the role for risk research." Risk 13 Analysis. 25(6): 1387-1398.

GEC special edition-Reframing adaptation pathways. Y T Maru, M S Smith, Global Environmental 16 Change. 28Maru, Y.T. and M.S. Smith, 2014. "GEC special edition-Reframing adaptation pathways." Global Environmental 16 Change. 28(2014): 322-324.

Bridging the gap: linking climate-impacts 19 research with adaptation planning and management. M D Mastrandrea, N E Heller, T L Root, S H Schneider, Climatic Change. 1001Mastrandrea, M.D., N.E. Heller, T.L. Root, and S.H. Schneider. 2010. "Bridging the gap: linking climate-impacts 19 research with adaptation planning and management." Climatic Change. 100(1): 87-101.

Impact Assessments and Policy Responses to Sea-Level Rise in Three US States: An Exploration of 22 Human-Dimension Uncertainties. S C Moser, 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2005.08.002Global Environmental Change. 154Moser, S. C. 2005. "Impact Assessments and Policy Responses to Sea-Level Rise in Three US States: An Exploration of 22 Human-Dimension Uncertainties." Global Environmental Change. 15 (4): 353-69. 23 doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2005.08.002.

Communicating adaptation to climate change: the art and science of public engagement when 26 climate change comes home. S C Moser, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change. 53Moser, S. C. 2014. "Communicating adaptation to climate change: the art and science of public engagement when 26 climate change comes home." Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change. 5(3): 337-358.

A framework to diagnose barriers to climate change adaptation. S C Moser, J A Ekstrom, Proceedings 29 of the National Academy of Science. 29 of the National Academy of Science107Moser, S. C. and J.A. Ekstrom. 2010. "A framework to diagnose barriers to climate change adaptation." Proceedings 29 of the National Academy of Science. 107: 22026-22031.

Adaptation to environmental change: contributions of a resilience 32 framework. D R Nelson, W N Adger, K Brown, Annual Review Environmental Resources. 32Nelson, D.R., W.N. Adger, and K. Brown. 2007. "Adaptation to environmental change: contributions of a resilience 32 framework." Annual Review Environmental Resources. 32: 395-419.

Aboriginal and 35 Cultural Heritage Fact Sheet 3. New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council. Joint Management of National Parks (Part 4A)New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council (2016) "Joint Management of National Parks (Part 4A)." Aboriginal and 35 Cultural Heritage Fact Sheet 3.

. New South Wales Government. NSW Office of Environment and HeritageNew South Wales Government (2015) NSW Office of Environment and Heritage, AdaptNSW web site 1 http://climatechange.environment.nsw.gov.au/ [Accessed 21 April 2017].

. New South Wales Government. 17NSW Office of Environment and HeritageNew South Wales Government (2015) NSW Office of Environment and Heritage, State of the Parks web site 4 http://www.environment.nsw.gov.au/sop/index.htm [Accessed 17 July 2018].

NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service. New South Wales Government. New South Wales Government (2016) NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service web site 7 https://www.nationalparks.nsw.gov.au/ [Accessed 21 April 2017].

Perspective-Tacit knowledge and knowledge conversion: Controversy and 10 advancement in organizational knowledge creation theory. I Nonaka, G Von Krogh, Organization Science. 203Nonaka, I., and G. Von Krogh. 2009. "Perspective-Tacit knowledge and knowledge conversion: Controversy and 10 advancement in organizational knowledge creation theory." Organization Science. 20(3): 635-652.

Conserving biodiversity: Reconciling local and global public benefits. C Perrings, M Gadgil ; Kaul, I , P Conceicao, K Le Goulven, R U Mendoza, Providing 13 global public goods: managing globalization. OxfordOxford University PressPerrings, C., and M. Gadgil. 2003. "Conserving biodiversity: Reconciling local and global public benefits." In: Providing 13 global public goods: managing globalization, edited by Kaul, I., P. Conceicao, K. Le Goulven, and R.U. Mendoza, 532- 14 555. Oxford:Oxford University Press.

The role of social and decision sciences in communicating uncertain climate 17 risks. N Pidgeon, B Fischhoff, Nature Climate Change. 11Pidgeon, N., and B. Fischhoff. 2011. "The role of social and decision sciences in communicating uncertain climate 17 risks." Nature Climate Change. 1(1): 35-41.

Climate change adaptation pathways for Australian residential buildings. Z Ren, Z Chen, X Wang, 20 Building and Environment. 4611Ren, Z., Z. Chen, and X. Wang. 2011. "Climate change adaptation pathways for Australian residential buildings." 20 Building and Environment. 46(11): 2398-2412.

Hurricane Sandy and adaptation pathways in New York: lessons from a first-23 responder city. C Rosenzweig, W Solecki, Global Environmental Change. 28Rosenzweig, C. and W. Solecki. 2014. "Hurricane Sandy and adaptation pathways in New York: lessons from a first- 23 responder city." Global Environmental Change. 28(X): 395-408.

Adaptation to climate change in the context of sustainable development and 26 equity. B Smit, O Pilifosova, Sustainable Development. 899Smit, B., and O. Pilifosova. 2003. "Adaptation to climate change in the context of sustainable development and 26 equity." Sustainable Development. 8(9): 9.

Rethinking adaptation for a 4 C world. M S Smith, L Horrocks, A Harvey, C Hamilton, Philosophical 29 Transactions of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences. 369Smith, M.S., L. Horrocks, A. Harvey, and C. Hamilton. 2011. "Rethinking adaptation for a 4 C world." Philosophical 29 Transactions of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences. 369(1934): 196-216.

Improving Adaptation Planning for Future Sea. D J Spirandelli, T R Anderson, R Porro, C H Fletcher, 32Spirandelli, D. J., T.R. Anderson, R. Porro, and C.H. Fletcher. 2016. "Improving Adaptation Planning for Future Sea- 32

Level Rise: Understanding Uncertainty and Risks Using a Probability-Based Shoreline Model. Journal of Planning 33 Education and Research. 363Level Rise: Understanding Uncertainty and Risks Using a Probability-Based Shoreline Model." Journal of Planning 33 Education and Research. 36(3): 290-303.

The social-psychological determinants of climate change risk perceptions: Towards a 36 comprehensive model. S Van Der Linden, Journal of Environmental Psychology. 41van der Linden, S. 2015. "The social-psychological determinants of climate change risk perceptions: Towards a 36 comprehensive model." Journal of Environmental Psychology. 41(2015): 112-124.

. M Vellend, L Baeten, A Becker-Scarpitta, V Boucher-Lalonde, J L Mccune, J Messier, I H Myers-Smith, D F , Vellend, M., L. Baeten, A. Becker-Scarpitta, V. Boucher-Lalonde, J.L. McCune, J. Messier, I.H. Myers-Smith, and D.F.

Plant biodiversity change across scales during the Anthropocene. Annual Review of Plant Biology. 681Sax. 2017. "Plant biodiversity change across scales during the Anthropocene." Annual Review of Plant Biology. 68(1): 3 563-586.

Adaptive policies, policy analysis, and policy-making. W E Walker, S A Rahman, J Cave, European 6 Journal of Operational Research. 1282Walker, W.E., S.A. Rahman, and J. Cave, 2001. "Adaptive policies, policy analysis, and policy-making." European 6 Journal of Operational Research. 128(2): 282-289.

Adapt or perish: a review of planning approaches for adaptation 9 under deep uncertainty. W Walker, M Haasnoot, J Kwakkel, Sustainability. 53Walker, W., M. Haasnoot, and J. Kwakkel, 2013. "Adapt or perish: a review of planning approaches for adaptation 9 under deep uncertainty." Sustainability. 5(3): 955-979.

Planning for an unknowable future: uncertainty in climate change adaptation planning. S C Woodruff, 12 Climatic Change. 1393-4Woodruff, S. C. 2016 "Planning for an unknowable future: uncertainty in climate change adaptation planning." 12 Climatic Change. 139(3-4): 445-459.