The roles of Health Cadres in the Implementation of Mental Health Programs in Indonesia
January-March 2022

Cut Yuni Marlita 
Faculty of Medicine


Said Usman 
Faculty of Medicine


Marthoenis 
Faculty of Nursing
Universitas Syiah Kuala
Banda AcehIndonesia

Irwan Syahputra 
Faculty of Medicine


Nurjannah 
Faculty of Medicine


The roles of Health Cadres in the Implementation of Mental Health Programs in Indonesia

International Journal of Nursing Education
1419January-March 2022


Background

Mental or mental health includes a person's emotional, psychological and social well-being.

Mental health affects the way a person thinks, feels and acts. Mental health also helps determine     The training referred to in this study is training related to mental health programs, with the knowledge variable is grouped into two, namely high and low, the attitude variable is grouped into two, namely positive and negative, facilities are grouped into two, namely complete and incomplete, and the supervision variable is grouped into two, namely there is and there is not.

The results of complete data processing can be seen in the following table:    


c. Multiple Logistic Regression Test

Based on the results of the bivariate statistical test, the multivariate analysis included education, training, knowledge, attitudes, facilities, and supervision.

Furthermore, the research variables were analysed using logistic regression analysis. The results of the multivariate analysis can be seen in Table 4. 


Discussion

The  


how a person handles stress, relates to others and makes choices. Mental health is important at every stage of life, from childhood and adolescence to adulthood.Data for 2019 shows that 970 million people worldwide have a mental health disorder or substance abuse. Anxiety is the most common mental illness in the world, affecting 284 million people. Globally, mental illness affects more women (11.9%) than men (9.3%). Major depression, anxiety, alcohol use disorder, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and dysthymia (continuous mild depression) were identified as the main causes of mental disorders. The mortality rate for people with mental disorders was significantly higher than in the general population, .8%. Interestingly, as one of the provinces in Indonesia, Aceh Province has significant amount of mental health problems. It was reported that schizophrenia/psychosis mental disorders were 8.7%, depression 4.4% and mental emotional disorders 9.0%. Furthermore, the coverage of household treatment in Indonesia with antiretroviral therapy for schizophrenia/psychosis was 85.0% and depression 9.0%. Meanwhile, the coverage of household treatment in Aceh Province who has family members with schizophrenia/psychosis mental disorders was 83.5% and depression 11.7% 2 Aceh Besar, as a district in the province, established six indicators of the success of the program's achievements, namely: 1) the percentage of health centres that carry out community mental health efforts; 2) percentage of health service facilities as recipients of mandatory reporting of addicts; 3) percege of mental health awareness in villages; 4) the percentage of people with mental disorders (PMD) who receive mental health services and are independent; 5) percentage of PMD who are free from chains; and 6) the number of senior high schools and the equivalent that carry out efforts to prevent and control mental health and drug problems 3 Based on these indicators, the mental health programs in the district of Aceh Besar, Aceh province in 2019 obtained the following results: 1) the percentage of health centres that carried out community mental health efforts was 90% (2019 target: 90%); with mental disorders PMDwho receive mental health services and are independent are 50% (2019 target: 50%); 5) the percentage of PMD who are free from chains is 50% (2019 target: 50%); and 6) the number of senior high schools and the equivalent that carry out prevention and control of mental health and drug problems is 30% (2019 target: 30%).


Based on data from the District Health Office, Aceh Besar, in 2020, had 584 mental health cadres that are not evenly distributed in all villages in sub-districts in the district of Aceh Besar 4 . Several previous studies related to the evaluation of the implementation of mental health programs at health centres have been conducted qualitatively by Santoso (2019) with the results: 1) personnel involved in mental health programs have a minimum education of Diploma in Nursing; 2) have never received training related to mental health; 3) inadequate program funds; 4) early detection of cases has not been maximized; and 5) standard operational procedures for the implementation of mental health services are not available. Next, Hothasian, Suryawati and Fatmasari (2019) in their research describe the evaluation of inputs: 1) sufficient mental health personnel; 2) the available funds are sufficient; 3) facilities and materials are sufficient; 4) availability of standard operational procedures; 5) Unavailability of specific schedule. Process evaluation: 1) routine early detection is carried out; 2) the diagnosis is good; 3) limited stock availability of certain drugs; 4) difficulties in the tiered referral system; 5) extension activities are not optimal. Evaluation of output: 83 severe PMD who received mental health services are as much as 94.results, namely all health centres have not implemented mental health service standards, certified mental health doctors and nurses in health centres are still limited, mental nurses are not evenly distributed in all health centres, medicines are not adequate, mental health cadres are still limited and people's perceptions of going to traditional healers instead of going to health centres for treatment 6 Based on the description above, it is known that the implementation of mental health programs in health centres, especially in the district of Aceh Besar has not run optimally. There are several factors related to the success of mental health programs at the health centres. There was a relationship between nurses' perceptions of political support, funding, cooperation, organizational capacity, program evaluation, communication and strategic planning factors with the success of mental health activities in the community 7 . Fatoni (2011) in his research shows that the education of nurses in mental health programs is Diploma in Nursing, program planning is carried out by the Head of the health centre, and the performance of the health centre is in the poor category in implementing mental health programs. Mental health programs have not been implemented in accordance with minimum service standards 8 . This study is therefore undertake to investigate the role of health cadres in implementing mental health programs at health centres in accordance with the Decree of the Minister of Health of the Republic of Indonesia number: 406/Menkes/SK/VIdetermine the implementation of mental health programs and related factors at the health centre in the district of Aceh Besar. The population in this study were 584 mental health cadres in 12 subdistricts within the district. Aceh Besar and the entire population were sampled.The research instrument is in the form of an online questionnaire using the google form https://bit.ly/3hdCIW5, https://bit.ly/3wpVv5f, https://bit.ly/3gKZDrN, https://bit.ly/2TXGutvand equipped with explanations, informed consent and filling guidelines. The data analysis carried out includes descriptive analysis and inferential analysis.


is an analysis towards research variables in the form of a frequency distribution and is served in a percentage table towards characteristic variables, knowledge, training, attitude, facilities, supervision, and the role in the implementation of mental health programs.

( 1 )
1Characteristics of Mental Health CadresThe characteristics of the data in this study include age, gender, education, and occupation.12 International Journal of Nursing Education, January-March 2022, Vol.14, No. 1


results of the chi square test obtained p value = 0.000, thus it can be concluded that there is a relationship between a cadre's education and the role of cadres in the implementation of mental health programs in the Public Health Center Work Area in Aceh Besar District (p).0.05). The results of this study are in line with research conducted where the results of her research show that that health cadres and community leaders have an important role in socializing mental health, this is because cadres are the spearhead for reporting as well as handling and following up on mental problems in the environment 9 . The role of mental health cadres is to participate in improving and maintaining the mental health of the community. Cadres as influential people in health services need to improve their knowledge and skills in handling or providing health services, for example in handling and caring for mental disorders patients so that cadres in carrying out their duties are better and more precise. One of the efforts to increase the knowledge and skills of cadres is the provision of health education and skills in treating mental disorders patients after pasungor chain. In this effort there must be support from the community and the patient's family, health education is very effective, especially for health cadres who have not much knowledge about mental disorders and their treatments, usually health cadres pay less attention to mental disorders, most cadres only focus on common diseases that occur in society in general. The results of the chi square test obtained p value = 0.002, thus it can be concluded that there is a relationship between attitude and the role of cadres in the implementation of mental health programs in the Public Health Center Work Area in Aceh Besar District (p≤0.05) because mental health cadres are a helping hand from community health centers. The results of this study are in line with the research conducted Sahriana which states that the primary identification is in the form of data collection, providing health education, cadre attitudes and providing motivation. The role of mental health cadres in secondary prevention programs is early detection and socialization. The role of mental health cadres in tertiary prevention programs is to be kind in providing motivation and reminding patients to take medication regularly, besides that cadres convey to families to monitor patients taking medication. The implications for nursing are found that collaboration between cadres, families, communities and health services is needed to overcome mental health problems in the community. These findings can be used as a basis for information that can be used as a reference for developing community mental health programs 10 . The results of the chi square test obtained p value = 0.020, thus it can be concluded that there is a relationship between facilities and the role of cadres in the implementation of mental health programs in the Public Health Center Work Area in Aceh Besar District (p≤0.05). Health facility is a tool and/or place used to organize health service efforts, whether promotive, preventive, curative, or rehabilitative carried out by the Central Government, Regional Government and/ or the community. To achieve a good level of public health, health care facilities are needed and can provide affordable health services for all levels of society in the context of improving health, maintaining health, treating disease, and restoring health. The provision of Health Service Facilities is the responsibility of the Central Government and Local Governments International Journal of Nursing Education,January-March 2022, Vol.14, No. Facilities for the community to achieve the highest degree of health. The results of this study are in line with research conducted by Santoso which states that health facilities are an important factor in the implementation of all health programs and can directly affect the performance of health workers 11 . The results of the chi square test obtained p value = 0.013, thus it can be concluded that there is a relationship between supervision and the role of cadres in the implementation of mental health programs in the Public Health Center Work Area in Aceh Besar District (p≤0.05). Supervision is an observation or direct observation of the implementation of routine work. The results of this study are in line with research conducted by Rahmawati where the results of her research show that the role of leadership supervision is an aspect of the manager's or leader's duties as a supervisor 5 . Supervision becomes a facilitator who coordinates and provides direction on employee performance as well as supervises and evaluates the point of achievement of work targets. The role of leadership supervision on employee performance includes planners, directors, observers, trainers, and evaluators shows that there is an influence of the role of a health center leader in improving the health center's performance.ConclusionBased on the results of data processing, it can be concluded that there is a relationship between a cadre's education, training, knowledge, attitude, facilities, and supervision and the role of cadres in the implementation of mental health programs. Among these, supervision is the most predominant factor perceived by the health workers. It can be concluded that the improvement in the performance of the health center could be influenced by the supervisory role of the health center leadership as planners, directors, directors, trainers, and assessors.

Table 1 :
1The Frequency Distribution of Mental Health Cadre Characteristics at Health Centres in the Work Area in The District of Aceh Besar Based on age characteristics, it is known that most of the cadres are in the 20-30 year age group, as many as 384 people or 65.8% and the female category with a percentage of 93.4%. From the last education variable, it is known that 43.5% of cadres have secondary education. In terms of work, it is known that 82.5% of cadres are housewives.No. 
Characteristics 

Amount 

f 
% 

1. 

Age 

20-30 years old 
384 
65,8 

31-40 years old 
200 
34,2 

> 40 years old 
0 
0 

2. 

Gender 

Man 
2 
0,4 

Woman 
542 
99,6 

3. 

Education 

Basic 
78 
13,4 

Secondary 
254 
43,5 

High 
252 
43,2 

4. 

Occupation 

PNS 
7 
1,2 

Entrepreneur 
38 
6,5 

Housewife 
482 
82,5 

Farmer 
57 
9,8 

Amount 
584 
100 

Source : Data Primer, 2021 

(2) Training, Knowledge, Attitude, Facilities and 

Supervision 



Table 2 :
2The Distribution of Training Frequency, Knowledge, Attitude, Facilities and Supervision ofMental Health Cadres in the Implementation of Mental Health Programs 

No. 
Variable 

Amount 

f 
% 

1. 

Training 

Yes 
453 
77,6 

No 
131 
22,4 

2. 

Knowledge 

High 
229 
39,2 

Low 
355 
60,8 

3. 

Attitude 

Positive 
278 
47,6 

Negative 
306 
52,4 

4. 

Facilities 

Complete 
309 
52,9 

Not Complete 
275 
47,1 

5. 

Supervision 

There is 
369 
63,2 

There is not 
215 
36,8 

6. 

Role of Nurses 

Has a role 
376 
64,4 

Less role 
208 
35,6 

Amount 
584 
100 

Source : Primary data (2021) 



Table 2
2shows that 77.6% of cadres have also 

received training on mental health, most of the 

majority cadres have low knowledge, namely 60.8%, 

the majority of cadres have a negative attitude, namely 

52.4%, and there are 52.9% cadres who stated that the 

facilities were complete. Based on the supervision 

variable, it is known that most of the cadres stated that 

there was supervision in the implementation of mental 

health programs, namely 63.2%, and there were 64.4% 

of cadres who played a role in the implementation of 

mental health programs in Aceh Besar District. 

b. Bivariate Analysis. 

To find out the relationship between education, 

training, knowledge, attitudes, facilities and 

supervision of cadres with roles in the implementation 

of mental health programs, a chi square test was 

carried out with a 95% confidence level, the results of 

complete data processing can be seen in the following 

table: 



Table 3 :
3The Relationship Between a Cadre's Education and The Implementation of Mental HealthPrograms 



Table 3
3role of cadres in the implementation of mental health programs in the Public Health Centre Work Area inshows that out of 78 cadres with 

basic education, 33.3% have a lesser role in the 

implementation of mental programs than cadres 

with higher education (59.8%). The results of the chi 

square test obtained p value = 0.000, thus it can be 

concluded that there is a relationship between cadre 

education and the role of cadres in the implementation 

of mental health programs in the Public Health Centre 

Work Area in Aceh Besar District (p≤0.05) 

Furthermore, of the 77 cadres who stated that they 

had received training, there were 83.0% who played 

a role in the implementation of the mental program, 

which was higher than the cadres who had never 

received training (0%). The results of the chi square 

test obtained p value = 0.000, thus it can be concluded 

that there is a relationship between training and the 

Aceh Besar District (p≤0.05). Based on the results 

of data processing, it is known that of 229 cadres 

with high knowledge, 71.6% played a role in the 

implementation of the mental health program, which 

is much higher than cadres with low knowledge.The 

results of the chi square test obtained p value = 0.04, 

thus it can be concluded that there is a relationship 

between knowledge and the role of cadres in the 

implementation of mental health programs in the 

Public Health Centre Work Area in Aceh Besar 

District (p≤0.05). Of the 278 cadres with a positive 

attitude, 70.9% had a role in the implementation of the 

mental program, much higher than the cadres with a 

negative attitude (58.5%). The results of the chi square 

test obtained p value = 0.002, thus it can be concluded 

that there is a relationship between attitudes and the 

role of cadres in the implementation of mental health 

programs in the Public Health Centre Work Area in 

Aceh Besar District (p≤0.05).The results showed that 

of the 209 cadres who stated that the facilities were 

complete, 68.6% had a role in the implementation 

of the mental health program, which was higher 

than the cadres who stated that the facilities were 

incomplete (59.6%). The chi square test obtained a p 

value = 0.020, thus it can be concluded that there is a 

relationship between facilities and the role of cadres in 

the implementation of mental health programs in the 

Health Centre Working Area in Aceh Besar District 

(p≤0.05). Of the 417 cadres who stated that there was 

supervision, 77.9% had a role in the implementation 

of the mental program, which was higher than the 

cadres who stated that there was no supervision 

(22.1%). The results of the chi square test obtained 

p value = 0.000 cadres, thus it can be concluded that 

there is a relationship between supervision and the 

role of cadres in the implementation of mental health 

programs in the Public Health Centre Work Area in 

Aceh Besar District (p≤0.05). 



Table 4 :
4The Final Model of Logistic Regression Analysis of the Role of Health Cadres in theImplementation of Mental Health Programs at Community Health Centresin The District of Aceh 

Besar 

No 
Variable 
Odd Ratio 
CI 95% 
P value 

1 
Training 
8,251 
2,46-26,4 
0,002 

2 
Supervision 
9,808 
6,90-27,6 
0,000 

Source : Data Primer, 2021 



Ethical Clearance : The study obtained ethical clearance from the Health Ethical Committee at the ZainoelAbidin General Hospital Banda Aceh, Indonesia.
International Journal of Nursing Education, January-March 2022, Vol.14, No. 1
International Journal of Nursing Education, January-March 2022, Vol.14, No. 1
Acknowledgement:We would like to thank you all health cadres involved for their time and knowledgein this study.Conflict of Interest:There is no conflict of interest to disclose.Source of Funding:The research is a self-funded study
Mental health and psychosocial considerations during the COVID-19 outbreak. WHOWHO. Mental health and psychosocial considerations during the COVID-19 outbreak, 18 March 2020: World Health Organization. 2020.

Laporan Nasional Riset Kesehatan Dasar tahun. Balitbangkes, Jakarta: Kementerian Kesehatan RI. Balitbangkes. Laporan Nasional Riset Kesehatan Dasar tahun 2018. Jakarta: Kementerian Kesehatan RI; 2018.

Indikator program kesehatan jiwa. Dinkes, Jantho: Dinas Kesehatan Kab. Aceh Besar. Kabupaten Aceh BesarDinkes. Indikator program kesehatan jiwa Kabupaten Aceh Besar (2018 -2022). Jantho: Dinas Kesehatan Kab. Aceh Besar; 2018.

Data perawat CMHN dan kader kesehatan jiwa tahun 2020. Jantho: Dinas Kesehatan Kab. A Dinkes, Aceh BesarDinkes A. Data perawat CMHN dan kader kesehatan jiwa tahun 2020. Jantho: Dinas Kesehatan Kab. Aceh Besar; 2020.

. J M Hothasian, C Suryawati, E Y Fatmasari, Hothasian, J. M., Suryawati, C. & Fatmasari EY.

Evaluasi Pelaksanaan Program Upaya Kesehatan Jiwa Di Puskesmas Bandarharjo Kota Semarang Tahun. J Kesehat Masy (e-Journal). 71Evaluasi Pelaksanaan Program Upaya Kesehatan Jiwa Di Puskesmas Bandarharjo Kota Semarang Tahun 2018. J Kesehat Masy (e-Journal), 7(1), 75-83. 2019;

Mada. Universitas Gadjah 18 International Journal of Nursing Education. Islami M. Evaluasi Pelaksanaan Program Kesehatan Jiwa Masyarakat Oleh Puskesmas Di Kabupaten Aceh Besar141Islami M. Evaluasi Pelaksanaan Program Kesehatan Jiwa Masyarakat Oleh Puskesmas Di Kabupaten Aceh Besar. Universitas Gadjah 18 International Journal of Nursing Education, January-March 2022, Vol.14, No. 1 Mada; 2016.

. J Junardi, B A Keliat, Nhc Daulima, Junardi, J., Keliat, B. A. & Daulima NHC.

Analisis Faktor-Faktor Yang Berhubungan Dengan Keberhasilan Pelaksanaan Kegiatan Community Mental Health Nursing Di Aceh. Analisis Faktor-Faktor Yang Berhubungan Dengan Keberhasilan Pelaksanaan Kegiatan Community Mental Health Nursing Di Aceh.

. Idea Nurs Journal. 81Idea Nurs Journal, 8(1), 1-11. 2017;

Analisis Faktor Penurunan Capaian Program Kesehatan Jiwa Dinas Kesehatan Kabupaten Sidoarjo. S Fatoni, Evaluasi ProgramFatoni S. Analisis Faktor Penurunan Capaian Program Kesehatan Jiwa Dinas Kesehatan Kabupaten Sidoarjo (Evaluasi Program).

. UNIVERSITAS AIRLANGGA. UNIVERSITAS AIRLANGGA; 2011.

. Kesehat Masy. Faradila E. Peran Kader Kesehatan Dan Tokoh Masyarakat Dalam Promosi Kesehatan Jiwa Pada Pasien Pasca Pasung Di SukoharjoFaradila E. Peran Kader Kesehatan Dan Tokoh Masyarakat Dalam Promosi Kesehatan Jiwa Pada Pasien Pasca Pasung Di Sukoharjo. Kesehat Masy. 2019;

. Univeristas Airlangga Surabaya. Sahriana. Peran Kader Kesehatan Jiwa Dalam Program Kesehatan Jiwa Komunitas di MasyarakatSahriana. Peran Kader Kesehatan Jiwa Dalam Program Kesehatan Jiwa Komunitas di Masyarakat. Univeristas Airlangga Surabaya. 2018;

Evaluasi pelaksanaan program kesehatan jiwa di puskesmas simpang parit kecamatan renah pembarap tahun 2018. T Santoso, J Kesehat dan Sains Ter. 52Santoso T. Evaluasi pelaksanaan program kesehatan jiwa di puskesmas simpang parit kecamatan renah pembarap tahun 2018. J Kesehat dan Sains Ter 5(2), 36-50. 2019;