Site-based customized surgical approaches for orbital lesion and their outcomes -A case series
4 September 2023

Sucharita Das 
Department of Ophthalmology
All India Institute of Medical Sciences Rishikesh
249203UttarakhandIndia

Madhubari Vathulya madhubari@yahoo.co.in 
Department of Burns and Plastic Surgery
All India Institute of Medical Sciences Rishikesh
249203UttarakhandIndia

Anupam Singh 
Department of Ophthalmology
All India Institute of Medical Sciences Rishikesh
249203UttarakhandIndia

Jitendra Chaturvedi 
Department of Neurosurgery
All India Institute of Medical Sciences Rishikesh
249203UttarakhandIndia

Arush Pasricha 
Department of Burns and Plastic Surgery
All India Institute of Medical Sciences Rishikesh
249203UttarakhandIndia

Taruna Singh 
Department of Burns and Plastic Surgery
All India Institute of Medical Sciences Rishikesh
249203UttarakhandIndia

Site-based customized surgical approaches for orbital lesion and their outcomes -A case series
4 September 2023B0F90BE71594274A615C794835514CA710.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108782Received 26 July 2023; Received in revised form 30 August 2023; Accepted 30 August 2023Orbitotomy Surgical approaches Orbital lesions Conservation of vision Postoperative outcome
The orbit is a complex region of the body that is susceptible to several diseases.The term "anterior orbitotomy" describes access to the orbit through the conjunctiva or eyelid from the front.This includes transconjunctival, medial, inferior, and superior approaches.The superior and lateral regions of the posterior orbit can be adequately exposed using a frontotemporal orbitozygomatic approach.The main aim of orbital surgery is to preserve vision.We discuss numerous surgical procedures for ocular tumours in this case series, along with the results of those procedures.Case presentation: In this case series, various surgical procedures for ocular tumours are discussed, along with their results postoperatively.Meningioma, cavernous hemangioma, dermoid, and Erdheim Chester disease were among the diagnoses.The early surgical outcome parameters in this case series were increased ocular motility and decreased proptosis.Clinical discussion: A medial orbitotomy was done as the lesion was in the medial orbit in our first case.In the second, third, and fourth cases, lateral orbitotomies were done because the lesion was in the lateral orbit.The frontotemporal orbitozygomatic approach was used in the fifth and sixth cases with the lesion reaching the orbital apex.Patients with symptoms should consider surgical excision, which involves completely removing the tumour while maintaining the functionality of the muscles and optic nerve.Having a good surgical view and exposure is essential to understand the anatomical relationships in a small area.Conclusion:The surgical strategy should be used in a manner that maintains visual acuity, limits injury to nearby objects, lowers postoperative morbidity, and is cosmetically acceptable.

Introduction

The orbit is a challenging part of the body as the surgeon has access to a limited area that houses extremely sensitive structures crucial for vision and eye movements, which are afflicted by various diseases [1][2][3].

Thorough preoperative planning is crucial due to the likelihood of morbidity associated with surgery in this area.Conserving vision is the primary goal of orbital surgery.To avoid manipulating the optic nerve and its vascular supply, this is accomplished by selecting the surgical technique that is anatomically most suitable [1].Anterior orbitotomy refers to access to orbit from the front, that is, through the eyelid or conjunctiva.This encompasses superior, inferior, medial, and transconjunctival approaches.Lateral orbitotomy involves entering the orbit through the lateral rim.Orbital apex lesion is treated effectively by transcranial approach [4].This case series describes various surgical approaches for orbital tumours and postoperative outcomes in a tertiary care hospital.


Presentation of case

This is a retrospective case series of six patients aged 15-35 years (Fig. 1) from a single academic tertiary care centre.They presented to the outpatient department with gradually progressive proptosis.The duration of the symptoms ranged from 2 to 7 years before presentation.Presenting symptoms were proptosis in all patients (100 %) and visual impairment (83 %).The diagnoses of the cases in the series were meningioma, cavernous hemangioma, dermoid, and Erdheim-Chester disease.All the patients had limited extraocular movements; four had abaxial proptosis, and two had axial proptosis.Orbital and brain CT scans and MRI scans showed the extent and location of lesions (Fig. 2), based on which surgical approach was decided.The series adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki.Ethical approval was obtained from the Institutional Ethics Committee (Letter no.AIIMS/IEC/23/255 dated 26/07/2023), and written informed consent was obtained from all participants.


Surgical approach and follow-up

In our first case the best corrected visual acuity of the right eye was 6/6 and left eye was 6/18, the tumour was located in the left medial orbit, medial approach by taking a frontoethmoidal Lynch incision.Blunt dissection was carried out until the tumour was exposed.Carefully, the tumour was dissected from its surrounding structures.The muscle was closed with a 6-0 vicryl suture.Skin closure was done with 6-0 prolene.The tumour was removed completely, resulting in the complete disappearance of proptosis.The patient was followed up for a year.Initially on a monthly basis for 3 months then 3 monthly.Vision, extraocular movements and fundus were examined at every visit.On follow up best corrected visual acuity of the right eye was 6/6 and left eye was 6/9.Histopathological diagnosis was suggestive of meningioma.For the second, third and fourth cases, tumours were in lateral orbit; hence, a lateral approach was adopted by joining the lid crease and sub tarsal incision (Fig. 3 A).In the second case, the best corrected visual acuity of the right eye was 6/6 and the left eye was 6/12, the tumour was located in the left lateral orbit.For the third case the best corrected visual acuity of both eyes was 6/12, the tumour was located in both orbits.In the fourth case, the best corrected visual acuity of the right eye was 6/6 and the left eye was 6/60, the tumour was located in the left lateral orbit.The incision on the periosteum was made, and blunt dissection was carried out.In two cases, a front zygomatic suture was identified.A reciprocating saw was used to drill the zygomatic bone.Periorbita was opened, and the tumour was exposed.The tumour was separated from its adjacent structures.The tumour was excised totally.

The bone was attached back with 2 (1.5 mm) plates and four screws.The muscle was closed with a 6-0 vicryl suture.6-0 proline was used to approximate the skin wound.This led to the disappearance of proptosis in two cases and a significant reduction in one case.The patients were followed up till 18 months.Initially on a monthly basis for 3 months then 3 monthly for 9 months and then at 6 months.Vision, extraocular movements, and fundus were examined at every visit.Postoperative ptosis resolved on subsequent follow-up.On follow up best corrected visual acuity of the right eye was 6/6 and left eye was 6/6 of the second case.Histopathological diagnosis was suggestive of cavernous hemangioma.The histopathological diagnosis of the third case was suggestive of Erdheim-Chester disease.The patient was treated with injection Interferon alpha 5 million units S/c 3 times/week.His best corrected visual acuity was 6/6 in both eyes.In the fourth case best corrected visual acuity of the right eye was 6/6 and the left eye was 6/12.Histopathological diagnosis was suggestive of cavernous hemangioma.In the fifth and sixth cases, as the tumours were present up to the orbital apex, a frontotemporal orbitozygomatic approach (Fig. 3 B) was adopted.In the fifth case the best corrected visual acuity of the right eye was 6/6 and the left eye was 6/18.The tumour was present in the left orbit.For the sixth case the best corrected visual acuity of the right eye was 6/ 12 and left eye was 6/6.The tumour was present in the right orbit.The scalp incision was made on the inferior border of the zygomatic arch, extending upward just behind the hairline up to the midline of the skull.The temporalis muscle is cut and elevated.The zygoma, lateral orbital wall and superior orbital rim are exposed.The bone flap was removed following a one-piece orbitozygomatic craniotomy.Periorbita was incised.The tumour was located and freed from neighbouring structures and was removed entirely.The bone flap was fixed back with four mini plates and eight screws after achieving hemostasis.It aided in the gross total removal of the tumour with complete disappearance in proptosis.The patients were followed up for a year.Initially every month for 6 months then 3 monthly for the rest 6 months.Vision, extraocular movements, Hertel's exophthalmometry and fundus were examined at every visit.During the follow up of the fifth case best corrected visual acuity of the right eye was 6/6 and the left eye was 6/9.Histopathological diagnosis was suggestive of dermoid cyst.The best corrected  visual acuity of the right eye was 6/9 and the left eye was 6/6 of the sixth case.Histopathological diagnosis was suggestive of a cavernous hemangioma.

Lid crease incision, subtarsal incision, frontoethmoidal Lynch incision, and frontotemporal -orbitozygomatic approach were taken depending on the lesion location.The optic nerve was in close proximity to the lesion in all cases and was preserved and functional after tumour removal.Five lesions were separated by blunt dissection from surrounding structures and removed in toto.One lesion was diffuse, adhered to enclosing muscles, and was removed piecemeal (Table 1).

All the lesions were sent for histopathological examination.In all cases, there were improved extraocular movements and preserved vision after removing the lesion.There was a complete disappearance of proptosis in five patients and a significant reduction in one patient.Two patients had improvement in vision.Postoperative complications were ophthalmoplegia and ptosis, which resolved over subsequent followups.Patients were followed up with a minimum period of 6 months.


Surgical tips

• While dissecting various layers after skin incision, bipolar cautery provides better hemostasis than monopolar cautery.• Packing with adrenaline-soaked gauze to control bleeding minimizes cautery usage.• Cryoprobe can deliver tumours after blunt dissection from surrounding structures.• The extraocular muscles, especially the recti muscle, should be hooked carefully as it leads to bradycardia (Oculocardiac reflex).

This work has been reported in line with PROCESS criteria [5].


Discussion

Primary orbital tumours rarely occur, with an incidence of fewer than 1 per 100,000/year.Orbital tumours can be categorized into one of three groups depending on where they are located inside the orbit: (a) intraconal (inside the extraocular muscle cone), (b) extraconal, and (c) intracanalicular (inside the optic canal).Orbital tumours are of two types, primary and secondary, which involve the orbit from some other site.In adults, cavernous hemangiomas, lymphoid tumours, and meningiomas are the most frequent primary orbital tumours; in children, dermoid cysts, capillary hemangiomas, and rhabdomyosarcoma are more common [6,7].

Advanced diagnostic techniques like computed tomography, angiography, and magnetic resonance imaging have been employed to determine the position and magnitude of the lesion [2].

Surgical excision is indicated in symptomatic patients, which involves complete removal of the tumour while conserving the integrity of the optic nerve and muscles.A good surgical view and exposure are crucial to appreciate the anatomical associations in a relatively limited space [8].

There are four different types of orbitotomy: lateral (Krönelein method), medial (Lynch incision), superior (transcranial approach), and inferior (maxillary sinus).Depending on where the tumour is situated, the following approach is taken (Fig. 4): i) Tumours present on the lateral side of the globe reaching up to the apex-lateral orbitotomy (with/without removal of bone), ii) Mass around optic nerve situated medial to globe extending upto apex -an amalgamation of the transcranial method with medial orbitotomy, iii) tumours affecting the skull from the orbital apex -transcranial approach.Krönelein et al. first described lateral orbitotomy in 1891, and it is still often practised today, with or without revisions [9].

Anterior medial orbitotomy, first described by Galbraith and Sullivan, is beneficial for anterior and medial tumours in the intraconal region of the anterior two-thirds region of the orbit.An orbital segment of the optic nerve is under direct view; hence, it can be protected while removing the tumour.The disadvantage is that it provides a restricted area with exposure to sinus [3,6].

Lateral orbitotomy has the advantage of providing a large surgical site where damage to extraocular muscles, nerves and vessels can be avoided.It allows wider space to be manipulated, and bleeding points can be cauterized quickly.Tumours situated deep and in superolateral, inferolateral and lateral fields can be accessed through this route.The drawback of this approach is just a barely apparent scar.The frontotemporal orbitozygomatic approach offered the benefit of accommodating various tumour sizes and providing an adequate operating area, removing the tumour in one piece, and managing bleeding during surgery.The following osteotomies are typically needed for masses present deep in the orbit [3,9].

The transconjunctival technique is suggested to remove masses in the inferomedial and basal regions of the anterior orbit.This method avoids the necessity for bone excision, making it less traumatic and better from a cosmetic standpoint.Nonetheless, the transconjunctival technique is not recommended for medium-and large-sized tumours due to the constrained surgical route [6].The frontotemporal orbitozygomatic approach allows adequate exposure of the superior and lateral portions of the posterior orbit.The orbitozygomatic method improves the operative route with multi-dimensional accessibility and less brain retraction with increased bone removal at the skull base and displacement of the orbital contents by removing the zygoma, orbital rim, and complete orbital roof and lateral wall [10].Even though the transcranial route is considered too substantial with extended surgical time, it has benefits, including the ability to accommodate a variety of tumour sizes, the provision of an abundant field, the possibility of total removal of the mass and the control of bleeding during surgery.The cosmetic outcome is favourable since the skin incision is concealed under the hairline, and a titanium miniplate secures the bone flap [8].

The endoscopic endonasal approach is gaining popularity these days.The benefit is that it employs an extracranial approach, avoids brain handling and prevents external scars.This is made possible by the endoscope's adaptability, manoeuvrability, and panoramic perspective.On the side of the lesion, a middle turbinectomy and ethmoidectomy are performed first, then an anterior sphenoidotomy.The lamina papyracea is opened from posterior to anterior.The posterior third of the medial orbit wall can generally be removed; however, depending on where the tumour is located, this opening may need to be altered.A medial maxillectomy, which involves removing the medial section of the orbital floor, may be used to treat lesions in the inferior quadrants [11].In a study by Tang et al., the most frequent relapses in orbital lesions were seen in lacrimal gland tumours, followed by vascular malformation and neoplasm.Neurogenic tumours are the last on the list.Recurrence is frequently identified by imaging.Due to knowledge of orbital diseases likely to recur, early diagnosis prevents extended surgery or exenteration and loss of sight [12].In our series, the improvement of ocular motility and the reduction of proptosis was the early surgical outcome.A prospective study with a larger number of patients should be conducted.


Limitation

Retrospective design and short duration of follow-up are the limitations of this case series.


Conclusion

Orbital surgeries are complex as there is a plethora of contents in a confined space.The surgical approach should be adopted to preserve visual acuity, minimize damage to surrounding contents, reduce postoperative morbidity, and be cosmetically acceptable.


CRediT authorship contribution statement


Patient's perspective

The patient and their caregivers were satisfied with both surgical and medical management.The patient improved symptomatically after surgery.


Funding

None.


Declaration of competing of interest

None.


Ethical approval

Taken.


Patient consent for photo publication

Taken.


Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Fig. 1 .Fig. 3 .
13
Fig. 1.A: Pre-operative clinical photograph of left eye exhibiting severe proptosis (Patient 1; Red arrow) who underwent medial orbitotomy B: Pre-operative clinical photograph of left eye exhibiting severe proptosis (Patient 2; Red arrow) who underwent lateral orbitotomy C: Pre-operative clinical photograph of both eyes exhibiting severe proptosis (Patient 3; Red arrow) who underwent lateral orbitotomy D: Pre-operative clinical photograph of left eye exhibiting mild proptosis (Patient 4; Red arrow) who underwent lateral orbitotomy E: Pre-operative clinical photograph of left eye exhibiting moderate proptosis (Patient 5; Red arrow) who had mass excision biopsy through frontotemporal orbitozygomatic approach F: Pre-operative clinical photograph of right eye exhibiting severe proptosis (Patient 6; Red arrow) who had mass excision biopsy through frontotemporal orbitozygomatic approach.(For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)


S

.Das et al.


Sucharita Das :
Das
Data curation, Writing-Original draft preparation.Madhubari Vathulya: Patient management, conceptualization, Methodology, Software, writing, editing, validation.Anupam Singh: Software, writing, editing, validation, Jitendra Chaturvedi: Patient management, Supervision, Writing, editing.Arush Pasricha: Visualization, Investigation.Taruna Singh: Software, Writing-Reviewing and Editing.


Fig. 4 .
4
Fig. 4. Algorithm highlighting different approaches for surgical management of orbital tumours.


Table 1
1
Clinical characteristic and surgical approaches in the subjects.
S. Das et al.CaseGenderAgeSymptoms and signsSide ofDiagnosisSurgical approachExtent ofOutcomeNumbertumourresection1M18Proptosis, Decreased visualLeftMeningiomaFrontoethmoidal LynchGross totalDisappearance ofacuity, Limited extraocularincision. Medial orbitotomyremovalproptosismovement2F23Proptosis, Decreased visualLeftCavernousLid crease and subtarsalGross totalDisappearance ofacuity, Limited extraocularhemangiomaincision. Lateral orbitotomyremovalproptosismovement3M35Proptosis, Decreased visualBilateralErdheim ChesterLid crease and subtarsalPartialSignificant reduction inacuity, Limited extraoculardiseaseincision. Lateral orbitotomyproptosismovement4M32Proptosis, Decreased visualLeftCavernousLid crease and subtarsalGross totalDisappearance ofacuity, Limited extraocularhemangiomaincision. Lateral orbitotomyremovalproptosis, Visionmovementimproved5M15Proptosis, Decreased visualLeftDermoidFrontotemporalGross totalDisappearance ofacuity, Limited extraocularorbitozygomatic approachremovalproptosismovement6F25Proptosis, Decreased visualRightHemangiomaFrontotemporalGross totalDisappearance ofacuity, Limited extraocularorbitozygomatic approachremovalproptosis, Visionmovementimproved
S.Das et al.   
AcknowledgementsWe would like to thank Ms. Jyoti Kushwaha for the frontotemporal orbitozygomatic approach illustration.
Surgical approaches to the orbit: a neurosurgical perspective. Z Abussuud, S Ahmed, A Paluzzi, J Neurol Surg B Skull Base. 8142020

Lateral orbital approach: gateway to intraorbital lesions. L K Surej Kumar, M K Vinod, P V Menon, Natl J of Maxillofac Surg. 522014

A neurosurgical perspective to approaches to the orbit: a cadaveric study. S B Pai, M N Nagarjun, Neurol. India. 652017

Surgical approaches to the orbit -the past and the present. D Das, S Modaboyina, S Gupta, A Deora, S , IP Int J Ocul Oncol Oculoplasty. 712021

Neill for the PROCESS Group, The PROCESS 2020 guideline: updating consensus Preferred Reporting of Case Series in Surgery (PROCESS) guidelines. R A Agha, C Sohrabi, G Mathew, T Franchi, A Kerwan, N , Int J Surg. 602020article in press

Optimising surgical approaches to the orbit -a retrospective analysis of a series of forty orbital tumours. S Menon, V Reddy, A R Poduval, G Menon, Ophthalmol J. 62021

Tumors of the orbit: case report and review of surgical corridors and current options. S Kannan, M Hasegawa, Y Yamada, T Kawase, Y Kato, Asian J Neurosurg. 142019

Surgical outcome of orbital cavernous hemangioma: a case series. N Golden, T G Mahadewa, C Ryalino, Open Access Surg. 122018

Location-based surgical approaches for orbital tumor resection. T Morotomi, N Hirano, Y Sanada, M Fujita, K Niwa, Mathews J Ophthalmol. 712022

Cranio-orbital and orbitocranial approaches to orbital and intracranial disease: eye-opening approaches for neurosurgeons. H Abou-Al-Shaar, K M Krisht, M A Cohen, A M Abunimer, J A Neil, M Karsy, Front Surg. 7 (2020

Endoscopic approaches to orbital lesions: case series and systematic literature review. M Zoli, G Sollini, L Milanese, E La Corte, A Rustici, F Guaraldi, J. Neurosurg. 13422021

Recurrent orbital space-occupying lesions: a clinicopathologic study of 253 cases. W Tang, Y Hei, L Xiao, Chin. J. Cancer Res. 2542013