University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing
Senior Fellow


Leonard Davis Institute of Health Care Economics
PhiladelphiaPennsylvaniaUnited States


Mercy LIFE West Philadelphia
PhiladelphiaPennsylvaniaUnited States


University of Pennsylvania
PhiladelphiaPennsylvaniaUnited States
GSA 2019 Annual Scientific Meeting


Associated Universities,Oak Ridge,Tennessee,United States,2. Oak Ridge Associated Universities,Arvada,Colorado,United States According to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, the average age of retirement is 62. While many retirees may have employer-provided or other access to healthcare, others have limited access to affordable care until full Medicare eligibility at 65. Regardless of access, retirees with toxic occupational exposures may not have providers with specialized knowledge of tests or diagnoses for exposure-related health conditions, especially those with long-latency. The National Supplemental Screening Program for U.S. Department of Energy Former Workers is described here as a nationwide program providing recurring (every 3 years) integrated health screenings designed to identify both occupational and non-occupational conditions in the context of exposure so that early identification can enable appropriate and timely diagnoses and treatments to improve health outcomes. Since September 2005, there has been 18,518 initial exams for former workers, of whom 5,461 returned for rescreening exams through April 2019. The average age of those returning was significantly younger at initial exam (63.4 years) compared to those who did not return (65.1 years). The most common occupational condition was noise-induced hearing loss not attributable to natural, age-related loss (67%). Rare and long-latency occupational health conditions, such as asbestosis or silicosis, were identified at rates expected (1-4%). The most common non-occupational condition was elevated body mass index (BMI>25, 77.3%), followed by hypertension (20.7%), of which 50% had no prior knowledge or clinical diagnosis. In conclusion, occupational health surveillance programs can provide value for identifying non-occupational health conditions and as a supplementary source of health information and care. Understanding lifecourse determinants of older-age health outcomes is indispensable for resources planning and optimizing public health in light of continued gains in longevity in the US and worldwide. Data increasingly points to midlife health and modifiable risk factors as critical targets for improving older-age health outcomes and mitigating potential cognitive impairment and disease. We used 16-years of biennial data (1998)(1999)(2000)(2001)(2002)(2003)(2004)(2005)(2006)(2007)(2008)(2009)(2010)(2011)(2012)(2013)(2014) from the Health and Retirement Study (unweighted-n=6,724), to examine how a comprehensive battery of midlife (age 50-64 years) health measures (disability, physical function, comorbid conditions, and self-reported health) affect cognitive status (using Langa-Weir criteria: Normal, Cognitively Impaired Not Dementia (CIND), and Dementia) and death 16-years later. Additionally, we test for racial/ethnic and gender modifications in the effects of these conditions on the outcomes of interest. We used survey multinomial logistic regression models adjusting for predisposing sociodemographic factors, health-enabling economic characteristics and health behaviors. Relative risk ratios (RRR) across all unadjusted models varied from 1.36-4.84 and 1.36-3.31 for those with dementia and who died in 2014 respectively, suggesting worse health outcomes in midlife are associated with higher dementia/ mortality risk in later-life. After covariates-adjustment, comorbidities (RRR=1.15[1.04,1.27]) and Self-reported Health (RRR=1.36[1.22,1.52]) were associated with CIND, and attenuation was particularly pronounced for IADLS (RRR=3.15[2.25,4.43]) and Fine Motor Skills (RRR=1.94[1.46,2.57]) for individuals with dementia in 2014. Neither sex nor race/ethnicity modified these associations. Modifying the midlife health profile of US adults can yield important public health savings and reductions in structural and social health burdens through extenuating the prevalence of dementias and reducing excess mortality. Long-term exposure to stress places people at risk for chronic diseases including but not limited to obesity, Type-2 diabetes, and heart disease. Various aspects of technology use are associated with stress. Known as technostress, this unique stress is characterized by individuals' inability to cope with demands generated by computer-related technologies. To date, studies on technostress have focused on young adults and older adults, with an emphasis on selfreported indicators of both technology use and stress. This study differs from prior work in two ways. One, it examines technology use and stress in mid-life adults (50-64), an understudied population in research on technostress. This segment of the population is important because their technostress may negatively affect their successful transition into older adulthood. Second, we use three types of data to elucidate the linkages between technology use and stress: (1) self-reported survey measures of technology use and stress;


MIDLIFE HEALTH FACTORS AND LATER-LIFE


PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS OF TECHNOLOGICAL AND BIOPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDIES OF TECHNOSTRESS IN MID-LIFE ADULTS

(2) objective measures of technology use from tracking applications, and (3) biophysiological measures of stress. The study focuses on smartphone use, which was the most commonly used technology by mid-life adults on both weekdays and weekends based on our initial results (N=40). The goal of this pilot study is to highlight the problems and prospects of conducting technostress research through the utilization of multiple data collection modes: self-report, tracking applications (apps), and biophysical indicators.


DEMENTIA WITHOUT BORDERS: BUILDING COMMUNITY CONNECTIONS TO REDUCE STIGMA AND FOSTER INCLUSION

Alison Phinney, 1 Marigrace Becker, 2 Lee Burnside, 2 and Gloria Puurveen 1 , 1. University of British Columbia,Vancouver,British Columbia,Canada,2. University of Washington,Seattle,Washington,United States BACKGROUND: The concept of social citizenship is gaining traction in the field of dementia studies, but as a practical tool to guide development of supports and services, it remains poorly understood. A one year project to promote collaboration between University of Washington in Seattle and University of British Columbia in Vancouver addressed this very question. Activities were undertaken so these communities could know each other better, with researchers, service providers and people with dementia connecting to share knowledge and expertise. PURPOSE: The project culminated with a public festival to put into practice and share some of what was learned over the year. METHODS: People with dementia and care partners helped plan "Dementia Without Borders", held at an international park straddling the border between Seattle and Vancouver. 150 people came from the US and Canada, including many people with dementia, family members and friends. The day began with a community walk and gift exchange, followed by a meal and creative activities including poetry readings, music, an art exhibit, and quilt making. RESULTS: Evaluation was overwhelmingly positive with people expressing a sense of hope and belonging. For some, it was their first time to speak openly about having dementia, and meeting others in this space was a joy-filled experience. CONCLUSIONS: This project has leveraged the symbolic power of an international border to raise awareness of the importance of social connection for people with dementia. We further explore how the notion of "dementia without borders" extends theoretical and practical understanding of social citizenship. BACKGROUND: Sarcopenia contributes to frailty, disability, and dependence in older adults, and is accelerated by Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM). In addition to its direct role in increasing muscle mass, progressive resistance exercise training (PRET) may also reduce sarcopenia by improving endothelial function and muscle perfusion. METHODS: Fifteen older adults with uncomplicated and well-controlled T2DM participated in a PRET program 3 times weekly for 3 months. Prior to and immediately following the intervention, flow-mediated dilation testing was performed to assess large vessel endothelial function via ultrasound and muscle perfusion via near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS). RESULTS: Preliminary ultrasound data from 9 subjects show a significant increase (5.21% to 8.73%, p=0.0448) in percent flow mediated dilation (%FMD), suggesting a modest improvement in endothelial function after 3 months' PRET. Preliminary NIRS data from 7 subjects showed no significant changes in oxygen saturation or reperfusion rates as a result of the intervention. CONCLUSION: Our preliminary data indicate that, in older adults with T2DM, 3 months' PRET is associated with modestly improved endothelial function in large vessels (as demonstrated by a significant increase in %FMD), but does not appear to be associated with improvements in muscle perfusion Innovation in Aging, 2019, Vol. 3, No. S1 


EFFECTS OF RESISTANCE EXERCISE TRAINING ON ENDOTHELIAL FUNCTION AND MUSCLE PERFUSION IN OLDER ADULTS WITH DIABETES


COGNITIVE DISEASE: RESULTS FROM THE 1998-2014 HEALTH AND RETIREMENT STUDY Benson Wu, 1 Mohammad Usama Toseef, 2 Wassim Tarraf, 2 and Hector M. González 3 , 1. Department of Neurosciences at UC San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, California, United States, 2. Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, United States, 3. University of California, San Diego, San Diego, California, United States


Elizabeth Mack, 1 Shelia Cotten, 1 Chu-Hsiang Chang, 1 and Wenda Bauschpies 1 , 1. Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, United States


Amanda Randolph, 1 Tatiana Moro, 2 Adetutu Odejimi, 1 Blake Rasmussen, 1 and Elena Volpi 3 , 1. UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS MEDICAL BRANCH, Galveston, Texas, United States, 2. Sealy Center on Agyng, Galveston, Texas, United States, 3. UTMB, Galveston, Texas, United States