Postoperative Deep Surgical-Site Infection after Instrumented Spinal Surgery: A Multicenter Study


Masayoshi Ishii masa-ishii@umin.ac.jp. 
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery
Hoshigaoka Koseinenkin Hospital
HirakataOsakaJapan

Motoki Iwasaki 
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery
Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine
OsakaJapan

Tetsuo Ohwada 
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery
Kansai Rosai Hospital
HyogoJapan

Takenori Oda 
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery
Osaka Rosai Hospital
OsakaJapan

Takashi Matsuoka 
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery
Himeji Red Cross Hospital
HyogoJapan

Yuichi Tamura 
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery
Toyonaka Municipal Hospital
OsakaJapan

Kazutaka Izawa 
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery
Toneyama Hospital
OsakaJapan

Hoshigaoka Koseinenkin Hospital
4-8-1 Hoshigaoka573-8511HirakataOsakaJapan

Postoperative Deep Surgical-Site Infection after Instrumented Spinal Surgery: A Multicenter Study
10.1055/s-0033-1343072Global Spine J 2013;3:95-102.Address for correspondence Masayoshi Ishii, MD,


control, the result may be spinal instability, causing clinical symptoms of backache, radicular pain, or neurologic deficits. When surgeons are dealing with infection management and spinal stability, they should not routinely choose debridement with implant retention. Instead, they must take into consideration patients' characteristics, such as immunity affected by physical strength or comorbidities, bone quality affected by age or initial spinal pathologies, original stability of the instrumented construction affected by surgical procedures, and the severity of wound contamination. To clarify the clinical features of SSI treatment after instrumented spinal surgeries, we performed a retrospective multicenter study.


Materials and Methods

We conducted a retrospective multicenter survey of 20 hospitals affiliated with the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery of Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, after first obtaining institutional review board approval. Between 2004 and 2008, 37 cases of deep SSI were identified among 3,462 instrumented spinal surgeries, a rate of 1.1%. We defined deep SSI according to the criteria of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 11 as a condition resulting in an abscess or other evidence of infection in deep soft tissue muscle and fascia, and we confirmed the presence of deep SSI by reoperation or by histopathologic or radiologic investigation. The total number of instrumented surgeries and surgeries for SSI was obtained from the surgical records of each hospital. To match the criteria for deep SSI, we selected cases by reviewing surgical records and excluding superficial SSI, which was infection involving only the skin and subcutaneous tissue, and delayed wound healing without signs of infection. We reviewed the details and treatment course for each patient. Deep SSI was present in 37 patients (26 men and 11 women), who had a mean age of 65 years (range, 4 to 87 years). Because this was a retrospective multicenter study, there was no common treatment protocol among the 20 institutes, and treatment in each case was conducted by a surgeon in consultation with an infectious-disease specialist. However, the basic strategy of surgical debridement and appropriate antibiotic therapy was common among all institutions. Depending on the bacteria identified, empirical or definitive intravenous antibacterial administration was continued until several weeks after a normalized level (< 0.3 mg/dL) of C-reactive protein (CRP) had been regained, and then oral antibiotic therapy was administered for several months. The decision between implant retention and removal during reoperation depended on the surgeon's judgment, taking into consideration implant loosening, contamination of the surgical site, and the patient's ability to endure multiple surgeries versus a longer treatment period. Deep SSI was diagnosed at an average of 32 days (range, 5 to 117 days) after the initial operation because of wound dehiscence or purulent drainage (47%), high fever (>38°C) or abnormal laboratory findings (31%), needle-aspirated discharge (17%), or for other reasons (5%).

Organisms isolated from cultured wound exudate, surgical-site tissue, or blood included methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus ([MRSA] n ¼ 15; 40.5%), methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (n ¼ 5; 13.5%), S. aureus (n ¼ 2; 5.4%), coagulase-negative Staphylococcus (n ¼ 2; 5.4%), miscellaneous (n ¼ 6; 16.2%), and undetected (n ¼ 9; 24%); there were two polymicrobial infections. Spinal pathologies at the initial operation were degenerative thoracolumbar disease (spinal canal stenosis, herniated disc, and spondylolisthesis, called the DEG group; n ¼ 15), osteoporotic vertebral collapse (the OVC group; n ¼ 10), metastatic spinal tumor (n ¼ 5), spinal trauma (n ¼ 2), atlantoaxial disorders (n ¼ 2), rheumatoid spinal disorders (n ¼ 2), and tubercular spondylitis (n ¼ 1). Because of the extent of their physical debilitation, 5 patients with metastatic spinal tumors, 1 patient with spinal trauma that complicated multiple organ injuries, and 1 patient with tuberculosis were excluded from our study. Another patient with revised lumbosacral fusion for adjacent segment collapse after a long thoracolumbar posterior fusion for rheumatoid spondylitis was also excluded, because of representing too small a number to be categorized separately. This left 29 patients (20 men and 9 women) for our study population.

To facilitate simple analysis of various backgrounds, we classified patients with deep SSI into three groups according to combinations of similar initial diagnoses, surgical sites, and procedures. In addition to the DEG group (n ¼ 15) and OVC group (n ¼ 10), there was the cervical group, which consisted of four patients with cervical disorders (one case each of cervical fracture, atlantoaxial rotatory fixation, atlantoaxial subluxation, and rheumatoid cervical spondylitis). Details about patients such as age, sex, preoperative American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status, 12 presence of diabetes mellitus, history of previous operations, initial surgical procedures, number of fused segments, artificial graft materials used, and implants are listed in ►Table 1.

For all patients, we recorded the time required to achieve a normalized CRP level (< 0.30 mg/dL), indicating infection cure; length of additional hospital stay after the infection was resolved; the duration of the follow-up period; the percentage of those with clinical symptoms who were ambulatory before surgery versus at final follow-up examination (the ambulatory rate); and final radiologic fusion status. We regarded radiographic evidence of a continuously integrated graft or lack of segmental motion on lateral flexion-extension radiographs as documentation of fusion. We also determined the implant retention rate and analyzed the details of additional operations for deep SSI. Besides patients' backgrounds, in each group we looked for infectious conditions that could affect implant management, such as onset time of deep SSI, maximum daily body temperatures, laboratory findings for CRP level and white blood cell (WBC) count at the time of deep SSI diagnosis, detection rate for purulent discharge by spontaneous wound breakdown or needle aspiration, and identification rate for bacterial organisms, especially MRSA. Onset time was defined as the period from initial surgery to deep SSI diagnosis and was classified as either early infection (occurring within 30 days after surgery) or late infection (occurring > 30 days after surgery). 13,14 Data are presented as means AE standard deviation, and p values of < 0.05 were considered to indicate statistical significance. Statistical analyses were performed by means of the Kruskal-Wallis test, Mann-Whitney U test, chi-square independence test, and Fisher exact test, using SPSS statistical software (version 18.0; IBM, Armonk, New York, United States).


Results

Infections resolved in all patients, with no recurrence during the follow-up period. The time elapsed from deep SSI diagnosis to infection resolution in the DEG group, the OVC group, and the cervical group was a mean of 106 AE 135 days, 77 AE 79 days, and 44 AE 23 days, followed by mean additional hospital stays of 48 AE 74 days, 131 AE 142 days, and 28 AE 11 days, respectively. There was no significant difference in length of treatment period among three groups. The respective mean duration of follow-up after discharge for each group was 18.7 AE 15.4 months (range, 0 to 48.5 months), 5.7 AE 11.2 months (range, 0 to 36.2 months), and 48.3 AE 19.6 months (range, 27 to 70.3 months). The ambulatory rate was unchanged after surgery for the DEG group, whereas 40% of the OVC group and 75% of the cervical group were ambulatory at the final follow-up evaluation. The fusion rate was 73% in the DEG group, 30% in the OVC group, and 100% in the cervical group (►Table 2). Implant retention rates and details of additional operations for SSI treatment appear in ►Table 3. Patients in the DEG group tended to require complex procedures, such as cage removal or anterior debridement and fusion, followed by continuous wound irrigation or delayed wound closure. In the DEG group, the 80% implant retention rate at the first reoperation declined to 40% by the final follow-up evaluation. In the OVC group, implant retention was attempted for only 20% of patients at the first trial, resulting in a final retention rate of 0%. The cervical group had an implant retention rate of 100%. There was a significant difference in final implant retention among the three groups This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.

(►Table 3). There was no significant difference in onset time of deep SSI or parameters of infections, as shown in ►Table 4.

To study factors affecting implant retention, we investigated the DEG group further; it had a final implant retention rate of 40%. We analyzed several parameters for early infections in six patients whose implants were retained and in six whose implants were removed, excluding three patients with late infection whose implants were removed. As a consequence, we found a lower maximum daily body temperature at the time of SSI diagnosis (p ¼ 0.01), lower WBC counts at the time of deep SSI diagnosis (p ¼ 0.04), and a lower detection rate for purulent wound discharge (p < 0.01) in the implant retention group with early onset infection (►Table 5).   


Discussion

Diabetes mellitus, smoking, previous surgery, fusion, longer duration of surgery, and poor general or functional status have been reported as risk factors for SSI after spinal surgery. 1,7,[15][16][17] In addition to providing prophylaxis, it is important to know how to treat deep SSI, especially because it has not been definitively established whether it is best to remove implants or instead leave them in place after the diagnosis of deep SSI. The clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of MRSA infections recommend device removal whenever feasible in late-onset spinal-implant infections (>30 days after implant placement). 14 It has been reported that in late infections occurring several months or years after the initial operation, implant removal is preferable because of documented bony fusion or difficulty in resolving infection. 9,13,18 In early infections, debridement with implant retention is ideal and should be attempted initially, 13,14 but debridement does not always ensure cure. Rates of successful implant retention of 92 to 100% have been reported by authors who used multiple debridements in combination with continuous irrigation, antibiotic-impregnated cement beads, or secondary wound closure, 2,4,5,7,8 although hardware removal after multiple debridements was sometimes required. 19 Ho et al reported that there is an almost 50% chance that infection will remain if all spinal implants are not removed in posterior scoliosis surgery. 3 To investigate the difference in the treatment course according to patients' backgrounds, we classified 29 patients into three groups by similar spinal pathology, surgical site, and procedures and then analyzed their treatment period, implant retention rates, and parameters about infection. The implant retention rates were different in each group, and we could not find any differences in treatment period and any of the parameters listed in ►Table 4, except for age (►Table 1). In the OVC group, which was characterized by advanced age, hardware removal was done at the first reoperation in two patients with early infection, because of screw loosening, whereas in two other patients with early infection, implant retention was attempted but failed, with removal being required later for infection treatment. In six patients with late infection, hardware was initially removed because of pedicle screw loosening due to preexisting osteoporosis as well as deep infection. However, the cervical group, 50% of which had late infections, had an implant retention rate of 100%. In the cervical group in our series, patients initially received bone grafts only on laminae or facet joints, so the lack of a need for interbody debridement might be advantageous in infection management with implant retention. Implant retention was successful in 6 of 12 patients with early infections in the DEG group after single or multiple episodes of debridement, with or without cage replacement, using autologous iliac bone grafting and a posterior approach. In the other five patients, implant removal was eventually required, along with switching cages to autograft in some cases, via anterior or posterior approaches, although implant retention was attempted during the first reoperation. In another patient with early infection, implant removal was initially performed. In late infection in three cases, implant retention was attempted in one patient during the first reoperation, but the implant failed later; in the other two patients, implants were removed during the first reoperation. Insufficient eradication of infection in the presence of hardware was the reason for implant removal in the DEG group.

Immunocompromise predisposed by comorbidities could be associated with implant salvage. Patients with diabetes mellitus were not able to retain their implants in our series, although this finding was not statistically significant. Kowalski et al conducted a univariate analysis of risk factors for treatment failure in patients with early and late-onset spinal infections and found no significance for immunocompromise, but they did find that systemic malignancy and prior radiation therapy posed significant risks. 13 It was not applicable to our series because we excluded malignancy, but their other finding that treatment failed in all patients with diabetes mellitus or hepatic failure seemed to be reasonable. We hypothesized that in addition to time of onset to infection, immune status, and initial spinal pathologies, the degree of wound contamination was associated with implant salvage, because of the lower detection rate of purulent wound discharge, lower maximum daily body temperature, and lower WBC count in the implant retention DEG group with early onset infection. We speculated that one of the reasons for implant salvage was early recognition of SSI. In patients who retained their implants, SSI might be suspected and diagnosed at an early stage of bacterial incubation, before infection had reached an advanced enough stage to produce an abscess that would break down the overlying skin or could be aspirated or to cause a high body temperature. Prompt diagnosis at an initial stage with a low intensity of infection could reduce the necessity of implant removal. Three groups have investigated whether laboratory data are helpful in the early detection of wound infection. [20][21][22] With the range of postoperative CRP peak ranging from day 4 to day 7, all three groups agreed that reelevation of CRP level or an increase in CRP after the peak day suggested the possibility of SSI. However, the usefulness of CRP level in this setting is limited because it also reflects other systemic infections or inflammations with unknown causes. Kang et al. investigated serial postoperative changes in CRP in 348 patients, resulting in 16 cases of abnormal CRP response. 21 There were 5 cases of infection related to spinal surgery, 3 cases of infection in the digestive or urinary tract, and 8 cases of unknown cause. Laboratory findings provide clues to deep SSI, but they are less reliable in diagnosis without corresponding wound symptoms.

Our study had several limitations. Because it was a retrospective multicenter survey-which provided the benefit of large sample size-evaluations of clinical outcomes from medical records were not standardized, especially regarding pain assessment. The only comparable symptoms were preoperative and final walking status. In the OVC group and the cervical group, in which the chief problem was inability to walk because of leg paresis, clinical outcomes measured by ambulation would be useful in assessing the benefit of deep SSI treatment. However, in the DEG group, in which the chief problem was back or leg pain and in which 93% were ambulatory before surgery, an unchanged ambulatory rate without pain assessment did not reflect the clinical effectiveness of deep SSI treatment. Another limitation was small sample size resulting from a low infection rate of 1.1%, although the sample was collected from 3,462 cases in multiple institutions. Regarding weak statistical power, we warrant the homogeneity of patients by categorization into multiple groups of similar backgrounds. Although our numbers were relatively small, the homogenized DEG group of 15 and the OVC group of 10 provided convincing documentation of implant handling in each group. Although the size of the cervical group was also too small for extracting a conclusion regarding significance, results of the group are presented in this report because they illustrate the clinical features of our SSI series and because a rate of 100% implant retention is informative.

The final implant retention rates were 40% in the DEG group, 0% in the OVC group, and 100% in the cervical group, indicating that implant retention was affected by spinal pathologies. In the OVC group, implant salvage and good clinical outcomes were unobtainable because of preexisting osteoporosis and preoperative symptoms of paraplegia. Implant removal at first reoperation should be considered for the purposes of avoiding multiple operations in the elderly and resolving infection in the shortest possible time. In our cervical group without interbody procedures, it was possible to attempt implant retention.

In the DEG group with early onset infection, it was possible to attempt initial debridement and to leave implants in place, keeping in mind that the success rate was 50%. For this population, in whom screws are not expected to be loose, we believe the key to success is early suspicion of SSI. Our analysis of early infection in the DEG group suggests a relationship between implant retention and intensity of infection, especially when purulent discharge is present. Early debridement before detection of purulent discharge could decrease the chances of implant removal. If reelevated laboratory markers after postoperative day 4 to day 7 or fever of $38°C is observed, surgeons should immediately suspect deep SSI. However, without skin breakdown or spontaneous drainage, a diagnosis of SSI will not be confirmed, so surgeons should investigate other possible causes of inflammation, such as pneumonia or urinary or digestive tract infection, by the use of imaging studies or bacterial cultures. If fever origin is not identified even after sufficient examination, we urge that surgeons do not hesitate to perform needle aspiration of the surgical site or exploratory surgery to confirm diagnosis before drainage appears, instead of taking a waitand-see approach. Until a reliable, less invasive detection method for early deep SSI is available, exploratory surgery for early debridement is the only way to reduce the risk of implant removal.


Conclusions

The final implant retention rates of 40% in our DEG group, 0% in our OVC group, and 100% in our cervical group represent clinical features of implant handling in each group. Besides infection onset time, implant retention may be affected by initial spinal pathology. In DEG with early infection, prompt debridement at a stage of lower intensity of infection before drainage may be advantageous to implant salvage.

Table 1
1Background data and details of initial surgery Abbreviations: ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists; ASF, anterior spinal fusion; Cervical, cervical disorders; DEG, degenerative thoracolumbar disease; HA, hydroxyapatite; OVC, osteoporotic vertebral collapse; PLIF, posterior lumbar interbody fusion; PSF, posterior spinal fusion; PSO, pedicle subtraction osteotomy; PTIF, posterior thoracic interbody fusion; TLIF, transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion. Note: ASA physical status classification: 1, healthy patient; 2, patient with mild systemic disease; 3, patient with severe systemic disease that is not incapacitating; 4, patient with an incapacitating systemic disease that is a constant threat to life; 5, moribund patient. a p value indicates significance in three groups, as shown by the Kruskal-Wallis test.Group 

DEG 
OVC 
Cervical 
p value 



Table 2
2Clinical symptoms in relation to ambulatory rate and radiologic evidence of fusionGroup 

DEG OVC Cervical 

n 
15 
10 
4 

Preoperative ambulatory rate (%) 
93 
10 
50 

Postoperative ambulatory rate (%) 93 
40 
75 

Fusion rate (%) 
73 
30 
100 

Abbreviations: Cervical, cervical disorders; DEG, degenerative thoraco-
lumbar disease; OVC, osteoporotic vertebral collapse. 



Table 4
4Details of deep SSI OVC, osteoporotic vertebral collapse; SSI, surgical-site infection; WBC, white blood cell. a Significant difference in three groups, as indicated by the Kruskal-Wallis test. b Significant difference in three groups, as indicated by the chi-square independence test.Group 

DEG 
OVC 
Cervical 
p value 



Table 3
3Details of surgical procedures for surgical-site infection and implant retention rate Significant difference in three groups, as indicated by the Kruskal-Wallis test. b Significant difference in three groups, as indicated by the chi-square independence test.Group 

DEG 
OVC 
Cervical 
p value 



Table 5
5Analysis of data on implant retention in DEG group with early onset SSIGroup 

Implant retention 
Implant removal 
p value 


Global Spine Journal Vol. 3 No. 2/2013
This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.
Global Spine Journal Vol. 3 No. 2/2013 Postoperative Deep Surgical-Site Infection after Instrumented Spinal Surgery Ishii et al.
AcknowledgmentsWe thank the other members of Osaka Spine Group
The diagnosis and management of infection following instrumented spinal fusion. I Collins, J Wilson-Macdonald, G Chami, Eur Spine J. 17Collins I, Wilson-MacDonald J, Chami G, et al. The diagnosis and management of infection following instrumented spinal fusion. Eur Spine J 2008;17:445-450

Salvage of instrumental lumbar fusions complicated by surgical wound infection. Spine (Phila Pa. S D Glassman, J R Dimar, R M Puno, J R Johnson, 21Glassman SD, Dimar JR, Puno RM, Johnson JR. Salvage of instru- mental lumbar fusions complicated by surgical wound infection. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 1996;21:2163-2169

Management of infection after instrumented posterior spine fusion in pediatric scoliosis. C Ho, D L Skaggs, J M Weiss, V T Tolo, Spine. 32Ho C, Skaggs DL, Weiss JM, Tolo VT. Management of infection after instrumented posterior spine fusion in pediatric scoliosis. Spine 2007;32:2739-2744

Management of postoperative infections after spinal instrumentation. A D Levi, C A Dickman, V K Sonntag, J Neurosurg. 86Levi AD, Dickman CA, Sonntag VK. Management of postoperative infections after spinal instrumentation. J Neurosurg 1997;86: 975-980

Postoperative deep wound infection in adults after posterior lumbosacral spine fusion with instrumentation: incidence and management. R Picada, R B Winter, J E Lonstein, J Spinal Disord. 13Picada R, Winter RB, Lonstein JE, et al. Postoperative deep wound infection in adults after posterior lumbosacral spine fusion with instrumentation: incidence and management. J Spinal Disord 2000;13:42-45

The presentation, incidence, etiology, and treatment of surgical site infections after spinal surgery. A F Pull Ter Gunne, A S Mohamed, R L Skolasky, C J Van Laarhoven, D B Cohen, Spine. 35Pull ter Gunne AF, Mohamed AS, Skolasky RL, van Laarhoven CJ, Cohen DB. The presentation, incidence, etiology, and treatment of surgical site infections after spinal surgery. Spine 2010;35:1323-1328

Risk factors for deep surgical site infections after spinal fusion. Jjp Schimmel, P P Horsting, M De Kleuver, G Wonders, J Van Limbeek, Eur Spine J. 19Schimmel JJP, Horsting PP, de Kleuver M, Wonders G, van Limbeek J. Risk factors for deep surgical site infections after spinal fusion. Eur Spine J 2010;19:1711-1719

Management of postoperative wound infection in posterior spinal fusion with instrumentation. C Wimmer, H Gluch, J Spinal Disord. 9Wimmer C, Gluch H. Management of postoperative wound infec- tion in posterior spinal fusion with instrumentation. J Spinal Disord 1996;9:505-508

Postoperative spinal wound infection: a review of 2,391 consecutive index procedures. M A Weinstein, J P Mccabe, F P CammisaJr, J Spinal Disord. 13Weinstein MA, McCabe JP, Cammisa FP Jr. Postoperative spinal wound infection: a review of 2,391 consecutive index procedures. J Spinal Disord 2000;13:422-426

Biofilm theory can guide the treatment of devicerelated orthopaedic infections. J W Costerton, Clin Orthop Relat Res. 437Costerton JW. Biofilm theory can guide the treatment of device- related orthopaedic infections. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2005;437: 7-11

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for Prevention of Surgical Site Infection. A J Mangram, T C Horan, M L Pearson, L C Silver, W R Jarvis, Am J Infect Control. 27discussion 96Mangram AJ, Horan TC, Pearson ML, Silver LC, Jarvis WR; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for Prevention of Surgical Site Infection, 1999. Am J Infect Control 1999;27: 97-132, quiz 133-134, discussion 96

ASA physical status classifications: a study of consistency of ratings. W D Owens, J A Felts, E L SpitznagelJr, Anesthesiology. 49Owens WD, Felts JA, Spitznagel EL Jr. ASA physical status classi- fications: a study of consistency of ratings. Anesthesiology 1978; 49:239-243

The management and outcome of spinal implant infections: contemporary retrospective cohort study. T J Kowalski, E F Berbari, P M Huddleston, J M Steckelberg, J N Mandrekar, D R Osmon, Clin Infect Dis. 44Kowalski TJ, Berbari EF, Huddleston PM, Steckelberg JM, Mandre- kar JN, Osmon DR. The management and outcome of spinal implant infections: contemporary retrospective cohort study. Clin Infect Dis 2007;44:913-920

Clinical practice guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America for the treatment of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infections in adults and children: executive summary. C Liu, A Bayer, S E Cosgrove, Clin Infect Dis. 52Liu C, Bayer A, Cosgrove SE, et al. Clinical practice guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America for the treatment of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infections in adults and children: executive summary. Clin Infect Dis 2011;52: 285-292

Risk factors for surgical site infection following orthopaedic spinal operations. M A Olsen, J J Nepple, K D Riew, J Bone Joint Surg Am. 90Olsen MA, Nepple JJ, Riew KD, et al. Risk factors for surgical site infection following orthopaedic spinal operations. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2008;90:62-69

Incidence, prevalence, and analysis of risk factors for surgical site infection following adult spinal surgery. A F Pull Ter Gunne, D B Cohen, Spine. 34Pull ter Gunne AF, Cohen DB. Incidence, prevalence, and analysis of risk factors for surgical site infection following adult spinal sur- gery. Spine 2009;34:1422-1428

Risk factors for postoperative spinal wound infections after spinal decompression and fusion surgeries. A Veeravagu, C G Patil, S P Lad, M Boakye, Spine. 34Veeravagu A, Patil CG, Lad SP, Boakye M. Risk factors for postoper- ative spinal wound infections after spinal decompression and fusion surgeries. Spine 2009;34:1869-1872

Failure of attempted implant retention in spinal deformity delayed surgical site infections. D Hedequist, A Haugen, T Hresko, J Emans, Spine. 34Hedequist D, Haugen A, Hresko T, Emans J. Failure of attempted implant retention in spinal deformity delayed surgical site infec- tions. Spine 2009;34:60-64

Implant removal for the management of infection after instrumented spinal fusion. J I Kim, K T Suh, S J Kim, J S Lee, J Spinal Disord Tech. 23Kim JI, Suh KT, Kim SJ, Lee JS. Implant removal for the management of infection after instrumented spinal fusion. J Spinal Disord Tech 2010;23:258-265

The post-operative changes in the level of inflammatory markers after posterior lumbar interbody fusion. H Aono, T Ohwada, N Kaneko, T Fuji, M Iwasaki, J Bone Joint Surg Br. 89Aono H, Ohwada T, Kaneko N, Fuji T, Iwasaki M. The post-operative changes in the level of inflammatory markers after posterior lumbar interbody fusion. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2007;89:1478- 1481

Surgical site infection in spinal surgery: detection and management based on serial C-reactive protein measurements. B U Kang, S H Lee, Y Ahn, W C Choi, Y G Choi, J Neurosurg Spine. 13Kang BU, Lee SH, Ahn Y, Choi WC, Choi YG. Surgical site infection in spinal surgery: detection and management based on serial C-reactive protein measurements. J Neurosurg Spine 2010;13: 158-164

Usefulness of white blood cell differential for early diagnosis of surgical wound infection following spinal instrumentation surgery. J Takahashi, Y Shono, H Hirabayashi, Spine. 31Takahashi J, Shono Y, Hirabayashi H, et al. Usefulness of white blood cell differential for early diagnosis of surgical wound infec- tion following spinal instrumentation surgery. Spine 2006; 31:1020-1025

. Global Spine Journal. 32Global Spine Journal Vol. 3 No. 2/2013

Postoperative Deep Surgical-Site Infection after Instrumented Spinal Surgery Ishii et al. 101. Postoperative Deep Surgical-Site Infection after Instrumented Spinal Surgery Ishii et al. 101