Physical Fitness and Development of High Non-High-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol
2018

Shinji Koba skoba@med.showa-u.ac.jp 
Division of Cardiology
Department of Medicine
Division of Cardiology
Department of Medicine
Showa University School of Medicine
1-5-8 Hatanodai, Shinagawa-ku142-8666TokyoJapan

Showa University School of Medicine
TokyoJapan

Physical Fitness and Development of High Non-High-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol

J Atheroscler Thromb
25201810.5551/jat.ED105Received: October 8, 2018 Accepted for publication: October 15, 2018Editorial Address for correspondence: Shinji Koba,


were 40.7 ml/min/kg (11.6 metabolic equivalents: METs), 22.5 kg/m 2 , 127.0 mmHg, 119.7 mg/dL, 102.3 mg/dL, 58.6 mg/dL, 87.2 mg/dL, and 93.4 mg/dL, respectively, which showed very healthy characteristics of the study population. They observed that 1,482 participants exhibited high non-HDL-C levels during the follow-up period (median 13 years). They reported that multivariate hazard ratio and 95% confidence interval (CI) for the incidence of high non-HDL-C levels was 0.79 (95% CI: 0.67 -0.92) in the top quartile of CRF when the lowest quartile was the reference, after adjustment for age, BMI, systolic BP, smoking status, alcohol intake, and family history of dyslipidemia. They concluded that high CRF levels were less likely to have hyper-non-HDL cholesterolemia and that habitual aerobic exercise might prevent high non-HDL-C levels in Japanese healthy men. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to demonstrate the inverse association between CRF levels and incidence of high non-HDL-C levels. A recent report from the Aerobics Center Longitudinal study, a prospective study of adults at the Cooper Clinic in Dallas, US, showed an association between CRF levels evaluated by treadmill exercise test duration and aging trajectory of lipids and lipoproteins for the life course from data of health examinations between 1970 and 2006, in 11,408 men, 20 -90 years of age, without high cholesterol, high triglyceride, CVD, and cancer at baseline 6) . The serum levels of T-C, LDL-C, non-HDL-C, and triglyceride increased gradually until 50 years of age, with subsequent declines. Compared with men with higher CRF, those with lower CRF developed high non-HDL-C earlier in life. They reported that men with higher CRF levels had more favorable lipid profiles than those with lower CRF levels.

The landmark study by Blair et al., in 1989, demonstrated that low CRF levels were a strong predictor for all-cause mortality independent of traditional CHD risk factors 7) . Similarly, many prospective cohort stud-


See article vol. 25: 1196-1205

Elevation of total cholesterol (T-C), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (non-HDL-C), and triglyceride levels and decreases in HDL-C levels can predict the incidence and mortality rates due to coronary heart disease (CHD) in the future even in the Japanese population 1) . Non-HDL-C includes all lipid biomarkers except HDL-C and has been reported to be more associated with highly atherogenic lipids or lipoproteins (e.g., remnant lipoproteins, small dense LDL, Lp(a), and triglyceride) compared with LDL-C 2, 3) . The Japan Atherosclerosis Society Guidelines for Prevention of Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Diseases 2017 defined hypernon-HDL cholesterolemia as non-HDL-C levels ≥ 170 mg/dL 1) .

The physical activity (PA) and cardiorespiratory fitness (CRF) levels have been found to be negatively correlated with mortality due to cardiovascular disease (CVD) and cancer as well as all-cause mortality in studies conducted worldwide 1) . Although many randomized controlled trials (RCT) and meta-analyses of these RCTs have reported the beneficial effects of exercise on serum lipid profiles, limited studies have investigated non-HDL-C as targets. Among cross-sectional studies, CRF is positively associated with HDL-C levels and inversely associated with non-HDL-C, LDL-C, and triglyceride levels. However, there are few prospective studies investigating that high CRF levels prevent the incidence of dyslipidemia 4) . Watanabe et al. 5) investigated CRF levels measured by cycle ergometer and health habits in 4,067 Japanese healthy men aged 19 -60 years without dyslipidemia at baseline. The mean CRF levels, body mass index (BMI), systolic blood pressure (BP), non-HDL-C levels, LDL-C levels, HDL-C levels, triglyceride levels, and glucose levels at baseline ies showed that CRF was important for modifying the effect of risk factors for CVD 8) . A meta-analysis of 23 cohorts of PA or CRF reported that CRF was a stronger predictor of CVD events than PA 9) . A prospective cohort study from Veterans Affairs Medical Centers in US reported that CRF over 5 METs achieved similar or even greater reduction in mortality risk than that achieved by statin therapy alone and that combination of statin therapy and higher CRF resulted in substantially lower mortality risk than either alone in dyslipidemic individuals 10) . Therefore, a high CRF level is very important to prevent CVD events and CVD risk factors. However, the measurement of CRF level is not routinely assessed in general clinical settings. Fig.1 shows effects of PA and CRF on cardiovascular risk. In general, PA appears to be the most powerful contributor to CRF, and CRF is recognized as an objective marker for habitual PA. Efforts to increase PA will maintain or increase CRF, resulting in the maintenance or decreases of BMI, non-HDL-C levels, LDL-C levels, triglyceride levels, systolic and diastolic BPs, and glucose levels; maintenance or increases of HDL-C levels; and subsequently decrease CVD risk. The present study confirms that a high CRF level is a significant contributor to maintaining favorable lipid profiles in the future. Physicians should pay attention to the significance of CRF for the prevention of CVD risk factors and incorporate CRF into clinical practice.


Disclosures

The authors have no conflicts to declare. 

Copyright©2018
Japan Atherosclerosis Society This article is distributed under the terms of the latest version of CC BY-NC-SA defined by the Creative Commons Attribution License.

Fig. 1 .
1Effects of PA and CRF on cardiovascular risk. Abbreviations, see text.

Committee for Epidemiology and Clinical Management of Atherosclerosis. Committee for Epidemiology and Clinical Management of Atherosclerosis;

(JAS) Guidelines for Prevention of Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Diseases. M Kinoshita, S Yamashita, K Yokote, H Arai, M Iida, Y Ishigaki, S Ishibashi, S Umemoto, G Egusa, H Ohmura, T Okamura, S Kihara, S Koba, I Saito, T Shoji, H Daida, K Tsukamoto, J Deguchi, S Dohi, K Dobashi, H Hamaguchi, M Hara, T Hiro, S Biro, Y Fujioka, C Maruyama, Y Miyamoto, Y Murakami, M Yokode, H Yoshida, H Rakugi, A Wakatsuki, J Atheroscler Thromb. 25Japan Atherosclerosis SocietyKinoshita M, Yamashita S, Yokote K, Arai H, Iida M, Ishigaki Y, Ishibashi S, Umemoto S, Egusa G, Ohmura H, Okamura T, Kihara S, Koba S, Saito I, Shoji T, Daida H, Tsukamoto K, Deguchi J, Dohi S, Dobashi K, Hamaguchi H, Hara M, Hiro T, Biro S, Fujioka Y, Maruyama C, Miyamoto Y, Murakami Y, Yokode M, Yoshida H, Rakugi H, Wakatsuki A.: Japan Athero- sclerosis Society (JAS) Guidelines for Prevention of Ath- erosclerotic Cardiovascular Diseases 2017. J Atheroscler Thromb 2018; 25: 846-984

Non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and apolipoprotein B in the prediction of coronary heart disease in men. T Pischon, C J Girman, F M Sacks, N Rifai, M J Stampfer, E B Rimm, Circulation. 112Pischon T, Girman CJ, Sacks FM, Rifai N, Stampfer MJ, Rimm EB: Non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and apolipoprotein B in the prediction of coronary heart dis- ease in men. Circulation 2005; 112: 3375-3383

Non-HDL Cholesterol is a More Superior Predictor of Small-Dense LDL Cholesterol than LDL Cholesterol in Japanese Subjects with TG levels 400 mg/dL. K Moriyama, E Takahashi, J Atheroscler Thromb. 23Moriyama K, Takahashi E: Non-HDL Cholesterol is a More Superior Predictor of Small-Dense LDL Cholesterol than LDL Cholesterol in Japanese Subjects with TG levels 400 mg/dL. J Atheroscler Thromb 2016; 23: 1126-1137

Association of Fitness With Incident Dyslipidemias Over 25 Years in the Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults Study. M A Sarzynski, J M SchunaJr, M R Carnethon, D R JacobsJr, C E Lewis, C P QuesenberryJr, Sidney S Schreiner, P J Sternfeld, B , Am J Prev Med. 49Sarzynski MA, Schuna JM Jr, Carnethon MR, Jacobs DR Jr, Lewis CE, Quesenberry CP Jr, Sidney S, Schreiner PJ, Sternfeld B: Association of Fitness With Incident Dyslip- idemias Over 25 Years in the Coronary Artery Risk Devel- opment in Young Adults Study. Am J Prev Med. 2015; 49: 745-752

Relationship between cardiorespiratory fitness and non-high-denslty lipoprotein cholesterol: a cohort study. N Watanabe, S S Sawada, K Shimada, I M Lee, Y Gando, H Monmma, R Kawakami, M Miyachi, Y Hagi, C Kinugawa, T Okamoto, K Tsukamoto, S N Blair, J Atheroscler Thromb. 25Watanabe N, Sawada SS, Shimada K, Lee IM, Gando Y, Monmma H, Kawakami R, Miyachi M, Hagi Y, Kinugawa C, Okamoto T, Tsukamoto K, Blair SN: Relationship between cardiorespiratory fitness and non-high-denslty lipo- protein cholesterol: a cohort study. J Atheroscler Thromb 2018; 25: 1196-1205

The impact of cardiorespiratory fitness on age-related lipids and lipoproteins. Ymm Park, X Sui, J Liu, H Zhou, P F Kokkinos, C J Lavie, J W Hardin, S N Blair, J Am Coll. 329Park YMM, Sui X, Liu J, Zhou H, Kokkinos PF, Lavie CJ, Hardin JW, Blair SN: The impact of cardiorespiratory fitness on age-related lipids and lipoproteins. J Am Coll 329

Physical fitness and activity as separate heart disease risk factors: a meta-analysis. P T Williams, Med Sci Sports Exerc. 33Williams PT: Physical fitness and activity as separate heart disease risk factors: a meta-analysis. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2001; 33: 754-761

Doumas M: Interactive effects of fitness and statin treatment on mortality risk in veterans with dyslipidemia: a cohort study. P F Kokkinos, C Faselis, J Myers, D Panagiotakos, Lancet. 381Kokkinos PF, Faselis C, Myers J, Panagiotakos D, Dou- mas M: Interactive effects of fitness and statin treatment on mortality risk in veterans with dyslipidemia: a cohort study. Lancet 2013; 381: 394-399

. Cardiol. 65Cardiol 2015; 65: 2091-2100

Physical fitness and all-cause mortality: a prospective study of healthy men and women. S N Blair, H W Kohl, Paffenbarger Jr, R S Clark, D G Cooper, K H Gibbons, L W , JAMA. 262Blair SN, Kohl HW, Paffenbarger Jr RS, Clark DG, Cooper KH, Gibbons LW: Physical fitness and all-cause mortality: a prospective study of healthy men and women. JAMA 1989; 262: 2395-2401

Physical activity versus cardiorespiratory fitness: two (partly) distinct components of cardiovascular health ?. L F Defina, W L Haskell, B L Willis, C E Barlow, C E Finley, B D Levine, K H Cooper, Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 57324DeFina LF, Haskell WL, Willis BL, Barlow CE, Finley CE, Levine BD, Cooper KH: Physical activity versus car- diorespiratory fitness: two (partly) distinct components of cardiovascular health ? Prog Cardiovasc Dis 2015; 57: 324-