Scaling BDD-based Timed Verification with Simulation Reduction


Truong Khanh Nguyen truong.khanh.nguyen@autodesk.com 
Tian Huat Tan 
Nanyang Technological University


Jun Sun 
Nanyang Technological University


Jiaying Li jiayingli@mymail.sutd.edu.sg 
Nanyang Technological University


Yang Liu yangliu@ntu.edu.sg 
National University of Singapore


Manman Chen manmanchen@sutd.edu.sg 
Nanyang Technological University


Jin Song Dong dongjs@comp.nus.edu.sg 
Autodesk 

Singapore University of Technology


Scaling BDD-based Timed Verification with Simulation Reduction
80D99E512DCE8FFBEC5A82E683666741
Digitization is a technique that has been widely used in real-time model checking.With the assumption of digital clocks, symbolic model checking techniques (like those based on BDDs) can be applied for real-time systems.The problem of model checking real-time systems based on digitization is that the number of tick transitions increases rapidly with the increment of clock upper bounds.In this paper, we propose to improve BDD-based verification for real-time systems using simulation reduction.We show that simulation reduction allows us to verify timed automata with large clock upper bounds and to converge faster to the fixpoint.The presented approach is applied to reachability and LTL verification for real-time systems.Finally, we compare our approach with existing tools such as Rabbit, Uppaal, and CTAV and show that our approach outperforms them and achieves a significant speedup.

Introduction

Timed automata are an extension of finite automata with clock variables which represent timed constraints [3].Interesting model checking problems of timed automata, like the verification of the reachability and LTL properties, are shown to be decidable through the construction of region graphs [3].However, since the size of region graphs grows exponentially with the number of clocks and the maximal clock constants, verification based on region graphs is impractical.

There are two lines of work that are proposed to address this problem.The first line of work is based on Difference Bound Matrices (DBMs).DBMs were proposed to represent a set of clock valuations satisfying a set of convex clock constraints [19] with a zone graph.The resulted zone graph is often much smaller than the region graph, which often results in efficient verification of timed automata models [15].There are several problems with DBMs.First, it is difficult to verify LTL properties with non-Zeno assumption.A run is called Zeno if there are infinite actions happening in finite time.Zeno runs are unrealistic and therefore should be excluded during the system verification.However, this process has shown to be fairly non-trivial [41].Second, DBMs cannot represent non-convex zones.Some verification/reduction techniques for timed automata may result in non-convex zones, and novel techniques need to be invented for handling such cases.For instance, with a particular abstraction technique called LU abstraction [7], the resulted zone can be non-convex.In such a case, a convex subset of LU abstraction, called Extra + LU extrapolation [7], needs to be used.Third, since locations and clock valuations are stored separately in zone graphs, state space explosion is often encountered with models having many processes.

The other line of work is based on digitization [29].It replaces the continuous passage of time with a passage in discrete steps.The advantage of this approach is that it helps transforming the problem to model checking a discrete system and techniques such as BDD-based symbolic model checking [16] can be leveraged.There are several advantages of using BDD-based verification compared to DBMs-based verification.First, checking non-Zenoness with digitization and BDDs is almost trivial.Furthermore, it has been shown to outperform zone-based approach in many existing works (e.g., [15,5,9,43,12]).Second, we can store both locations and clock valuations together symbolically and is not limited to non-convex sets.However, the problem with digitization and the BDD-based approach is that it does not scale for large clock constants.Large clock constants would significantly increase the number of tick transitions which denote the passage of one time unit.As a result, a large number of iterations are often necessary to completely explore the state space.

In this work, we propose the usage of LU simulation to address the aforementioned problem.In particular, we propose two algorithms, based on LU simulation, for model checking reachability and LTL properties respectively.A desired property of LU simulation is that it can be obtained for free in timed automata.Our algorithms depend on two clock bounds: the maximal lower bound and the maximal upper bound (LU bounds) [7].By leveraging these clock bounds, we could explore the set of all reachable states from initial states in fewer iterations.Intuitively, this is achieved in two ways.First, during the verification, given a set of reachable states S encoded as BDD, we actively enlarge it by adding states which can be simulated by those in S .Thus, we have more states and it is possible to find all the reachable states with fewer iterations.Second, according to LU simulation relation, states with clock value greater than the maximal lower bound can simulate all states with larger clock values.Therefore, our method could perform well even if the maximal upper bound is very large.

In short, we make the following technical contributions in this work:

1. We have applied simulation reduction in a BDD efficient way for both reachability and LTL properties.To the best knowledge of the authors, we are the first to apply LU simulation relation in BDD-based approach model checking of timed automata.2. We have shown the soundness and completeness of our proposed algorithms.In addition, we further prove that for the algorithm on verifying reachability properties, our approach always requires the same or fewer iterations than classic approaches.3. We have compared our approaches on verifying reachability and LTL properties with state-of-the-art DBMs-based and BDD-based model checkers, e.g., Uppaal [30] and Rabbit [10] on benchmark systems.The results show that our approach achieves a significant speed up and outperforms other tools.


Related Work

On the effort of improving reachability analysis of timed automata, this work is related to studies on the abstraction techniques [33,13,7,26] to reduce the number of states in zone graphs.The idea is to enlarge a DBMs without violating the correctness.This work continues the research on using BDDs and BDD-like data structures to improve the verification of real-time systems [15,5,8,9,43,12,44,38].

This work is related to the research on simulation reduction (e.g., [20,21]) as well as research on the emptiness checking of Timed Büchi Automata (TBA).Note that LTL verification on timed automata can be converted to the emptiness checking of TBA.In [41], Tripakis discovered that it is non-trivial to check whether a run in a zone graph can induce a non-Zeno run in the original TBA.The proposed remedy is to transform a TBA to an equivalent strongly non-Zeno TBA so that algorithms for emptiness checking of Büchi automata can be used to solve the emptiness problem of TBA.In [42], Tripakis questioned whether coarser extrapolation techniques, specifically inclusion abstraction [18] and LU extrapolation [7], can also be used to check TBA emptiness.In [28], Laarman et al. showed that inclusion abstraction only preserves the emptiness of TBA in one direction.In [31], Li showed that LU extrapolation indeed preserves the emptiness of TBA.One result of this work is an improved algorithm of solving the non-emptiness problem based on BDDs.

This work is closely related to [7], [31] and work on using downward closure [21] based on LU simulation relation as an abstraction.While [7] and [31] both apply LU simulation relation to DBMs (Extra + LU extrapolation) for reachability analysis and emptiness checking respectively, we apply the LU simulation relation to BDDs for both reachability and emptiness.There are two advantages of our approach.First, given a convex set of clock valuations, Extra + LU is a subset of LU abstraction.Our approach based on LU abstraction can be more efficient than Extra + LU [26,21], because a BDD can represent a non-convex set of clock valuations.Second, to handle the non-Zeno condition, [31] relies on the strongly non-Zeno transformation, which requires an additional clock and may result in a zone graph with exponentially more states [25,24].

Organization The rest of the paper is organized as follows.Section 2 introduces timed automata and the LU simulation relation in timed automata.Section 3 presents our work on the reachability analysis.Then, Section 4 presents our work on the LTL verification.Next, Section 5 shows the experimental results.Section 6 discusses our work.Finally, Section 7 concludes our paper.


Preliminaries


Timed Automata

In this section we introduce timed automata, arguably one of the most popular modeling languages for real-time systems.We denote the finite alphabet by Σ.Let R ≥0 be the set of non-negative real numbers.Let X be the set of non-negative real variables called clocks.The set Φ(X ) contains all clock constraints δ defined inductively by the grammar : and c ∈ N. Given a set of clocks X , a clock valuation v : X → R ≥0 is a function which assigns a non-negative real value to each clock in X .We denote R |X | ≥0 the set of clock valuations over X .We write v |= δ if and only if δ evaluates to true using the clock valuation v .We denote as 0 the valuation that assigns each clock with the value 0. Given a clock valuation v and d ∈ R ≥0 , the clock valuation
δ := x ∼ c | x − y ∼ c | δ ∧ δ where x , y ∈ X , ∼∈ {<, ≤, =, ≥, >},v = v + d is defined as v (x ) = v (x ) + d for all clocks x in X . For R ⊆ X , let [R → 0]v denote the clock valuation v such that v (x ) = v (x ) for all x ∈ X \ R and v (x ) = 0 for all x ∈ R.
Definition 1.A timed automaton is a tuple A = (Σ, X , L, l 0 , T , I ) where -Σ is the finite alphabet, X is the set of clock variables.-L is the set of locations, l 0 ∈ L is the initial location.

-T ⊆ L × Φ(X ) × Σ × 2 X × L is the set of transitions (l , g, e, R, l ) where l and l are the source and destination locations of this transition respectively, g ∈ Φ(X ) is a guard, e ∈ Σ is an event name, and R ⊆ X is a set of resetting clocks.-I : L → Φ(X ) assigns invariants to locations.The (continuous) semantics of a timed automaton A = (Σ, X , L, l 0 , T , I ) is a transition system CS (A) = (S , s 0 , →) where
S = L × R |X |
≥0 is a set of states, s 0 = (l 0 , 0) is the initial state, and → is the smallest labeled transition relation satisfying the following:

-Delay transition:
(l , v ) d − → (l , v + d ) if ∀ 0 ≤ d ≤ d , v + d |= I (l ) -Action transition: (l , v ) t − → (l , v ) with t = (g, e, R) if there exists (l , g, e, R, l ) ∈ T such that v |= g, v = [R → 0]v , and v |= I (l ) We write (l , v ) d − → t − → (l , v ) if there exists (l 1 , v 1 ) where (l , v ) d − → (l 1 , v 1 ) and (l 1 , v 1 ) t − → (l , v ). A run of A is a sequence (l 0 , v 0 ) d0 − → t0 − → (l 1 , v 1 ) d1 − → t1 − → • • • . A state (l n , v n ) is reachable from (l 0 , v 0 ) if
there is a run starting from (l 0 , v 0 ) and ending at (l n , v n ).The duration of the run is defined as the total delay over this run, i≥0 d i .A run is called Zeno if there are infinite actions happening in finite time.Given a timed automaton A = (Σ, X , L, l 0 , T , I ) and a location l ∈ L, reachability analysis is to decide whether a given state (l , v ) is reachable from the initial state (l 0 , 0).Next, we define the emptiness checking problem for timed automata.Let Acc ⊆ L be the set of accepting locations.An accepting run of A is a run which visits a state in Acc infinitely often.The language of A over Acc, L(A), is defined as the set of accepting non-Zeno runs.The emptiness problem is to determine whether L(A) is empty, i.e., whether there exists an infinite run which is non-Zeno and accepting.We remark that reachability analysis is often used to verify safety problem, whereas algorithms for the emptiness checking problem can often be extended to verify liveness properties like LTL formulae.

In the above semantics, clock values are continuous and events are observed at real time points.Thus, the number of states is infinite and BDDs can not be applied to verify timed automata under this semantics.In the following, we introduce discrete semantics which are based on the assumption that events are observed at integer time points only.


Discrete Semantics

In discrete semantics, we assume that clock constraints are always closed, i.e., defined by δ
c := x ∼ c c | x − y ∼ c c | δ c ∧ δ c where x , y ∈ X , ∼ c ∈ {≤, =,
≥}, and c ∈ N. Timed automata with closed constraints are called closed timed automata [5,23].

Given any clock x ∈ X , we write M (x ) to denote the maximal constant to which x is compared in any clock constraint of A. Given a clock valuation v , v ⊕ d denotes the clock valuation where
(v ⊕ d )(x ) = min(v (x ) + d , M (x ) + 1)
. Intuitively, for each clock x , once the clock value is greater than its maximal constant M (x ), its exact value is no longer important, but the fact v (x ) > M (x ) matters.

The discrete semantics of a closed timed automaton A = (Σ, X , L, l 0 , T , I ) is a transition system DS (A) = (S , s 0 , →) where S = L × N |X | is a set of states, s 0 = (l 0 , 0) is the initial state, and → is the smallest labeled transition relation satisfying the following condition:

-Tick transition:
(l , v ) tick −−→ (l , v ⊕ 1) if v |= I (l ) and v ⊕ 1 |= I (l ) -Action transition: (l , v ) t − → (l , v ) with t = (g, e, R) if there exists (l , g, e, R, l ) ∈ T such that v |= g, v = [R → 0]v , and v |= I (l )
It was shown that the discrete semantics preserves untimed properties of closed timed automata [5,23].Thus, DS (A) can be used in place of CS (A) in the verification of untimed properties like untimed reachability analysis and untimed LTL verification.It follows that BDDs can be used to encode and verify the closed timed automata based on the discrete semantics.In this work, we adopt the approach presented in [35,9] to encode DS (A) in BDD.Given a timed automaton A = (Σ, X , L, l 0 , T , I ), we denote Init, Tick , and Trans the BDD encodings of the initial states, tick transitions, and action transitions of DS (A), respectively.Note that the encoding of the transition relation of DS (A) is the disjunction of Tick and Trans.The tick transitions and action transitions are encoded separately for efficiency.The details are discussed in Section 3.


Simulation Relation

Since our model checking algorithms use the simulation relation, we introduce the simulation relation over timed automata in the following.


Definition 2. Given a timed automaton A, a (location-based) simulation relation over states of CS
(A) is a binary relation R ⊆ S ×S such that for all ((l 1 , v 1 ), (l 2 , v 2 )) ∈ R, -l 1 = l 2 . -if (l 1 , v 1 ) d − → (l 1 , v 1 + d ) then there exists d such that (l 2 , v 2 ) d − → (l 2 , v 2 + d ) and ((l 1 , v 1 + d ), (l 2 , v 2 + d )) ∈ R. -if (l 1 , v 1 ) t − → (l 1 , v 1 ) then there exists (l 2 , v 2 ) such that (l 2 , v 2 ) t − → (l 2 , v 2 ) and ((l 1 , v 1 ), (l 2 , v 2 )) ∈ R. hold. A state (l 1 , v 1 ) is simulated by state (l 2 , v 2 ) denoted as (l 1 , v 1 ) (l 2 , v 2 ), if there exists a simulation relation R such that ((l 1 , v 1 ), (l 2 , v 2 )) ∈ R.
By definition, any state simulates itself.Given a set of states Q ⊆ S , we define the downward closure [21] as
Down(Q) = {s 1 ∈ S | ∃ s 2 ∈ Q.s 1 s 2 }.
Intuitively, the downward closure of Q is the set of states which can be simulated by any state in Q.Since the simulation relation is reflexive, it follows that Q ⊆ Down(Q).

For timed automata, there exists a simulation relation called the LU simulation relation [7].Given a clock x , the maximal lower bound L(x ) (respectively maximal upper bound U (x )) is the maximal constant k that there exists a constraint x > k or x ≥ k in the timed automaton.If such constant k does not exist, we set L(x ) to −∞.Then, given two clock valuations v and v , we denote v v if for all clocks x ∈ X , either [7].The following proposition shows that it is also a simulation relation based on DS (A).
v (x ) = v (x ) or L(x ) < v (x ) < v (x ) or U (x ) < v (x ) < v (x ). It shows the relation R CS = {((l , v ), (l , v )) | v v } is a simulation relation based on CS (A)Proposition 1. The relation R = {((l , v ), (l , v )) | v , v ∈ N |X | ∧ v v } is a simulation relation of DS(A).
The proof is the same as Lemma 3 in [7].For simplicity, we denote the BDD encoding of the simulation relation R defined in Proposition 1.
Q p = ∅ 3: Q = Init 4: Q = Reach(Q, Trans) 5:
while
(Q p = Q) do 6: Q p = Q 7:
Q=Q∪Reach( succ(Q, Tick ), Trans)
8: if Q ∩ goal = ∅Q p = ∅ 17: while (Q p = Q) do 18: Q p = Q 19: Q = Q ∪ succ(Q, R)Q p = ∅ 3: Q = Down(Init) 4: Q = Reach sim (Q, Trans) 5:
while
(Q p = Q) do 6: Q p = Q 7:
Q=Q∪Reach sim (Down(succ(Q, Tick )), Trans)
8: if Q ∩ goal = ∅Q p = ∅ 17: while (Q p = Q) do 18: Q p = Q 19: Q = Q ∪ Down(succ(Q, R)) 20:
end while


21:

return Q 22: end function 3


Reachability Analysis Algorithm

In this section, we present the reachability analysis algorithm without the simulation reduction and the one with the reduction.


Algorithm without Simulation Reduction

Given a set of states goal , the reachability analysis is performed by computing the set of reachable states and checking whether it contains any state in goal .The problem of efficiently computing the set of reachable states in BDDs for timed systems has been investigated by Beyer in [11,9].There are two important observations to avoid exploding BDDs.First, separating action and tick transitions is more efficient than unifying them as monolithic transitions.Second, for fix-point computation, applying action transitions before tick transitions can achieve smaller encodings of intermediate reachable states.

Algorithm 1 shows the reachability analysis algorithm based on Beyer's observations, without simulation reduction.The function IsReach takes Init, Tick , Trans, and goal as input.It checks whether a state in goal is reachable from an initial state in Init by transitions in Tick or Trans.Moreover, given a set of states Q and a transition relation R, the function Reach(Q, R) computes the set of states reachable from Q by transitions in R. We denote the set of successor states of Q as succ(Q, R).Intuitively, Q stores the set of states reachable within i time units after i th iteration (lines 5-11).The algorithm reaches the fixpoint if no new state is found in the next time unit.

While Algorithm 1 is relatively efficient in computing the reachable states, it still suffers from large maximal clock constants.Models with large maximal clock constants require a large number of iterations to obtain the fixpoint.Figure 1a presents a timed automaton with a large clock constant, i.e., with a maximal clock constant of 10 6 .We remark that in practice, large clock constants are not uncommon because different time units are often used in the same time.Figure 1b is the transition system generated by the discrete semantics.States at location l 2 are ignored in Figure 1b for simplicity.We denote (l i , j ) the state where the location is l i and the clock valuation v such that v (x ) = j .Assume the property is whether location l 2 is reachable.Then, Algorithm 1 requires 10 6 + 2 iterations to reach the fixpoint to conclude that l 2 is unreachable.Specifically, 10 6 + 1 iterations to find all the reachable states and the last iteration does not find any new state and concludes that the fixpoint is reached.However, with simulation reduction, our approach can verify whether l 2 is reachable within 3 iterations.

In the next section, we present our improved algorithm by using the simulation relation.We prove that the number of iterations can be reduced, and experimental results given in Section 5 confirm that our improved algorithm is much more efficient.


Algorithm with Simulation Reduction

In this section, we present our improved reachability analysis algorithm.Given a transition system L, a simulation relation over states of L and a set of states goal , our algorithm determines whether any state in goal is reachable.The reachability analysis is performed similarly as Algorithm 1 by computing the reachable states set and checking whether it contains any state in goal .

We assume that the simulation on L is compatible with the set goal , i.e., for any (s 1 , s 2 ) ∈ , s 1 ∈ goal ⇒ s 2 ∈ goal .In our reachability verification for timed automata, the LU simulation relation satisfies this condition because the reachability verification is over locations.Effectively, with simulation reduction, we would explore a reduced transition system defined as Def. 3. Definition 3. Given the transition system L = (C , init c , →) and the simulation relation , we define the transition system L = (C , init c , ⇒) such that:
-C = C , init c = Down(init c ).
-Given any state s 1 , s 2 ∈ L , there is a transition s 1 ⇒ s 2 in L if there exists a transition s 1 → s 2 in L and s 2 s 2 .

Note that the state space is unchanged.The initial states and transition functions are changed accordingly the simulation relation over the set of states C .Intuitively, for any transition s 1 → s 2 in L, we allow other states simulated by s 2 to be successor states of s 1 in L .Thus, given a set of states Q ⊆ C , succ(Q, ⇒) = Down(succ(Q, →)).In the following, we establish that L preserves the reachability.Lemma 1.Given q 1 q 1 , if there exists a path with length n, q 1 ⇒ q 2 ⇒ • • • ⇒ q n in L , there exists a path with the same length, q 1 → q 2 → • • • → q n in L such that q i q i for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n.

2 Theorem 1.Given the transition systems L, L , and a set of states goal , goal is reachable in L if and only if goal is reachable in L .


2

Based on the relationship between transition systems L and L stated by Theorem 1, we can use L as the input for Algorithm 1.However, explicitly computing the transition relation of L is computationally expensive.Instead, we apply Down to the result of any call succ(Q) on the fly in Algorithm 1 because succ(Q, ⇒) = Down(succ(Q, → )).Algorithm 2 presents our improved reachability analysis algorithm with simulation reduction.We rename the two functions as IsReach sim and Reach sim respectively.The difference between Algorithm 2 and Algorithm 1 is that in the function IsReach sim , we first update Q = Down(Init) at line 3, and subsequently, we call Reach sim (Q, R) and Down(succ(Q, R)) instead of Reach(Q, R) and succ(Q, R) respectively.It can be observed that we always apply Down to the results of the succ function.

Theorem 2. Algorithm 2 is sound and complete.Proof: As we discussed the difference between Algorithm 2 and Algorithm 1, given a transition system L, while the function IsReach(Init, Tick , Trans, g) checks the reachability of g on L, the function IsReach sim (Init, Tick , Trans, g) actually checks the reachability of g on L .Thus, the correctness of Algorithm 2 is obtained based on Theorem 1 and the correctness of Algorithm 1.

Our algorithm is similar to the algorithm of antichain of promising states [21].Note that in [21], the algorithm uses the Min operator while our approach uses the Down operator.We uses Down operator because it is efficient to compute in BDD.This algorithm is also similar to the one in [7], where LU simulation is used to improve zonebased verification of timed automata.However, the Down operator here is coarser than extrapolation used in [7] (any extrapolation must result in convex zones).
Lemma 2. Assume Q = Down(Q), Q ∪Reach sim (Down(succ(Q , Tick )), Trans) = Down(Q ∪ Reach(succ(Q, Tick ), Trans)). Lemma 3. Assume Q = Down(Q), after n iterations, if Reach(Q, R) reaches the fixpoint, Reach sim (Q , R) also reaches the fixpoint. Moreover the results of those func- tions satisfy Reach sim (Q , R) = Down(Reach(Q, R)).
Since the reachability analysis requires many fixpoint computations, the rationale of Algorithm 2 is to converge faster to the fixpoint.In the following, we prove that Reach sim (Down(Q)) requires the same or smaller number of iterations to reach the fixpoint than Reach(Q).In our proof, to distinguish with Algorithm 1, given any variable Q appearing in Algorithm 2, we use the prime version Q to denote that variable in Algorithm 2. Theorem 3. Algorithm 2 requires fewer or the same number of iterations than Algorithm 1.

Proof: By Lemmas 3 and 2, in Algorithms 1 and 2, Q = Down(Q).So if Algorithm 1 terminates when Q ∩ goal = ∅, Algorithm 2 also terminates because
Q ∩ goal = ∅. Otherwise if Q = Q p holds in Algorithm 1, Q = Q p also holds in Algorithm 2.
Example.In the following, we demonstrate how Algorithm 2 works using the example in Figure 1.The reachability problem is to check whether l 2 is reachable from the initial state l 0 .According to timed automaton, we have L(x ) = 1 and U (x ) = 10 6 .Algorithm 2 only takes 3 iterations to verify l 2 is unreachable, specifically:

-
Q 0 = {(l 0 , 0)} -Q 1 = {(l 0 , 0), (l 0 , 1), (l 1 , 1)} -Q 2 = {(l 0 , i ) | 0 ≤ i ≤ 10 6 + 1} ∪ {(l 1 , i ) | 1 ≤ i ≤ 10 6 + 1} -Q 3 = Q 2
In the 2 nd iteration, we have (l 0 , 2), (l 1 , 2) ∈ Q 2 at first.Since (l 0 , i ) (l 0 , 2) and (l 1 , i ) (l 1 , 2) for all i > 2, we add all states (l 0 , i ), (l 1 , i ) where i > 2 to Q 2 by Down function.Thus, finally
Q 2 = {(l 0 , i ) | 0 ≤ i ≤ 10 6 + 1} ∪ {(l 1 , i ) | 1 ≤ i ≤ 10 6 + 1}.
In this section, we have presented our improved algorithm for reachability verification by using the LU simulation relation.We prove that our approach in Algorithm 2 always uses fewer or the same number of iterations compared with the classic algorithm as in Algorithm 1.In the next section, we continue with presenting our improved emptiness checking algorithm with the simulation relation.for all J i ∈ J do for all J i ∈ J do Under digitization and automata theory, LTL verification can be done by emptiness checking.Thus, the emptiness checking algorithm of Kesten et al. [27] can be used.In this section, we fist present the algorithm of Kesten.Then, we introduce our improved algorithm by using the simulation relation.


Algorithm without Simulation Reduction

Given a transition system and a set of Büchi conditions J where J i ∈ J is a set of states, an accepting run is an infinite run which visits a J i -state (a state in J i ) infinitely often for all J i ∈ J .The emptiness problem is to check whether this run exists.

For simplicity, in this section, we merge Trans and Tick and assume that Tr is the encoding of the whole transition system.Algorithm 3 [27] presents the symbolic emptiness checking algorithm.Specifically, function IsEmpty takes the set of the initial states Init, the transition relation Tr , and a set of Büchi conditions J as input.

In Algorithm 3, function IsEmpty searches for an accepting strongly connected component (SCC) which contains a J i -state for every Büchi condition J i ∈ J .The algorithm computes the set of all reachable accepting SCCs.If this set is empty, there is no accepting run in the given transition system.At line 4, new is assigned as the set of all reachable states from the initial states.Then, the while-loop (from line 5 to line 14) continuously refines the set of states new until a fixpoint is reached (i.e., new = old at line 5).Inside this while-loop, first, we backup the current value of new in old (line 6).Then, from line 7 to line 9, we continue to refine new as the set of states reachable by a J i -state for all J i ∈ J .Next, in the inner while-loop from line 11 to line 13, we again refine new by successively removing from new states which do not have a predecessor in new (line 12).This loop is iterated until new is closed under predecessor.Thus, new is the set of all reachable SCCs.Because of the loop from line 7 to line 9, those SCCs are accepting by containg a state in J i for all J i ∈ J .At the end, new contains all reachable accepting SCCs in this transition system.


Algorithm with Simulation Reduction

In this section, we present our improved emptiness checking algorithm of timed automata Algorithm 4, which improves Algorithm 3 by using the simulation relation.We rename the function as IsEmpty sim .The difference between Algorithm 4 and Algorithm 3 is that in the function IsEmpty sim , we update Init = Down(Init) at line 3 at the beginning, and throughout the algorithm, we call the functions Reach sim (Q, Tr ) and Down(succ(Q)) instead of Reach(Q, Tr ) and succ(Q), respectively.Note that the function Reach sim (Q, Tr ) is introduced in Section 3. In other words, we always apply the function Down on the results of the succ function.We prove that Algorithm 4 is sound and complete as we did for Algorithm 3. First, we prove that L (defined in Definition 3) also preserves the emptiness.Lemma 4. Given q 1 q 1 , if there exists a path with length n, q 1 ⇒ q 2 ⇒ • • • ⇒ q n in L , there exists a path with the same length n, q 1 → q 2 → • • • → q n in L such that q i q i for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n.Lemma 5. Given q 1 q 1 , if there exists a cycle q 1 ⇒ • • • ⇒ q 1 in L which contains a J i -state for all J i ∈ J , there exists a cycle q 1 → • • • → q 1 in L which contains a J i -state for all J i ∈ J .Lemma 6.If there exists an accepting run in L , there exists an accepting run in L.

Theorem 4. Given a transition system L, a set of Büchi conditions J , and a simulation relation over states of L, L has an accepting run if and only if L has an accepting run.

Following Theorem 4, we can use the transition system L as the input for Algorithm 3.However, explicitly computing the transition relation of L is not efficient.Instead, we apply Down for the result of any call succ(Q) on the fly in Algorithm 3 because of the fact that succ(Q, ⇒) = Down(succ(Q, →)).

Theorem 5. Algorithm 4 is sound and complete.Proof: As we discussed the difference between Algorithm 4 and Algorithm 3, given a transition system L with a set of initial states Init, the transition relation Tr and a set of Büchi conditions J , while IsEmpty(Init, Tr , J ) is checking the emptiness of L, IsEmpty sim (Init, Tr , J ) is actually checking the emptiness of the transition system L .Thus, the correctness of Algorithm 4 is obtained based on Theorem 4.

2 Algorithm 4 does not guarantee that it always takes fewer or the same number of iterations than Algorithm 3. To distinguish between Algorithms 4 and 3, we use new and new to denote the variable new in Algorithm 4 and Algorithm 3 respectively.Then, the reason that Algorithm 4 might take more iterations is new = Down(new ) is not an invariant during the algorithm.Assume before executing the line 12, it holds that new = Down(new ), then new = Down(new ) may not hold after this line is executed as shown in Lemma ?? in [2].Thus, new = Down(new ) is not an invariant.Nevertheless, in our evaluation in Section 5, Algorithm 4 always outperforms Algorithm 3 and takes less number of succ function calls.The reason is that during the computation of all reachable states from initial states at line 4 and the first run of the while-loop in lines 7-9, Algorithm 4 can take much lesser number of succ function calls than Algorithm 3 as the result of Theorem 3 and Lemma ?? in [2].Moreover, the computation of all reachable states (line 4) is the most expensive computation in these algorithms.

Algorithm 4 can be adopted to verify the emptiness of TBA straightforwardly.The requirement that the run must visit an accepting location infinite times and contain an infinite number of tick transitions and action transitions is represented as a set of Büchi conditions J = {Acc, J 0 , J 1 } where Acc is a set of accepting locations in DS (A) and J 0 (respectively J 1 ) is the set of states which are the destination states of the action transition (respectively tick transition).A boolean variable isTick can be introduced during the encoding.For each transition, this variable is updated to false if that is an action transition.Otherwise it is updated to true.Then J 0 is the set of states where isTick is false and J 1 is the set of states where isTick is true.

We have presented our approach on the verification of reachability and LTL properties by using the LU simulation relation.We evaluate them in the next section.


Evaluation

We conducted experiments to evaluate our approach.Specifically, we attempted to answer the following research questions: RQ1: How is the improvement in the number of iterations and verification time of our methods, compared to the existing state-of-the-art BDD-based and DBM-based methods, in checking reachability and LTL properties?RQ2: How scalable is our method in size of maximal clock constants and processes?

Our approach has been implemented as a BDD library for the reachability and LTL verification of timed automata in the PAT framework [40].Our implementation is based on the CUDD package [39], which is a package that provides functions to manipulate BDDs.All of the experiments are performed on a PC with Intel Core i7-2600 CPU at 3.4GHz and 4GB RAM.

To answer the research questions, we have conducted four experiments, and the results are shown in Tables 1-4.For all experiments, we measure the number of succ All experiments are conducted with a time limit of 2 CPU hours.An entry 'oot' in the table means that the time limit is reached, and an entry 'oom' means that the program runs out of memory.Given a benchmark system, when a smaller model is running out of time or memory, we omit the evaluation of larger models.An entry '-' means the information is unavailable.

We compare the results to three state-of-the-art model checkers, i.e., DBM-based model checker Uppaal [30] and CTAV [31], as well as BDD-based model checker Rabbit [10].Although RED [43] and BDD-based version of Kronos [14] are related to our work as real time verification tools using BDD (BDD-like) data structure, Rabbit was shown to outperform them [10].Therefore, only Rabbit is used in our experiments.


Evaluation for Reachability Properties

We evaluate our approach with Rabbit and Uppaal in the verification of reachability properties.Since our approach is digitization-based, naturally, the first question is how well the library scales with the number of clock ticks.In the first experiment (cf.Table 1), we exponentially increase the maximal clock constants while keeping the number of processes constant (we set it 4).Since Uppaal is a DBM-based model checker, its performance does not depend on the maximal clock constants; therefore, it is not used in the experiment.The column MCC is the maximal clock constant values in the corresponding models.Compared to PAT-NonSim, PAT-Sim takes smaller number of succ function calls which can be reduced from 2 to 4 times by using simulation.Compared to Rabbit, PAT-Sim achieves a speedup from 2 to 21 times, and there are five cases where Rabbit runs out of memory or time.As a result, PAT-Sim outperforms both PAT-NonSim and Rabbit and can handle larger maximal clock constants.

In the second experiment (cf.Table 2), we compare PAT, Rabbit, and Uppaal using the same benchmark systems.The column #P roc represents the number of processes.In this experiment, we set the maximal clock constants to 64 in Fischer protocol, 16 in Lynch-Shavit protocol, and 404 in CSMACD protocol.Then, we increase the number


Evaluation for LTL Properties

We evaluate our approach with CTAV in the verification of LTL properties under non-Zeno condition.Note that we do not compare with Uppaal since Uppaal does not support the verification of LTL properties under non-Zeno condition.In the third experiment (cf.Table 3), to demonstrate the efficiency of our approach in the handling of large maximal clock constants, we fix the number of processes at 4 and increase the maximal clock constants.We do not compare with CTAV since it is a DBM-based model checker and its performance is not affected by maximal clock constants.According to the results, by using the LU simulation relation, the number of succ function calls is reduced significantly.For example, in the Lynch protocol with MCC = 200, the number of succ calls is reduced from 19,682 to 6,937.As a result, the verification time is improved significantly, from 2,404s to 25s.PAT-Sim outperforms PAT-NonSim on all the models.It is faster and uses less memory.Thus, it can handle models with maximal clock constants up to thousands.

In the fourth experiment (cf.Table 4), to demonstrate the efficiency of our approach in the handling of large number of processes, we fix the maximal clock constant as 808 for CSMACD and 100 for other benchmarks.We increase the number of processes then.In this experiment, we compare our approach with CTAV tool.The results indicate PAT-Sim approach outperforms PAT-NonSim and CTAV on all the models.Specifically, it is faster and can handle more processes than PAT-NonSim and CTAV.For example, in the CSMACD model with 16 processes, PAT-Sim can verify within 511 seconds and 756 MB while PAT-NonSim runs out of time, and CTAV runs out of memory.With the results of four experiments, we answer research questions RQ1 and RQ2.Our approach improves the performance significantly by reducing the number of iterations.Furthermore, it can handle models with clock constants larger than a thousand.


Discussion

Limitation.A limitation of our approach is that when maximal lower and upper bounds are the same, LU abstraction would not provide better performance.This is because our method will take the same number of iterations to achieve the fixpoint, and there are overheads for calling the Down operator.Complexity of Down operator [7].For checking of reachability properties, given the maximal distance from the initial state to a state in the explored model as N , the complexity is O(N).For checking of LTL properties, the time complexity is linearly dependent upon the size of the symbolic (BDD) representation in terms of the distances between states in the automaton graph, the number and arrangement of the strongly connected components in the graph, and the number of fairness conditions asserted [37].Overall, Down operator can be computed efficiently.In addition, variable ordering could affect the performance of BDD.Overall, the Down operator can be computed efficiently.In our implementation, we make use of several well-known heuristics [22,6,9,36] that can produce a fairly good ordering.

In this paper, we propose to use the simulation relation to improve the BDD-based model checking for real-time systems.Our approach is applied to verify reachability and LTL properties.Experimental results confirm that our approach achieves a significant speedup and outperforms Rabbit, Uppaal, and CTAV.As future works, first, we plan to investigate the extensibility of our method to other variety of timed automata, such as parametric timed automata [4].Second, we plan to investigate other reduction techniques, e.g., interpolation [32] or IC3 [17], on top of our proposed techniques.


Acknowledgement

This work is supported by research project T2MOE1303.

Algorithm 1 :
1
Reachability Analysis 1: function IsReach(Init, Tick , Trans, goal ) 2:


Fig. 1 :
1
Fig. 1: Timed automaton with large clock constant and the transition system based on discrete semantics


2
2



Algorithm 3 :
3
Algorithm IsEmpty 1: function IsEmpty(Init, Tr , J )


8 :
8
new =Reach(new ∩J i , Tr ) while (new =(new ∩ 11: succ(new ))) do 12: new =(new ∩succ(new )) return (new = ∅) 16: end function Algorithm 4: Algorithm IsEmpty sim 1: function IsEmpty sim (Init, Tr , J ) Reach sim (Init, Tr )


8 :
8
new =Reach sim (new ∩J i , Tr ) while (new =(new 11: ∩Down(succ(new )))) do 12: new =(new ∩Down(succ(new )))




then
9:return true10:end if11:end while12:return false13: end function14:15: function Reach(Q, R)16:



then
9:return true10:end if11:end while12:return false13: end function14:15: function Reach sim (Q, R)16:

Table 1 :
1
[1,15,34]tal results in the reachability verification with increasing clock constants Succ), the verification time (in seconds) (T ime), and the memory usage of CUDD library (in MB) (M emory) over three benchmark systems from[1,15,34]: CSMACD protocol, Fischer's protocol, and Lynch-Shavit protocol.We run PAT in two settings, i.e., with and without simulation, which are referred to as PAT-Sim and PAT-NonSim.The algorithms for PAT-Sim (PAT-NonSim resp.) on verifying reachability and LTL properties are given in Algorithms 2 and 4 (Algorithms 1 and 3 resp.).
PAT-SimPAT-NonSimRabbitMCC #Succ Time Memory #Succ Time Memory TimeCSMACD 808 4,369 63417,794 1,563 577208CSMACD 1,616 8,721 3659-oot-1,494CSMACD 3,232 17,425 228181---ootFischer256 796 14732,838 1,033 1,08958Fischer512 1,564 112252--oom 1,076Fischer1,024 3,100 867931---oomLynch64481 12661,347 217498256Lynch128 929 1042872,627 2,163 1,562ootLynch256 1,825 859 1,003--oomoomfunction calls (#

Table 2 :
2
Experimental results in the reachability verification with increasing number of processes each benchmark system to find out which tool can verify the most number of processes.By using simulation, the number of succ function calls is reduced.Thus, PAT-Sim is faster and can handle larger number of processes compared to PAT-NonSim.For example, in the Lynch model with 8 processes, PAT-Sim requires 169 succ function calls and takes 8 seconds, while PAT-NonSim requires 696 succ function calls and takes 6,203 seconds.The verification time is thus reduced significantly.According to Table2, PAT-Sim also outperforms Rabbit and Uppaal.Although Uppaal achieves shorter evaluation time in smaller number of processes, both Rabbit and Uppaal easily run out of memory or time when the number of processes increases.On the contrary, PAT-Sim can still verify models while both other tools are out of memory or time, for example, 64 processes in the CSMACD benchmark.
PAT-SimPAT-NonSimRabbit Uppaal#Proc #Succ Time Memory #Succ Time Memory Time TimeCSMACD 16 7,377 6285-oot-5,638 oomCSMACD 32 14,289 453187---oot-CSMACD 64 26,801 3,912 477-----Fischer830852482-oot-7,258 0.7Fischer16356 366 1,442---oom oomFischer32452 3,351 1,651-----Lynch8169872696 6,203 1,690 2,494 1.1Lynch16217 104--oomoom oomLynch32313 2,971 1,201-----of processes in

Table 3 :
3
Experimental results in the LTL verification with increasing maximal clock constants
PAT-SimPAT-NonSimMCC #Succ Time Memory #Succ Time MemoryCSMACD 404 4,334 53614,169 493876CSMACD 808 8,608 187528,257 2,857 1,489CSMACD 1,616 16,688 3582--oomFischer200 9792282,812 417 1,101Fischer400 1,779 3295,412 3,847 1,600Fischer800 3,379 834-oot-Lynch200 6,937 255319,682 2,404 1,434Lynch400 13,137 4562-oot-Lynch800 25,537 9063---

Table 4 :
4
Experimental results in the LTL verification with increasing number of processes
PAT-SimPAT-NonSimCTAV#Proc #Succ Time Memory #Succ Time Memory TimeCSMACD 12 22,184 283 1,041-oot-562CSMACD 16 28,972 511756---oomCSMACD 20 35,760 839 1,063----Fischer86085391,974 10,275 1,6894Fischer12672 46208--oom oomFischer16736 310965----Lynch4 3,591 12510,003 2433291Lynch8 9,839 4265--oom5Lynch12 19,551 585326---oom

MCMT Benchmarks of Timed Automata. 

Technical Report of Scaling BDD-based Timed Verification with Simulation Reduction. 

A Theory of Timed Automata. R Alur, D L Dill, Theoretical Computer Science. 12621994

Parametric Real-Time Reasoning. R Alur, T A Henzinger, M Y Vardi, STOC. 1993

On Discretization of Delays in Timed Automata and Digital Circuits. E Asarin, O Maler, A Pnueli, CONCUR. 1998

BDD Variable Ordering for Interacting Finite State Machines. A Aziz, S Tasiran, R K Brayton, DAC. 1994

Lower and Upper Bounds in Zone Based Abstractions of Timed Automata. G Behrmann, P Bouyer, K G Larsen, R Pelánek, TACAS. 2004

Efficient Timed Reachability Analysis Using Clock Difference Diagrams. G Behrmann, K G Larsen, J Pearson, C Weise, W Yi, CAV. 1999

Improvements in BDD-Based Reachability Analysis of Timed Automata. D Beyer, FME. 2001

Rabbit: A Tool for BDD-Based Verification of Real-Time Systems. D Beyer, C Lewerentz, A Noack, CAV. 2003

Efficient Verification of Timed Automata using BDDs. D Beyer, A Noack, FMICS. 2001

Can Decision Diagrams Overcome State Space Explosion in Real-Time Verification?. D Beyer, A Noack, FORTE. 2003

P Bouyer, Forward Analysis of Updatable Timed Automata. Formal Methods in System Design. 200424

Kronos: A Model-Checking Tool for Real-Time Systems. M Bozga, C Daws, O Maler, A Olivero, S Tripakis, S Yovine, CAV. 1998

Some Progress in the Symbolic Verification of Timed Automata. M Bozga, O Maler, A Pnueli, S Yovine, CAV. 1997

Symbolic Model Checking: 10 20 States and Beyond. J R Burch, E M Clarke, K L Mcmillan, D L Dill, L J Hwang, Information and Computation. 9821992

Software model checking via ic3. A Cimatti, A Griggio, Computer Aided Verification. Springer2012

Model Checking of Real-Time Reachability Properties Using Abstractions. C Daws, S Tripakis, TACAS. 1998

Timing Assumptions and Verification of Finite-State Concurrent Systems. D L Dill, Automatic Verification Methods for Finite State Systems. 1989

Checking for Language Inclusion Using Simulation Preorders. D L Dill, A J Hu, H Wong-Toi, CAV. 1991

Antichain Algorithms for Finite Automata. L Doyen, J Raskin, TACAS. 2010

Interleaving Based Variable Ordering Methods for Ordered Binary Decision Diagrams. H Fujii, G Ootomo, C Hori, ICCAD. 1993

What Good Are Digital Clocks. T A Henzinger, Z Manna, A Pnueli, ICALP. 1992

Efficient On-the-Fly Emptiness Check for Timed Büchi Automata. F Herbreteau, B Srivathsan, ATVA. 2010

Efficient Emptiness Check for Timed Büchi Automata. F Herbreteau, B Srivathsan, I Walukiewicz, CAV. 2010

Better Abstractions for Timed Automata. F Herbreteau, B Srivathsan, I Walukiewicz, LICS. 2012

Algorithmic Verification of Linear Temporal Logic Specifications. Y Kesten, A Pnueli, L Raviv, ICALP. 1998

Multi-core Emptiness Checking of Timed Büchi Automata Using Inclusion Abstraction. A Laarman, M C Olesen, A E Dalsgaard, K G Larsen, J Van De Pol, CAV. 2013

Real-Time Model Checking Is Really Simple. L Lamport, CHARME. 2005

. K G Larsen, P Pettersson, W Yi, UPPAAL in a Nutshell. STTT. 11-21997

Checking Timed Büchi Automata Emptiness Using LU-Abstractions. G Li, FORMATS. 2009

Interpolation and sat-based model checking. K L Mcmillan, CAV. Springer2003

Difference Decision Diagrams. J B Møller, J Lichtenberg, H R Andersen, H Hulgaard, CSL. 1999

Fully Symbolic Model Checking for Timed Automata. G Morbé, F Pigorsch, C Scholl, CAV. 2011

Improved BDD-based Discrete Analysis of Timed Systems. T K Nguyen, J Sun, Y Liu, J S Dong, Y Liu, FM. 2012

A Survey of Static Variable Ordering Heuristics for Efficient BDD/MDD Construction. M Rice, S Kulhari, 2008University of California, RiversideTechnical report

Linear temporal logic symbolic model checking. K Y Rozier, Computer Science Review. 522011

Unbounded, Fully Symbolic Model Checking of Timed Automata using Boolean Methods. S A Seshia, R E Bryant, CAV. 2003

F Somenzi, CUDD: CU Decision Diagram Package. 

PAT: Towards Flexible Verification under Fairness. J Sun, Y Liu, J S Dong, J Pang, CAV. 2009

Verifying Progress in Timed Systems. S Tripakis, ARTS. 1999

Checking Timed Büchi Automata Emptiness on Simulation Graphs. S Tripakis, ACM Transactions on Computational Logic. 1032009

Symbolic Verification of Complex Real-Time Systems with Clock-Restriction Diagram. F Wang, FORTE. 2001

Efficient Verification of Timed Automata with BDD-Like Data-Structures. F Wang, VMCAI. 2003