A play, tens of teachers and hundreds of their ideas about child who
2012

Gokhan Gunes 
Department of Early Childhood Education
Hacettepe University
06800BeytepeAnkaraTurkey

Belma Tugrul 
Department of Early Childhood Education
Hacettepe University
06800BeytepeAnkaraTurkey

A play, tens of teachers and hundreds of their ideas about child who

Procedia -Social and Behavioral Sciences
47201210.1016/j.sbspro.2012.06.943Play, stereot
opinions about play will be important for ensuring the arrangement of the environment based on play. The purpose of this Moreover, and also play are another aims of this study. A planned game and a poster were used for taking data. Descriptive analysis method was used for analysing the results. According to the results, participants have thoughts, feelings and behaviours about play.

Introduction

Play is the way of exploring the world for children and also it helps children bring their experience, knowledge and understanding new things (Piaget 1975). Fisher (2008) states that play has critical role for socialization process because games with rules are seen as a key for children to adapt their social environment. Moreover, children have different roles and different play situations, these roles and relationship have positive effects on children development (Bronfenbrenner 1979). From this perspective, it can be thought that play enables children to learn the social rules and also help them to participate the society. Benedict (2007) claimed that play exhibits some properties of children such as cleaning, nurturing, mastery, exploration, separation, power, aggression, and constancy. According to Gingsburg (2007) adult caregivers can understand their children's needs and their own world by observing their children when they are playing. In addition lopment, play also accepted States Parties recognize the right of the child to rest and leisure, to engage in play and recreational activities appropriate to the age of the child and to participate freely in cultural life and the arts have to supply environment and learning areas to children, based on play.

A Bulotsky- (2010) reported that children learn some concepts solutions in this process. In consideration of interaction between teacher and children, it is important what teachers think about play. Evans (2002) argues that sometimes teachers use play for reward and withdrawal of play as a punishment. At this point, d child-centred education programs and environment, based on play.

s purpose, natural play behaviours and also are another aims of the study. In this context the following research questions were posed:

1-What stereotyped ideas about play? 2-play behaviours? 3-


Methodology


Participants

The study was carried out with a total of 27 teachers from metropolitan preparticipants were female and chosen randomly.


Materials

A poster with an unhappy matchstick man was prepared as an instrument for collecting data (Figure 1). On the picture there is a sentence completion which sa list poster which contains different opinions related to the questions on the former poster was prepared . When preparing check-list items, researchers benefit from studies of Evans (2002), Ginsburg (2007) 


Procedure

The study was planned as a par doctorate lecture and the conference was held in Ahi Evran University in the second half of 2011 academic year.

It may be a useful strategy for they reflected their stereotyped opinions related with the play. The rule of the game was so simple. The person, who finds more answers similar to the answers in the check-list, will be winner of the game. From the beginning it was planned to give a gift for every participant at the end of the game. However, for raising motivation and make natural play observations of the participants, they were told that a gift will be given to the winner at the end of the game. All participants were given a gift at the end of the game.

ter the time was up, they checked their answers which were matching the answers on the poster. By this means, they did not only have the chance to see other opinions about the play but also they had the chance to raise their awareness of play.

After checking all their answers from the check-list poster, they stuck their answer papers on the former poster ( Figure 4).


Data management and analysis

Descriptive analysis method was used for analysing data. Observation technique was also used for gaining data from particip feelings about play.


Findings behaviours

The first data obtained from unhappy matchstick man and check-list information and findings which were published by other researchers. According to T Moreover the first six answers nearly constitute 60% of all answers from the check-list poster. Furthermore, unhealthy development, problematic behaviours, stresses and creativity issues constitute nearly 20% within all answers have fun, unable to listen ratio within the whole answers. While some items on check-list were not given as answers, some participants gave different answers from the check-list. These items are shown in Figure   It is understood from Figure 5 that, participants thought that there is no correlation between play and being stubborn or impatient and also they thought that there is no correlation between play and brain development. These finding shows that items on exhibits in Figure 5 are not stereotyped ideas about play. Some participants stated different opinions which were not in the check-list. These opinions are very valuable -list for further studies. Figure 6 exhibits 3.2. y behaviors play behaviours were observed, it was taken notes and behaviours list was prepared (Figure 7). It is understood from Figure 7 the children, participants were excited, had fun matched up with their answers.


3.1.


Frequencies Percentage


3.3.

In this study, only the teachers and their ideas about play were examined. However, another aim of this research w by studies of Evans 8).


Items on check-list not given as answers by teachers

Be stubborn  According to Figure 8 thoughts about play. In general, it can be said that play means a source of happiness, fun, feel children free and helps children learn new things (Evans, 2002). asked children What are the things which are your curiosity ren said that all games and plays. Another question is other children responded this for children as a means of curiosity and also help resolving their curiosity.


Results & Discussion

Examining Table 1, it is understood that participants have some common stereotyped ideas about play. Almost 80% of the answers are related with children being unhappy, alone, angry, selfish, stressed, having unhealthy %). These findings are parallel to Evans (2002) thoughts about teachers approach to play. Evans (2002) states that teachers understand the true value of play and learning through play is accepted philosophy in preschool setting. Play time is still favourite part of the school day for most children and what they do in the playground at recess times remains highly significant in their lives. Newton & Jenvey (2010) claim that play also thought as solution of problematic behaviours in children. studies in literature. For instance, Hillman (2006) claims not enough physical activities cause unhealthy development, chronic disease and also obesity. This linkage is recognized similarly in particip answers which related with physical activities and health obesity ( Figure 6). Health and play correlation is not only be considered by teachers, but also it is discussed by health professions. For example, Ginsburg (2007) had some suggestions about play to paediatricians pediatricians can promote free play as a healthy, essential part of childhood. They should recommend that all children are afforded ample, unscheduled, independent, non-screen time to be creative, to reflect, and -centered play is a time-tested way of producing . It is understood from the Figure 5 that none of the participants thought that there is a connection between play and understanding others or being afraid of making mistakes or being patient etc. It can be said that there are some common stereotyped ideas about play but some vital effects of play are not in the list of stereotyped ideas. Figure 7 show that teachers behave like children during the play. Natural play behaviours do not change over time and these behaviours give clues about personal characteristics. Although there are some differences thoughts of Actually, more detailed studies are needed to analyse adult natural play behaviours.

Comparing Figure 8 and Table 1, it is clear that teachers are aware that the children are happy, not feel alone and not aggressive when they are playing (nearly 40%). Moreover, almost 30% teachers think that play prevent to be However, in the given time, participants did not realize that children feel themselves free during the play, want to play when they are upset. Beside these feelings of children, they want to play all time in school, they also have curiosity of play, and they have fun when they are playing (Figure 8). Whereas, play is fun for children, only 3 teachers wrote this answer (Table 1). As a result, most and cognitive development effects, while children evaluate play a slightly different from teachers. I have fun when I play I feel myself free I want to play always at school I learn new things when I play I forget bad things that make me upset when I play I can understand things based on my curiosity if I play with them I have curiosity about all games and also I want to play so much In-service training programs, organizations and applications related with play are useful for developing child-. This study or similar studies will be carried out with more pre-school or elementary teachers, and also with parents.

Figure 3 .
3Comparison

Figure 1 .
1Unhappy matchstick man Figure 2. Check-list Poster

Figure 5 .
5Answers from check-list not used by participant -list

Figure 7 .
7Figure 7.

Figure 8
8Figure 8


and other literature about play. It can be seen from a comparison chart exhibits check-list items and other-list 
Evans (2002) article subjects 

Be unhappy 
Solution for problematic behaviors 

Be alone 
Movement/ physical activity 

Be angry 
ing decision skills 
Innovation 
Controlling 

Unable to share, be selfish 
Unable to use his/her body 
Freedom 
Learning 

Be aggressive 
Unable to give his/her attention 
Ginsburg (2007) article subjects 

Unhealthy development 
Unable to cooperate 
Imagination 
Socialization 

Unable to express himself, diffident Unable to accept his/her fault 
Discover 
Creativity 

Unable to develop owns creativity 
Unable to take responsibility 
Development 
Enjoyable 

Stress 
Unable to listen others 
Enable to show feelings 
Prevent obesity 

Show problematic behaviors 
Unable to have fun 

© 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of Prof. Dr. Hüseyin Uzunboylu

Play therapy with abused and attachment disordered children. Presentation at the New York Association for Play Therapy 8th Annual Conference. H Benedict, Albany, NYBenedict, H. (2007). Play therapy with abused and attachment disordered children. Presentation at the New York Association for Play Therapy 8th Annual Conference. Albany, NY.

Bulotskyns between behavior problems in classroom social and learning situations and peer social competence in head start and kindergarten. U Bronfenbrenner, Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders. 184Harvard University PressThe ecology of human developmentBronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Bulotsky- ns between behavior problems in classroom social and learning situations and peer social competence in head start and kindergarten. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 18(4), 195-210.

Play: a course of study. Play rights. J Evans, 24Evans, J. (2002). Play: a course of study. Play rights, 24, 1-7.

Starting with the child. J Fisher, Open University PressBuckingham, UKFisher, J. (2008). Starting with the child. Buckingham, UK: Open University Press.

The importance of play in promoting healthy child development and maintaining strong parent-child bonds. K R Ginsburg, American Academy of Pediatrics. 1191Ginsburg, K. R. (2007). The importance of play in promoting healthy child development and maintaining strong parent-child bonds. American Academy of Pediatrics, 119(1), 182-191.

. Child Geographies. 4Child Geographies, 4, 461-467.

Play and theory of mind: associations with social competence in young children. E Newton, V Jenvey, Early Child Development and Care. 1816Newton, E., & Jenvey, V. (2010). Play and theory of mind: associations with social competence in young children, Early Child Development and Care, 181(6), 761-773.