Barış Sevinç 
Journal of Universal Surgery
Department of General Surgery, Medical Park Uşak Hospital
Department of General Surgery, Medical Park Uşak Hospital
Uşak, UşakTurkey, Turkey

Barış Sevinç 
Journal of Universal Surgery
Department of General Surgery, Medical Park Uşak Hospital
Department of General Surgery, Medical Park Uşak Hospital
Uşak, UşakTurkey, Turkey
10.21767/2254-6758.1000641 iMedPub Journals Editorial This Article is Available in: Corresponding author:


In treatment of incisional hernias, synthetic mesh used may cause complications like seroma formation. Here, the author want to present a case operated for a huge incisional hernia. After placement of 30 cm × 30 cm polypropylene mesh anteriorly, patient had seroma formation. Seroma was drained and 6 months after the surgery patient had a huge subcutaneous pouch over the mesh. There was serous drainage at the incision scar. Bacterial cultures revealed no infection. PRP applied to the pouch. At the first application, only one side of the pouch was filled with diluted PRP. After one week, it is observed that PRP applied side of the pouch was closed. Then, PRP applied to the other side of the pouch. One month after the first application, the whole pouch was closed and there was no fistula opening at the skin. Six months after the application the patient has no fistula.

PRP has increasing effect on collagen synthesis [3,4]. At this case, it accelerated fibrosis and mesh adhesion to the subcutaneous fatty tissue. In management of such difficult cases PRP application can be very helpful. Even in a previous study, our team showed nonsurgical treatment of pilonidal disease by using PRP [5]. PRP accelerates wound healing and it can even close a sinus formation by activating tissue healing pathways. 


Keywords: Wound complications; Medical treatment; Plasma Especially in contaminated cases routine use can be suggested. However, there is a huge gap in literature about the routine use of PRP in abdominal surgery. An infection preventive, autologous body product can be very helpful in complicated cases. We need more studies about the role of PRP in surgical procedures. To conclude we need experimental studies with PRP to show its beneficial effects on surgical wounds. Further studies would highlight this issue.Platelet Rich Plasma Application to Prevent 
Wound Complications 

Received: October 27, 2016; Accepted: November 01, 2016; Published: November 
07, 2016 

Seroma formation and followed wound infection is also an 
important problem flap operations especially in breast and 
pilonidal sinus surgery. There are numerous flap methods 
described for treatment of pilonidal disease. Wound infection 
and seroma formation are common problems for all of those flap 
procedures. Recent literature showed us, in pilonidal sinus surgery 
tension free procedures have better results. However, these 
tension free procedures necessitate the subcutaneous tissue to 
be released and facilitate seroma formation. Preoperative PRP 
use can facilitate flap adhesion and therefore, prevent seroma 
formation. 

In some studies [6,7], effects of PRP in prevention of wound 
complications after surgical procedures has shown. As PRP can 
reduce wound infection rate, it can be used to prevent wound 
complications. 
Khan KM, Cook JL, Bonar F, Harcourt P, Astrom M (1999) Histopathology of common tendinopathies. Update and implications for clinical management. Sports Med 27: 393-408. 5 Karahan Ö, Sevinç B, Şimşek G, Demirgül R (2016) Minimally invasive treatment of pilonidal sinus disease using platelet-rich plasma. Transl Surg 1: 14. 6 Patel AN, Selzman CH, Kumpati GS, McKellar SH, Bull DA (2016) Evaluation of autologous platelet rich plasma for cardiac surgery: outcome analysis of 2000 patients. J Cardiothorac Surg 11: 62. 7 Kirmani BH, Jones SG, Datta S, Mclaughlin EK, Hoschtitzky AJ (2016) A meta-analysis of platelet gel for prevention of sternal wound infections following cardiac surgery. Blood Transfus 28: 1-9.

Platelet-richplasma: from basic science to clinical applications. T E Foster, B L Puskas, B R Mandelbaum, Am J Sports Med. 37Foster TE, Puskas BL, Mandelbaum BR (2009) Platelet-richplasma: from basic science to clinical applications. Am J Sports Med 37: 2259- 2272.

Applications of plateletrich plasma in musculoskeletal and sports medicine: an evidencebased approach. R T Nguyen, J Borg-Stein, K Mcinnis, PM R. 3Nguyen RT, Borg-Stein J, McInnis K (2011) Applications of platelet- rich plasma in musculoskeletal and sports medicine: an evidence- based approach. PM R 3: 226-250.

Platellet-Rich Plasma Applications. B Yılmaz, S Keskinburun, Turk J Phys Med Rehab. 59Yılmaz B, Keskinburun S (2013) Platellet-Rich Plasma Applications. Turk J Phys Med Rehab 59: 338-344.