ZCook Co. Med. Society.. May 4th. The Society met, the President, Dr. McArthur, in the chair. An Essay was read by Dr. J. W. Freer, on "the Na ture and Pathology of Rheumatism," from which wre make the following extracts :-


"The system is now in a condition to take on diseased action, and the force which determines the kind must, in the present state of our knowledge, remain undetermined.

"The joints, which are the regions usually selected, are so con stituted, anatomically, that they are least capable of self-protec tion against atmospherical vicissitudes.. For instance, the soft tissues surrounding the joints, the white fibrous, are those possess ing the lowest grade of organization and vitality, besides being scanty in bulk. So much is this the case, that the bony consti tuents of these regions are in a great measure subcutaneous, and the aggregate amount of blood circulating in these parts is much below that of the adjacent regions, which are principally muscular. We arc all aware, from experience, how much sooner than others these parts suffer from the effects of cold which are supplied with little or no muscular tissue, viz., the fingers, back of the hands, feet, knees, &c., while the adjacent muscular regions maintain a comfortable condition of temperature.

" From these facts we may infer that there is a lack of capabi lity in these parts to maintain a normal standard of temperature under adverse circumstances. Moreover, a reduction of the normal standard of animal heat being equal to a reduction of vitality and vital force, we may readily predict that those regions which are subject to these conditions are necessarily more obnoxious to inter ference and derangement from the above causes than others which are differently constituted.

"Furthermore, we may conclude from these statements, that with an individual in sound health (in fact, without a diathesis for this or any other malady,) these may be considered as among the weaker points of his physical constitution, and may determine the species of the diseased action. " From the known phenomena attending the introduction of this disease, that is its apparently local nature, manifesting a decided preference for parts of a definite structure-the joints-it follows that the affection, in the onset, is local in its character; but this does not preclude the idea of a general pathological condition ensuing, which may be peculiar and characteristic."

In regard to the lactic acid theory, the Doctor remarks : " From all the testimony which I have been able to gather., not a single point of direct evidence appears to establish the presence of lactic acid in blood, either in health or disease, more than the theoretical and unqualified assertions of certain authors and experimenters. That it is not a normal constituent of the blood has been well proven by Leibig, although he found it as an ingredient of the juices of the flesh, either as constituent per se or the result of chemical decomposition in the analysis.

" The theories in regard to the uric acid pathology of rheuma tism are established upon observations made in the acute variety of the disease.

The fever which attends being analogous to all fevers of an acute or sthenic character, in all of which we find this same excess of uric acid in the urinary secretions. In regard to the presence of uric acid in the blood, Granvel has proven by ex periments and analysis upon the blood of rheumatic patients, that it contains no more uric acid than in health, while the contrary maintains in the gouty conditions. " In conclusion, I would offer the query, whether there is any thing like a natural limit to the duration of acute rheumatism ? If not, than we are unable to decide, with any degree of accuracy, as to the real benefits derived from any of the therapeutical doc trines in vogue, and shall never be able to arrive, at correct con clusions until we are able to confine the disease to a limited and comparatively brief space of time."

Dr. Ilerrick remarked, that while the doctor attempts to over throw theories lie proposes one of his own, he assumes a want of balance between primary and secondary assimilation. We may learn much from an analysis of the secretions and of the blood in this disease, by which we shall be enabled to determine whether acids, alkalies, or neutral salts are indicated. Two cases, now in my mind, illustrate the benefit from the use of the organic acids.

1st. That of a boy about 16-for six months had only been able to get about with difficulty. Had been under homoeopathic treat ment. He was directed to eat three lemons daily, in three days he came back without his cane: directed to continue, in three days more was perfectly well. 2nd. The case of a sailor, who had been unable to do anything for six months-much pain and swelling in his ancles-every indication of severe inflammatory rheumatism. He was ordered lime juice §js three times daily, with grs. x. bi-carb. potass. In about ten days he was discharged well.

Dr. Cheeny had usually adopted the antiphlogistic treatment, calomel, opium, antimony, bleeding, and the protection of the diseased parts. Has generally found the action of the heart in creased ; reduce this and the disease soon gives way.

Dr. McArthur has had some experience personally in this disease, doubts whether the idea that perspiration is suppressed at the com mencement of rheumatic attacks is correct. Has noticed a change in feeling without observing any change in the condition of the skin; thinks the nice appreciation, by rheumatic patients, of atmos pheric changes, important in studying the pathology of the disease. Has heard of chloroform being used, does not know with what success, flas seen benefit result from the use of the organic acids.

Dr. Johnson thought that the fact of the disease originating in the white fibrous tissues surrounding the joints-parts possessed of low vitality, and peculiarly susceptible to atmospheric changes,r seems to indicate that the first step in the morbid process is the formation, instead of urea of uric acid, which, combining with the earthy bases, forms a deposit giving rise to pain.

Dr. Bird thought the different methods of treatment might all be beneficial by accomplishing one object, namely, the prevention of excessive oxydation ; opium in full doses reduces the number of respirations, and thus prevents the introduction of oxygen; the organic acids, on the other hand, neutralize it after it is introduced; the antiphlogistic treatment by depletion, antimony, &c., has the same ultimate effect as opium, viz., to lessen the amount of oxygen taken into the system. J.