Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre -including this research content -immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.


VENOUS VANTAGE POINT

Key Finding: Several reasons exist for poor compliance with, or adherence to, the wearing of elastic compression stockings by patients with chronic venous insufficiency (CVI), including knowledge and awareness of the need and their efficacy and patient discomfort.

Study Summary: This qualitative study assessed 10 patients with CVI who were undergoing elective surgical intervention. Focused semistructured face-to-face interviews were performed by experienced qualitative researchers with patients chosen because of their noncompliance with graduated compression stockings (CS). The patients were from a variety of socioeconomic backgrounds and a mix of urban and rural. Four major themes emerged: knowledge gap about CVI and utility of CS, lack of healthcare provider advice, discomfort, and sociopsychological factors, including cost.

Commentary: CS can be uncomfortable, irritating, and hot. However, better education and motivation might help patients with CVI understand their important role as a treatment of their varicosities, edema, ulcerations, and recurrence. This will require time and effort from healthcare providers. In addition, insurance companies should cover the cost of CS.


Humanitas COVID-19 Task Force Venous and Arterial Thromboembolic Complications in COVID-19 Patients Admitted to an Academic Hospital in Milan, Italy

Lodigiani C, Iapichino G, Carenzo L, Cecconi M, Ferrazzi P, Sebastian T, Kucher N, Studt J-D, Sacco C, Alexia B, Sandri MT, Barco S. Thromb Res 2020;191:9-14.

Key Finding: The occurrence of arterial and venous thromboembolic events was unusually high in hospitalized patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in a Milan hospital from February to April 2020, prompting a revision of the diagnostic strategies and the use of thromboprophylaxis in ambulatory patients with COVID-19.

Study Summary: This was a retrospective observational study of 388 consecutive symptomatic inpatients with laboratory-proven COVID-19 during a 2-month period in a large hospital in Milan, Italy. The primary outcome measures were venous and arterial thromboembolic events. The mean age was 66 years, and 16% had required intensive care unit care. The mortality rate for this cohort was 26%, and the thrombotic event rate was 7.7%. All intensive care unit patients had received weight-adjusted thromboprophylaxis.

Commentary: Thromboembolic complications are common in patients with laboratory-proven COVID-19 and might already be present at hospital admission. The usefulness of diagnostic testing could be limited, and serum markers might reflect the underlying inflammatory process and the procoagulant state, now both well-described in association with COVID-19. Aggressive diagnostic and thromboprophylaxis strategies are critical in these patients.


Concomitant Chronic Venous Insufficiency in Patients With Peripheral Artery Disease: Insights From MR Angiography

Ammermann F, Meinel FG, Beller E, Busse A, Streckenbach F, Teichert C, Weinrich M, Neumann A, Weber MA, Heller T. Eur Radiol 2020;30:3908-3914.

Key Finding: Both arterial and venous vascular disease processes can coexist in the same patient. Understanding the symptomatic overlap and prevalence will lead to a better diagnosis and targeted therapies.

Study Summary: This was a retrospective observational study assessing imaging studies of patients with known peripheral arterial disease (PAD) for the presence of chronic venous insufficiency (CVI). One in five patients was found to have CVI on magnetic resonance angiography; however, not all of these patients had had documentation in the medical record of a diagnosis of CVI. Patients with coexisting PAD and CVI found on imaging studies had had a more advanced stage of PAD than those without CVI.

Commentary: It can be difficult to differentiate between PAD and CVI in patients with symptoms that can be common to both disease entities. Patients with more advanced stages of PAD with ulcerations or gangrene are more likely to have coexisting CVI. The clinical management of patients with mixed arterial and venous disease could need to include treatment options for both PAD and CVI for healing and/or limb salvage.


Incidence and Distribution of Lower Extremity Reflux in Patients With Pelvic Venous Insufficiency

Scotti N, Pappas K, Lakhanpal S, Gunnarsson C, Pappas PJ. Phlebology 2020;35:10-17.

Key Finding: Fifty percent of women with pelvic venous insufficiency will present with symptomatic lower extremity venous reflux. The patterns of reflux have suggested an association between hormonal fluctuations and pregnancy.

Study Summary: In this study, 227 women with documented pelvic venous insufficiency also had the following lower extremity symptoms: pain (66%), edema (32%), heaviness (26%), leg fatigue (13%), itching (13%), cramping (10%), skin changes and/or thrombophlebitis (2%), and venous ulceration and/or hemorrhage (0.8%). One third had axial vein reflux, and 28% had a history of previous endovenous ablation.

Commentary: Pelvic venous disorders are being increasingly recognized as contributing, not only to abdominal and pelvic symptoms, but also to lower extremity venous disease. In women with residual or recurrent varicose veins or persistent symptoms after treatment of lower extremity venous insufficiency, evaluation of the pelvic veins via ultrasonography or other imaging modalities should be performed. Regardless, in the evaluation of women with symptomatic varicose veins and a history of pregnancy, questions that might indicate the presence of pelvic venous insufficiency should be a part of the history-taking process.


commentary of key non-JVS-VL articles Reasons for Patient Non-Compliance With Compression Stockings as a Treatment for Varicose Veins in the Lower Limbs: A Qualitative Study Gong JM, Du JS, Han DM, Wang XY, Qi SL. PLoS One 2020;15:e0231218.