FURTHER STUDIES ON CHEMICAL EVALUATION OF LAUHA BHASMA III
July 1996

A Keshri 
P R P Verma 
C M Prasad 

Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences
Department of Pharmacy
Birla Institute of Technology
Ranchi -835215Mesra, Bihar


Muzaffarpur Institute of Technology*
Muzaffarpur -842 002Bihar

FURTHER STUDIES ON CHEMICAL EVALUATION OF LAUHA BHASMA III

Ancient Science of life
XVIJuly 19961
Samples of marketed Lauha Bhasma from different manufactures were evaluated chemically. Apart from the 81 -85% iron content, the 15-19% other constituents were determined therein. Ferrous ferric and total iron in a single aliquot were determined spectrophotometrically, Qualitative and chromatographic analysis indicate the presence of sodium, potassium, calcium copper and cobalt in the samples, silicious matter and traces of ascorbic acid were present while tannin was absent in lauha Bhasma. Quantitatively sodium and potassium were determined by flame spectrometry. Upon fractionation, water soluble and acid soluble contents were determined.

INTRODUCTION

On qualitative and quantitative analysis the samples of lauha bhasma, an ayurvedic drug, used in the iron deficiency anaemia, were found to contain both the ferric and the ferric oxide than ferrous ozxide1. Upon in vivo evaluation on healthy adult male rabbits, samples of lauha bhasma were considered better bhasma were considered better on the basis of increase I the haemoglobin content than the allopalhic iron preparation of ferrous sulphate2. This establishes its superiority over the allopathic iron preparation.

In the present study further chemical evaluation was done of the samples of Lauha bhasma, from not only the earlier manufacturer but also from other manufacturers. This study enables us to complete the chemical evaluation by determining the chemical constituents of the 15-19% apart from the total iron content.


MATERIAL AND METHODS


Lauha bhasma samples were from different manufacturers

viz Baidyanath (all commonly available variants), sadhna, Dabur Gurukul Kangari Cooperative drug factory. All chemicals and reagents were of analar grade.


Determination of Iron content

Ferrous, Ferric and total iron content in a single aliquot were determined spectrohotometrically at 515 mm. 1,3-4 The results of the analysis are tabulated I Table -1.


Evaluation of inorganic content

Qualitative test: Non -luminous Bunsen flame 5,6 was used to detect the presence of calcium, sodium and potassium.

Chromatographic analysis: Descending paper chromatography was employed to detect the presence of cobalt and copper. In this Acetone: Ethylacetate: 6M HCI (9:9:2) as solvent and 1% Rubeanic acid in ethanol as spraying reagent were used 7 .

Quantitative test: Amount of sodium and potassium were determined by flame spectrometry 8 on systronic digital FPM 125 flame photometer. With the aid of appropriate filters in flame photometer and standard curve of potassium ions (made with solutions containing 20,10,5,2 ppm of potassium ions) and sodium ions (made with solutions containing 10,5,2,5,1 ppm of sodium ions). Different ions were determined in the solution of Lauha Bhasma this was repeated with different samples of Lauha Bhasma and the results obtained are presented in Table-1.


Evaluation of organic matter:

Tannin and ascorbic acid may be present in the samples of lauha bhasma triphla [a mixture oaf terminella chebula, terminalia belerica and phyllanthus emblica which is added during of preparation may be a source of tannin and ascorbic acid.

Tannin was determined qualitatively in the test solutions of Lauha Bhasma by comparing with the presence of tannin in catechu solution 9-11 (Table -2).

Ascorbic acid (Vitamin C) was also determined qualitatively in the test samples12 and the test solution was compared with standard solution of ascorbic acid the results are depicted in Table -3.


Fractional analysis of lauha Bhasma:

100 mg of Lauha Bhasma was taken and shaken with 100ml of distilled water for half an hour, it was then filtered and the filter paper was dried to a constant weight the residue on filter paper was carefully washed off with dilute HCL (17ml of conc.

HCL+140ml of distilled water). It was then heated at a temperature of 45oC to accelerate the solubility of acid soluble substances. Samples were again filtered and dried to a constant weight to get values of acid insoluble substances. The results are tabulated in table -4.


RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

On assaying the marketed Lauha bahsma samples from different manufacturers, % of ferric, % of ferrous and % of total iron content are found (Table 1). These results are more or less same as the results reported earlier1, except in the case of samples obtained form manufacturers D and H The % of ferric iron was found more than the % of ferrous iron in all the samples as it is evident in the form or ratios of ferric to ferrous (Table 1). This is because during the excessive heating process, the ferrous has been oxidized to ferriciron. Literature shows that although these bhasma are prepared from the same ayurvedic text the differences seen may be due to the variations in the processing of Lauha Bhasma.   The presence of traces of ascorbic acid may be due to the formation of sodium ascorbate which is supposed to be fairly stable at high temperatures.

On the basis of fractional analysis (Table 4), it can be concluded that the water extract contains sodium, potassium, calcium and traces of copper, cobalt and ferrous iron. The water insoluble but acid soluble portion contains ferric iron, ferrous iron, copper and cobalt, the water extract is seen to contain less copper and cobalt than the acid soluble filtrate. This indicates that cobalt and copper are present in the form of their oxides which is insoluble in the aqueous medium. Sodium and potassium in general are supposed to have higher aqueous solubility and hence it is extracted in the aqueous medium.

Ferrous and the ferric iron are assumed to be in the oxide form. Ferrous oxide is practically insoluble in water and alkalies, readily soluble in acids, while ferric oxide is only soluble in dilute hydrochloric acid. Fractional analysis of Lauha Bhasma indicates that silicious matter present is 1% w/w (Table4), which may come from the earthen pots used during processing.

The present work details the chemical analysis and evaluation of Lauha Bhasma. This helps us to ascertain the quality of the product, standards or specifications which must be assigned so as to get the product of uniform standard, immaterial of the variations in a process, raw materials or other factors. 

Table 1
12% W/W) ions are found in the samples. In the test different methods of preparation and purification of lauha bhasma are available. Also each method may be modified according to the physicians'experience. These factors may lead to the variation in their percentage in the different samples obtainted from different manufacturers. Tannin and ascorbic acid was determined qualitatively in the samples of lauha bhasma. From the tests, as depicted in tables 2&3, it is clear that Lauha Bhasma sample do not contain tannin but traces of ascorbic acid has been found. The absence of other organic matter may e accounted by their loss as carbon dioxide, water etc during the numerous steps of heating the mixtures of Lauha churna and triphala. However, IRON, SODIUM AND POTASSIUM IONS IN THE SAMPLES OF LAUHA BHASMA *Mean of three runs. Values in parentheses indicate standard deviation.The 
qualitative 
analysis 
and 
chromatographic analysis indicate the 
presence of sodium, potassium calcium, 
copper and cobalt. On quantitative analysis 
of Lauha Bhasma sodium (1.3 -4.2 % 
W/W), potassium (0.6-

Table 2
2QUALITATIVE EVALUATION OF TANNIN IN LAUHA BHASMA1% of catechu 
1% of soln. of catechu 
Sample solution 


Table 3
3QUALTATIVE EVALUATION OF ASCORBIC ACID IN LAUHA BHASMAS.No 
Test 
Ascorbic acid 
standard soln. 

Lauha bhasma water 
extract 

Inference 

1. 
Test soln. + 5ml 2,6 di 
chlorophenol 
indophenol 
(0.05%) 

Reagent 
soln. 
is 
decolourised 

Reagent 
soln. 
is 
decolourised 

Ascorbic acid absent 

2. 
5ml test soln +0.5ml 0.1N HCI + 
3 drops of sod. Nitroprusside 
(5%) = 1ml of 0.1N NaOH soln. 

Transient blue colour 
No blue colour 
Ascorbic acid absent 

3. 
10ml test soln +0.1 gm sod 
bicarbonate 
+20mg 
ferrous 
sulphate-stand for 20minutes 
then 5ml of dilute H 2 so 4 was 
added 

Purple colour appears 
Purple colour on the top 
of layer 

Ascorbic acid is present in traces 



Table 4
4Fractional Analysis of Lauha Bhasma Weight of Water insoluble matter (mg) ACKNOWLEDGEMENT Authors are thankful to Dr. H.C Pande, former Director, Birla Institute, of Technology, Mesra and Dr. B.K Razdan, former professor and Head, Department of Pharmaceutical sciences, B.I.T Mesra for providing required facilities and the encouragement during the course of study.S.No 
Weight of 
Sample (mg) 

Weight of 
Water 
insoluble 
matter (mg) 

Weight of 
Water 
soluble 
(mg) 

Acid 
soluble 

Acid 
Insoluble 

1. 
100.2 
95.244 
4.956 
94.098 
1.126 
2. 
100.1 
95.210 
4.890 
94.113 
1.097 
3. 
99.9 
94.960 
4.931 
93.971 
0.998 


Pages 26 -30

. P R Verma, C M Prasad, Ancient Sci of Life. 15Verma, P.R.P and Prasad, C.M., Ancient Sci of Life 15, 129-136 (1995)

. P R Verma, C M Prasad, Ancient Sci of Life. 15Verma, P.R.P and Prasad, C.M., Ancient Sci of Life 15, 140-144 (1995)

practical clinical biochemistry. H Varley, A H Gowenlock, M Bell, William Heinemann Medical Book Ltd. IVarley, H, Gowenlock, A.H., Bell, M. "practical clinical biochemistry", volume I, William Heinemann Medical Book Ltd., London, P. 927-928 (1980) Pages 26 -30

Quantitative Analytical Chemistry2nd edition. James S Fritz, G Schenk, Jr, Allyan and Bacon Inc. Boston83Fritz, James. S., Schenk, G. H Jr., "Quantitative Analytical Chemistry2nd edition, Allyan and Bacon Inc. Boston, p 83(1969).

Modern Methods of Plant Analysis. Peach, M Tracy, I Narosa Publishing HouseNew DelhiPeach, K and Tracy, M.V "Modern Methods of Plant Analysis", I Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi, p. 477-486 (1956).

A Text Book of Macro and Semi-micro Qualitative inorganic Aalysis. A Vogel, London. P. 435Longman Green and Co4 th editionVogel, A.I "A Text Book of Macro and Semi-micro Qualitative inorganic Aalysis", 4 th edition, Longman Green and Co. London. P 435 (1955).

Volgel's Text Book of Quantitative Inorganic Analysis. Bassett, P. 837ELBS & Longman London4 th editionBassett. J etall Volgel's Text Book of Quantitative Inorganic Analysis, 4 th edition, ELBS & Longman London, P 837 (1978).

. Ibid, Ibid, p. 199-200 (1978).

. G Trease, W C Evans, Pharmacognosy, 378London12 th edition, Bailliere tindallTrease, G E and Evans, W.C. Pharmacognosy, 12 th edition, Bailliere tindall, London, p 378 (1983).

. V Tyler, Tyler, V.E;

. L R Brady, J Robbers, Pharmacognosy, 78Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia9 th editionBrady L.R. and Robbers, J.E " Pharmacognosy", 9 th edition, Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, p 78 (1988).

Ministry of health, Govt of India. India Pharmacopoeia Of, 5002 nd editionPharmacopoeia of India, 2 nd edition, Ministry of health, Govt of India, p. 500 (1966).

. Ibid, 48Ibid, p. 48 (966).