Toward better diabetes care: Exploration and implementation M I N I R E V I E W
2023. May 2023

Wayne 
Huey-Herng Sheu whhsheu@vghtpe.gov.tw 
Institute of Molecular and Genetic Medicine
National Health Research Institute
ZhunanMiaoli CountyTaiwan

Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism
Department of Internal Medicine
Taipei Veterans General Hospital
TaipeiTaiwan

Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism
Department of Internal Medicine
Taichung Veterans General Hospital
TaichungTaiwan

School of Medicine
National Yang Ming Chao Tong University
TaipeiTaiwan,

College of Medicine
National Defense Medical Center
TaipeiTaiwan

Toward better diabetes care: Exploration and implementation M I N I R E V I E W

J Diabetes Investig
1452023. May 202310.1111/jdi.13978Received 1 January 2023; accepted 10 January 2023*Correspondence Wayne Huey-Herng Sheu 640Diabetes CareExplorationImplementation
Approximately 40 years ago, I was fortunate enough to step into the field of diabetes. When I had my fellowship training in the USA, I learned how to ask a good scientific question and conduct clinical research. With collaboration with my mentors, Prof. Gerald R Reaven and Prof. Ida Chen, we participated in many clinical trials. We established the Taiwan Diabetes Registry (TDR) to track long-term changes in diabetes profiles. The ultimate purpose of medical research is to provide benefits to patients. Using electronic medical records and point-of-care glucometers, we reduced inpatients' hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia greatly, which was also reflected by the reduction in hospital stays and readmission rates. With the advent of new technology and medications, we have to ponder where we are on the journey toward better diabetes care. We rigorously advocate diabetes care, hold many symposia and publish updated guidelines. We successfully hosted the congress of the 11th International Diabetes Federation Western Pacific Region & 8th Asian Association for the Study of Diabetes Scientific Meeting 2016 at Taipei, Taiwan. As the era of precision medicine is coming, Taiwan could be considered as one of the best places to run precision medicine. The Taiwan Precision Medicine Initiative has enrolled more than half a million residents, and is currently conducting genotyping and data analysis. In conclusion. I witnessed the early days of simple and few choices for diabetes management to the current various modalities in diabetes care. As these new technologies have become available, patients will always remain at the center of the care model with warmth and humility.

Everyone has a story. Almost 40 years ago, when I was about to finish my rotating residency training in Taiwan, I was fortunate to venture into the field of diabetes as my professional career, partly because I believe that diabetes would be the most common chronic disease in an aging society and with industrialization in the modern world. It turns out that I was right.

I had a chance to perform 2 years of fellowship training at the Clinical Research Center, Stanford University Medical Center, California, USA, where I learned how to ask good scientific questions, and how to conduct clinical research and bench work. I deeply appreciate my mentors, Prof. Gerald R Reaven and Prof. Ida Chen, who guided me and provided timely suggestions. We have had a continuous collaboration for decades.


EXPLORATIONS

One of the major themes hypothesized by Prof. Reaven and our team was that insulin resistance is not only the main pathogenesis of developing type 2 diabetes, but is also present as the core of many cardiovascular and metabolic disorders 1 (Figure 1). Several subsequent studies have shown that these theories are correct 2 .

During this period, we used the glucose clamp technique to quantify the degree of insulin resistance in humans. Although it is a labor-intensive and time-consuming technique, it is widely believed to be the gold standard measurement of glucose disposal rate in vivo 3 . Using this technique, we showed that ambient daily plasma proinsulin concentrations increase as glucose tolerance declines. However, circulating plasma insulin concentrations in response to mixed meals remain the highest in patients with impaired glucose tolerance, the lowest in normal individuals and intermediate in patients with non-insulindependent diabetes mellitus 4 . Furthermore, we reported that hepatic glucose production can be regulated by varying the rate of exogenous glucose infusion during glucose clamp studies 5 . Several subsequent studies investigating the pharmacological effects in patients with hypertension and/or cardiovascular disease have been reported by our group [6][7][8] . In association studies, we identified several characteristics of patients classified as obese and their responses to weight reduction through an integrated structural education program [9][10][11] .

In addition, our group has actively participated in local and international clinical trials, several of which are famous drug trials 12 . In collaboration with investigators from Japan and South Korea, we collected real-world data from medical records and proved that the use of sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors was associated with lower inpatient expenses and emergency room visits compared with dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors use in routine clinical practice 13 . Recently, we examined a new form of the old drug, R-form verapamil, which could further reduce the level of glycated hemoglobin in addition to metformin therapy in patients with type 2 diabetes in Taiwan 14 .

The diabetes registry with the following information allowed us to track long-term changes in the diabetes profiles. We established the Taiwan Diabetes Registry (TDR) using an online portal system in 2015. Three groups of individuals with diabetes (those who participated in the 2006 diabetes survey in Taiwan, patients newly diagnosed with type 2 diabetes and patients with type 1 diabetes) were invited to attend outpatient clinics. Demographic information and laboratory results were collected. Tests and a questionnaire on quality of life were administered after written consent was obtained. As of September 2022, 15,000 patients with diabetes were registered, and some of them were under subsequent follow up. At least one paper published 15 from TDR, and some of the proposals are under analysis.

We previously studied deoxyribonucleic acid variants associated with disease in early stages 16,17 . Currently, we realize that a single genetic variant might not be powerful enough to influence complex diseases. Our group was one of the founders of the Stanford Asia Pacific Program of Hypertension Insulin Resistance (SAPPHIRe), which aimed to study the genetic contribution of insulin resistance in hypertensive families. Several significant findings have been reported in the literature. To name a few, we found clustering and heritability of insulin resistance in Chinese individuals from Taiwan and Japan from a Hawaiian hypertensive family obtained from this cohort 18 . We also identified a glycine allele in the beta-2 adrenergic receptor gene, which might be associated with hypertension in Chinese individuals in Taiwan 19 . We previously reported that C-reactive protein levels and polymorphism at rs1205 within the C-reactive protein gene were associated with 2-h glucose levels 20 .


IMPLEMENTATION

I firmly believe that the ultimate purpose of medical research is to provide benefits to patients and their families. As a result, only the implementation of knowledge is power. In this regard, we aimed to enhance the glycemic control of inpatients. It is well known that inpatient hyperglycemia is associated with an increased risk for comorbidities, complications, mortality, longer hospital stay, progression needing intensive care and readmission, while better glycemic control could reverse these observations 21,22 . It is also estimated that the largest component of medical expenditure on diabetes is hospital inpatient care 23 . Thus, the development of an efficient and integrated team that aims to achieve better glycemic control is mandatory. Taking advantage of the comprehensive electronic medical record and point-of-care glucose examination systems, we developed a remote automatic program targeting hyperglycemia (>300 mg/ dL twice within 24 h) or hypoglycemia (<70 mg/dL once). This structured program, with the introduction of a dashboard system embedded with a clinical decision support tool, 24 has been shown to achieve better glycemic control for all hospitalized inpatients with hyperglycemia, with or without a history of diabetes. With a continuous improvement cycle, incorporated with feedback and comparisons among different units within the hospital, we successfully reduced those with hyperglycemia by 43% and hypoglycemia by 50% 25 . Most interestingly, we also observed that the benefits of improved glycemic control help translate into reduced hospital days and readmission rates, 28 days after discharge from the hospital 26 . Furthermore, we applied an artificial intelligence-derived software (Convolutional Neural Network), which was approved by the Taiwan Food and Drug Administration 27 to assist physicians in grading pictures of eye fundi in individuals with diabetes We attempted to determine whether the implementation of this software could help endocrinologists to finish reports early or reduce unnecessary referrals to ophthalmologists. After incorporating this artificial intelligence software into our workflow, we found that the monthly percentage of finishing grading reports of fundi pictures from patients with diabetes within the allotted time increased from 66.8% to 77.6% in diabetes clinics, whereas the monthly referral rate to ophthalmology dropped from 55.1% to 43.0% after implementation 28 .


Insulin Resistance and Related Human Diseases


ADVANCE BETTER DIABETES CARE

With the advent of new technologies and medications, we have better tools to tackle diabetes and its related complications. However, many barriers and challenges exist, either from the health system, the medical community or patients' aspects. As diabetes caregivers, we have to ponder where we are on the journey toward better diabetes care. One way is to advocate rigorously in association with all resources and networks; for example, we have hosted the Annular World Diabetes Day (WDD) in Taiwan for decades. We also held many symposia and published updated guidelines for our Diabetes Association. We successfully hosted the congress of the 11th International Diabetes Federation Western Pacific Region & 8th Asian Association for the Study of Diabetes Scientific Meeting 2016 at Taipei, Taiwan. Many education programs with patients' engagements, such as games, competitions and experience sharing, have been delivered to peer support groups. Together with health authorities, regular accountability of the quality index of diabetes care was shown on open websites. The transparency and comparisons helped to advance better treatment goal attainment among different medical settings in Taiwan 29 . Disparities in diabetes care are a universal presence 30 . It became even more prominent in the middle of the COVID-19 pandemic 31 . Recently, several global diabetes targets were established during the meeting of the World Health Assembly in the hope of empowering member states to accelerate their action on diabetes and support people living with diabetes worldwide 32 . In addition to the lack of access to basic necessities, such as insulin, recent studies have identified racial and ethnic disparities in the prescription of sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors and glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists to treat patients with type 2 diabetes; therefore, the pharmacoequity should also be addressed 33 .

Precision medicine was inspired by the State of the US Union Address by President Obama in January 2015. In this address, he particularly pointed out two diseases that might be ideal targets: cancer and diabetes. In 2020, a consensus report was launched by experts from the American Diabetes Association and the European Association Study of Diabetes to address the current status and future perspective of precision medicine in diabetes 34 . They highlighted three directions that require further research and implementation: precision diagnostics, precision therapeutics and precision prognostics. There is still some debate as to whether it is the right time to realize precision medicine 35 . The argument is that the evidence to date is insufficient to implement precision medicine approaches in routine clinical practice for managing patients with type 2 diabetes. However, given that data accumulate and more genetic information from different ethnicities becomes available, we believe that an era of precision diabetes medicine will come. Currently, most major genetic datasets are obtained from individuals of European ancestry and not from diverse representatives of different ethnicities 36 . In this regard, we consider that Taiwan has several niches to implement precision medicine, as we have a relatively homogeneous genetic background, and a highly educated and health-conscious population, which might conceivably represent all of the geographic areas of China. In addition, we have a uni-payer nationwide health system and several years of systemic electronic health medical records 37 . In addition to those backgrounds, Academia Sinica, Taiwan, launched a Taiwan Precision Medicine Initiative (https://tpmi.ibms.sinica.edu. tw/www/en/precision-medicine/) in the hope to achieve tailored medical treatment and health management for everyone in Taiwan. The Taiwan Precision Medicine Initiative attempted to obtain the genetic profiles of 1 million patients from medical centers across Taiwan using genome-wide association studies. Thus far, we have enrolled half a million participants, and built a central research database in parallel to clinical databases to store genetic profiles and de-identified health information. Several large-scale studies with consortium members and collaborators have been carried out. We do hope that subsequent implementation in precision diabetes medication, including diagnostics, therapeutics and prognostics, will be realized in no time.


CONCLUSION

As I look back, my journey into the field of diabetes has almost reached 40 years. I have witnessed huge changes, from writing with pens to computers, a pathway very similar to the early days of simple and few choices for diabetes management to current various modalities in diabetes care. As these new technologies have become available and accessible, I have always reminded myself to address ethical principles and values, such as equity, fairness and collective good, into concrete and better diabetes care. At the end of the day, the patient will always remain at the center of the care model with warmth and humility.


DISCLOSURE

The author declares no conflict of interest.


PCOS, polycystic ovarian syndrome. ª 2023 The Author. Journal of Diabetes Investigation published by AASD and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd J Diabetes Investig Vol. 14 No. 5 May 2023Gene 
Central Obesity 
Environment 

Insulin 
Resistance 

Inadequate" 

Insulin Response 

InflammaƟon 

Compensatory 
Hyperinsulinemia 

Type 2 DM 
Insulin Resistance 
Syndrome 

ReƟonpathy 
CVD 
Hypertension 
Nephropathy 
Stroke 
Neuropathy 
PCOS 
NAFLD 

Figure 1 | Depiction of insulin resistance and related human diseases. 
All these chronic common diseases share a central core of insulin 
resistance, which interacts with vascular inflammation and leads to 
type 2 diabetes mellitus and/or insulin resistance syndrome. CVD, 
cardiovascular disease; DM, diabetes mellitus; NAFLD, non-alcoholic fatty 
liver disease; 

Banting lecture 1988. Role of insulin resistance in human disease. G M Reaven, Diabetes. 37Reaven GM. Banting lecture 1988. Role of insulin resistance in human disease. Diabetes 1988; 37: 1595-1607.

From syndrome X to cardiometabolic risk: clinical and public health implications. J P Despr Es, Proc Nutr Soc. 79Despr es JP. From syndrome X to cardiometabolic risk: clinical and public health implications. Proc Nutr Soc 2020; 79: 4-10.

A comparison between the minimal model and the glucose clamp in the assessment of insulin sensitivity across the spectrum of glucose tolerance. Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Study. M F Saad, R L Anderson, A Laws, Diabetes. 43Saad MF, Anderson RL, Laws A, et al. A comparison between the minimal model and the glucose clamp in the assessment of insulin sensitivity across the spectrum of glucose tolerance. Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Study. Diabetes 1994; 43: 1114-1121.

Plasma insulin, C-peptide, and proinsulin concentrations in obese and nonobese individuals with varying degrees of glucose tolerance. G M Reaven, Y D Chen, C B Hollenbeck, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 76Reaven GM, Chen YD, Hollenbeck CB, et al. Plasma insulin, C-peptide, and proinsulin concentrations in obese and nonobese individuals with varying degrees of glucose tolerance. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993; 76: 44-48.

Effect of difference in glucose infusion rate on quantification of hepatic glucose production. W H Sheu, C B Hollenbeck, M S Wu, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 70Sheu WH, Hollenbeck CB, Wu MS, et al. Effect of difference in glucose infusion rate on quantification of hepatic glucose production. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1990; 70: 1354-1360.

Effect of prazosin treatment on HDL kinetics in patients with hypertension. W H Sheu, A L Swislocki, B B Hoffman, Am J Hypertens. 3Sheu WH, Swislocki AL, Hoffman BB, et al. Effect of prazosin treatment on HDL kinetics in patients with hypertension. Am J Hypertens 1990; 3: 761-768.

Insulin resistance and abnormal electrocardiograms in patients with high blood pressure. W H Sheu, C Y Jeng, S M Shieh, Am J Hypertens. 5Sheu WH, Jeng CY, Shieh SM, et al. Insulin resistance and abnormal electrocardiograms in patients with high blood pressure. Am J Hypertens 1992; 5: 444-448.

Insulin resistance, glucose intolerance, and hyperinsulinemia. Hypertriglyceridemia versus hypercholesterolemia. W H Sheu, S M Shieh, M M Fuh, Arterioscler Thromb. 13Sheu WH, Shieh SM, Fuh MM, et al. Insulin resistance, glucose intolerance, and hyperinsulinemia. Hypertriglyceridemia versus hypercholesterolemia. Arterioscler Thromb 1993; 13: 367-370.

MRI measured epicardial adipose tissue thickness at the right AV groove differentiates inflammatory status in obese men with metabolic syndrome. K W Liang, I C Tsai, W J Lee, Obesity (Silver Spring). 20Liang KW, Tsai IC, Lee WJ, et al. MRI measured epicardial adipose tissue thickness at the right AV groove differentiates inflammatory status in obese men with metabolic syndrome. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2012; 20: 525-532.

Effects of weight loss on epicardial adipose tissue thickness and its relationship between serum soluble CD40 ligand levels in obese men. C P Fu, Whh Sheu, I T Lee, Clin Chim Acta. 421Fu CP, Sheu WHH, Lee IT, et al. Effects of weight loss on epicardial adipose tissue thickness and its relationship between serum soluble CD40 ligand levels in obese men. Clin Chim Acta 2013; 421: 98-103.

Weight loss reduces serum monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 concentrations in association with improvements in renal injury in obese men with metabolic syndrome. C P Fu, W H Sheu, I T Lee, Clin Chem Lab Med. 53Fu CP, Sheu WH, Lee IT, et al. Weight loss reduces serum monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 concentrations in association with improvements in renal injury in obese men with metabolic syndrome. Clin Chem Lab Med 2015; 53: 623-629.

Novel indices of cognitive impairment and incident cardiovascular outcomes in the REWIND trial. T Cukierman-Yaffe, H C Gerstein, J Basile, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 107Cukierman-Yaffe T, Gerstein HC, Basile J, et al. Novel indices of cognitive impairment and incident cardiovascular outcomes in the REWIND trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2022; 107: e3448-e3454.

Healthcare resource utilization in patients treated with empagliflozin in East Asia. W H Sheu, Y Seino, E C Tan, J Diabetes Investig. 13Sheu WH, Seino Y, Tan EC, et al. Healthcare resource utilization in patients treated with empagliflozin in East Asia. J Diabetes Investig 2022; 13: 810-821.

A randomized controlled trial of R-form verapamil added to ongoing metformin therapy in patients with type 2 diabetes. C Y Wang, K C Huang, C W Lu, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 107Wang CY, Huang KC, Lu CW, et al. A randomized controlled trial of R-form verapamil added to ongoing metformin therapy in patients with type 2 diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2022; 107: e4063-e4071.

Distinct associations of selfmonitoring of blood glucose with glycemic control and hypoglycemia between groups of recently diagnosed and long-term follow-up type 2 diabetes: the Taiwan diabetes registry. J S Wang, S H Lo, Y P Yeh, Int J Clin Pract. 7514410Wang JS, Lo SH, Yeh YP, et al. Distinct associations of self- monitoring of blood glucose with glycemic control and hypoglycemia between groups of recently diagnosed and long-term follow-up type 2 diabetes: the Taiwan diabetes registry. Int J Clin Pract 2021; 75: e14410.

Angiotensinogen gene polymorphism is associated with insulin resistance in nondiabetic men with or without coronary heart disease. W H Sheu, W J Lee, C Y Jeng, Am Heart J. 136Sheu WH, Lee WJ, Jeng CY, et al. Angiotensinogen gene polymorphism is associated with insulin resistance in nondiabetic men with or without coronary heart disease. Am Heart J 1998; 136: 125-131.

C-reactive protein gene polymorphism 1009A>G is associated with serum CRP levels in Chinese men: a TCVGHAGE study. W H Sheu, Y D Chen, C Y Yu, Clin Chim Acta. 382Sheu WH, Chen YD, Yu CY, et al. C-reactive protein gene polymorphism 1009A>G is associated with serum CRP levels in Chinese men: a TCVGHAGE study. Clin Chim Acta 2007; 382: 117-123.

Clustering and heritability of insulin resistance in Chinese and Japanese hypertensive families: a Stanford-Asian Pacific program in hypertension and insulin resistance sibling study. K D Wu, C F Hsiao, L T Ho, Hypertens Res. 25Wu KD, Hsiao CF, Ho LT, et al. Clustering and heritability of insulin resistance in Chinese and Japanese hypertensive families: a Stanford-Asian Pacific program in hypertension and insulin resistance sibling study. Hypertens Res 2002; 25: 529-536.

The glycine allele of a glycine/arginine polymorphism in the beta2-adrenergic receptor gene is associated with essential hypertension in a population of Chinese origin. K Ranade, W H Shue, Y J Hung, Am J Hypertens. 14Ranade K, Shue WH, Hung YJ, et al. The glycine allele of a glycine/arginine polymorphism in the beta2-adrenergic receptor gene is associated with essential hypertension in a population of Chinese origin. Am J Hypertens 2001; 14: 1196-1200.

CRP-level-associated polymorphism rs1205 within the CRP gene is associated with 2-hour glucose level: the SAPPHIRe study. W H Sheu, W C Wang, K D Wu, Sci Rep. 77987Sheu WH, Wang WC, Wu KD, et al. CRP-level-associated polymorphism rs1205 within the CRP gene is associated with 2-hour glucose level: the SAPPHIRe study. Sci Rep 2017; 7: 7987.

. E S Moghissi, M T Korytkowski, M Dinardo, American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American Diabetes Association consensus statement on inpatient glycemic control. Diabetes Care. 32Moghissi ES, Korytkowski MT, DiNardo M, et al. American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American Diabetes Association consensus statement on inpatient glycemic control. Diabetes Care 2009; 32: 1119-1131.

Management of diabetes and hyperglycaemia in the hospital. F J Pasquel, M C Lansang, K Dhatariya, Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 9Pasquel FJ, Lansang MC, Dhatariya K, et al. Management of diabetes and hyperglycaemia in the hospital. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2021; 9: 174-188.

Economic costs of diabetes in the U.S. Ada, Diabetes Care. 41ADA. Economic costs of diabetes in the U.S. in 2017. Diabetes Care 2018; 41: 917-928.

Electronic health record-based decision-making support in inpatient diabetes management. J E Gerwer, G Bacani, P S Juang, Curr Diab Rep. 22Gerwer JE, Bacani G, Juang PS, et al. Electronic health record-based decision-making support in inpatient diabetes management. Curr Diab Rep 2022; 22: 433-440.

Implementation of an electronic dashboard with a remote management system to improve glycemic management among hospitalized adults. Y J Sheen, C C Huang, S C Huang, Endocr Pract. 26Sheen YJ, Huang CC, Huang SC, et al. Implementation of an electronic dashboard with a remote management system to improve glycemic management among hospitalized adults. Endocr Pract 2020; 26: 179-191.

Electronic dashboardbased remote glycemic management program reduces length of stay and readmission rate among hospitalized adults. Y J Sheen, C C Huang, S C Huang, J Diabetes Investig. 12Sheen YJ, Huang CC, Huang SC, et al. Electronic dashboard- based remote glycemic management program reduces length of stay and readmission rate among hospitalized adults. J Diabetes Investig 2021; 12: 1697-1707.

Application of deep learning image assessment software VeriSee TM for diabetic retinopathy screening. Y T Hsieh, L M Chuang, Y D Jiang, J Formos Med Assoc. 1201Pt 1Hsieh YT, Chuang LM, Jiang YD, et al. Application of deep learning image assessment software VeriSee TM for diabetic retinopathy screening. J Formos Med Assoc 2021; 120(1 Pt 1): 165-171.

The clinical influence after implementation of convolutional neural network-based software for diabetic retinopathy detection in the primary care setting. Y H Li, W H Sheu, C C Chou, Life (Basel). 112021Li YH, Sheu WH, Chou CC, et al. The clinical influence after implementation of convolutional neural network-based software for diabetic retinopathy detection in the primary care setting. Life (Basel) 2021; 11: 200.

Trends of ABC control 2006-2011: a national survey of diabetes health promotion institutes in Taiwan. N C Yu, H Y Su, S T Chiou, Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 99Yu NC, Su HY, Chiou ST, et al. Trends of ABC control 2006- 2011: a national survey of diabetes health promotion institutes in Taiwan. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2013; 99: 112- 119.

International Diabetes Federation. IDF Diabetes Atlas 10th Edition Diabetesatlas. International Diabetes Federation. AASD and John Wiley & Sons Australia14ª 2023 The Author. Journal of Diabetes Investigation published by AASD and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd J Diabetes Investig Vol. 14 No. 5 May 2023 30. International Diabetes Federation. IDF Diabetes Atlas 10th Edition Diabetesatlas. International Diabetes Federation, 2021. Available from: https://diabetesatlas.org/atlas/tenth- edition/ Accessed December 30, 2022.

The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on ethnic minority groups with diabetes. K Khunti, E L Feldman, N Laiteerapong, Diabetes Care. 46Khunti K, Feldman EL, Laiteerapong N, et al. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on ethnic minority groups with diabetes. Diabetes Care 2023; 46: 228-236.

World health assembly ratifies first global diabetes targets. E Wilkinson, Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 10560Wilkinson E. World health assembly ratifies first global diabetes targets. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2022; 10: 560.

Beyond detecting and understanding disparities in novel diabetes treatment: need for a major shift in Pharmacoequity research. U R Essien, D L Washington, M J Fine, JAMA. 328Essien UR, Washington DL, Fine MJ. Beyond detecting and understanding disparities in novel diabetes treatment: need for a major shift in Pharmacoequity research. JAMA 2022; 328: 836-838.

Precision medicine in diabetes: a consensus report from the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European Association for the Study of diabetes (EASD). W K Chung, K Erion, J C Florez, Diabetes Care. 43Chung WK, Erion K, Florez JC, et al. Precision medicine in diabetes: a consensus report from the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European Association for the Study of diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care 2020; 43: 1617- 1635.

Diabetes precision medicine: plenty of potential, pitfalls and perils but not yet ready for prime time. S Griffin, Diabetologia. 65Griffin S. Diabetes precision medicine: plenty of potential, pitfalls and perils but not yet ready for prime time. Diabetologia 2022; 65: 1913-1921.

Population genetic considerations for using biobanks as international resources in the pandemic era and beyond. H Carress, D J Lawson, E Elhaik, BMC Genomics. 22351Carress H, Lawson DJ, Elhaik E. Population genetic considerations for using biobanks as international resources in the pandemic era and beyond. BMC Genomics 2021; 22: 351.

Nationwide population science: lessons from the Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database. A W Hsing, J P Ioannidis, JAMA Intern Med. 175Hsing AW, Ioannidis JP. Nationwide population science: lessons from the Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database. JAMA Intern Med 2015; 175: 1527-1529.

The Author. Journal of Diabetes Investigation. AASD and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd145J Diabetes InvestigJ Diabetes Investig Vol. 14 No. 5 May 2023 ª 2023 The Author. Journal of Diabetes Investigation published by AASD and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd