Has doxycycline, in combination with anti-malarial drugs, a role to play in intermittent preventive treatment of Plasmodium falciparum malaria infection in pregnant women in Africa?
2018

Tiphaine Gaillard 
Manon Boxberger 
Marylin Madamet 
Bruno Pradines 
Has doxycycline, in combination with anti-malarial drugs, a role to play in intermittent preventive treatment of Plasmodium falciparum malaria infection in pregnant women in Africa?

Malar J
17469201810.1186/s12936-018-2621-xOPINIONAntibioticsDoxycyclineMalariaPlasmodium falciparumAnti-malarial drugResistanceIntermittent Preventive TreatmentPregnancy
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), Plasmodium falciparum malaria during pregnancy is responsible for deleterious consequences for the mother and her child. The administration of intermittent preventive treatment (IPTp) with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) at each antenatal care visit as early as 13 weeks of gestation until the time of delivery is a strategy that is currently recommended by WHO for the prevention of malaria in pregnancy. However, the emergence and the spread of the resistance to SP in Africa raise the question of the short-term effectiveness of the strategy. Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine 120 mg/960 mg once a day for 3 consecutive days administered at least three times during the pregnancy might be an option for IPTp. The combination of 200 mg of doxycycline once a day for 3 consecutive days seems to be a good option to retard the emergence and the spread of resistance to artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) in Africa and improve the effectiveness of ACT in term of preterm births, neonatal morbidity and mortality. Contrary to preconceived ideas, scientific and medical data suggest that the risk of congenital malformations in the fetus or of tooth staining in infants whose mothers take doxycycline and hepatotoxicity during pregnancy is very low or non-existent. Additionally, the use of doxycycline during the first and second trimesters leads to an increase in gestational age at delivery, a decrease in the number of preterm births and a reduction in neonatal morbidity and mortality due to the beneficial antimicrobial activity of doxycycline against other infections during pregnancy. Furthermore, doxycycline has anti-malarial properties and is already recommended as prophylaxis for travellers and for treatment of falciparum malaria in combination with other anti-malarial drugs.

Background

According to the World Health Organization (WHO), Plasmodium falciparum malaria during pregnancy is responsible for deleterious consequences for the mother and her child, among which fetal growth restriction, prematurity and stillbirth contribute to perinatal and neonatal mortality [1]. In areas where the intensity of transmission is moderate to high, leading to higher levels of acquired immunity, most P. falciparum malaria infections during pregnancy remain asymptomatic and frequently undiagnosed and untreated [2,3]. In these areas, the administration of intermittent preventive treatment (IPTp) with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) is a strategy that is currently recommended by the WHO for the prevention of malaria in


Open Access

Malaria Journal *Correspondence: bruno.pradines@gmail.com pregnancy. IPTp with SP is recommended at each antenatal care visit as early as 13 weeks of gestation until the time of delivery [4]. The WHO has recommended the administration of at least three curative doses of SP during pregnancy, and irrespective of malaria infection status. However, only 19% of pregnant women received at least three doses of SP among the 23 African countries reporting IPTp to WHO in 2016 (6% in 2010, 13% in 2014, 18% in 2015) [5]. In sub-Saharan Africa, IPTp with SP has been shown to reduce maternal anaemia [6], low birth weight [7][8][9][10] and perinatal mortality [8]. Additionally, IPT with SP protects not only against malaria and adverse birth outcomes, but also against sexually transmitted and reproductive tract infections that could be responsible for preterm delivery [11]. However, the emergence and the spread of the resistance to SP in Africa raise the question of the shortterm effectiveness of the strategy [12].

In Burkina Faso, the use of SP in IPTp was associated with an increased prevalence of mutations involved in pyrimethamine resistance [13]. The efficacy of IPTp with SP to treat and prevent malaria infection has been compromised in areas with > 90% prevalence of the mutations involved in sulfadoxine resistance [10]. Few alternatives are currently available, among which dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine may be the most promising candidate for IPTp [14,15]. However, resistance to dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine has emerged in Cambodia [16][17][18] and may rapidly spread to Africa, compromising its use for IPTp. Another alternative is to use triple combination, and more particularly triple artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT), to retard the emergence and the spread of resistance to ACT in Africa [19]. Doxycycline might be this third partner drug for IPTp to prevent and treat malaria in pregnant women.


Doxycycline is an antibiotic with anti-malarial properties

Doxycycline is already recommended at a dose of 100 mg/day as malaria prophylaxis for travellers in Africa [20][21][22][23]. It also recommended for the treatment of falciparum malaria in combination with quinine in the event of ACT unavailability or clinical failure with artesunate or with artesunate in the treatment of severe malaria [24][25][26]. The slow schizonticidal action of doxycycline justifies its association with a fast schizonticide [27,28]. Additionally, recent work showed that doxycycline prevented cerebral malaria in the experimental model using Plasmodium berghei by attenuation of brain inflammation and reduction of expression of tumour necrosis factor and chemokines [29].

Doxycycline is efficacious against pathogens that are responsible for urogenital infections, which are deleterious for the fetus Oral doxycycline treatment (200 mg the first day followed by 100 mg for 6 days) during the first and second trimesters increased the duration of gestation and decreased the number of preterm births [30]. This result can be explained by the beneficial antimicrobial activity of doxycycline against infections during pregnancy. Doxycycline is effective against Ureaplasma spp., Mycoplasma spp. [31,32] and Chlamydia trachomatis infection [33], that are responsible of genitourinary infections, which are responsible of spontaneous preterm labour, prematurity with infant with low birth weight, stillbirth or neonatal death [34]. Additionally, preterm birth, neonatal sepsis and bacterial meningitis are also associated with maternal rectovaginal colonization by group B Streptococcus [35] and Escherichia coli [36,37]. Although resistance of these pathogens to doxycycline or tetracycline has been observed in Africa (16.9% of 1041 Streptococcus pneumoniae isolates in Kenya, 54.5% in comparison to 86.7% for ampicillin for Escherichia coli) [38,39], doxycycline remains efficacious.


Doxycycline is contraindicated during pregnancy

Doxycycline is contraindicated during pregnancy by comparison with other tetracyclines, such as oxytetracycline, that show teratogenic risk to the fetus during the second trimester [20,40]. However, the FDA (Food and Drug Administration) approved doxycycline for the treatment of pregnant women after exposure to biothreat agents, including Yersinia pestis, Bacillus anthracis and Francisella tularensis [41].


Potential teratogenicity of doxycycline

The first argument to contraindicate doxycycline during pregnancy is based on its potential adverse teratogenic effects. The teratogenicity after doxycycline exposition in pregnant woman is not based on any evidence [40]. The use of oral oxytetracycline in pregnant women in the second month of gestation presented an increased risk of having infants with congenital abnormalities [odds ratio (OR) of 12.9, 95% confident interval (CI) 3.5-83.5] [42]. However, very few studies have addressed the potential adverse teratogenic effects of doxycycline. Of 18,515 pregnant women who had an infant with a major congenital anomaly (including neural tube defect, cleft lip or palate, cardiovascular malformations, hypospadias, clubfoot), 56 (0.3%) were treated with doxycycline during 6 to 14 days during pregnancy, while 63 mothers exposed to doxycycline out of 32,804 pregnant women (0.19%) had healthy infant [43]. Although a significant difference (p = 0.01), the authors concluded that doxycycline shows very little, if any, risk of congenital malformations in infants because there was no significant difference of exposure to doxycycline during the second and third months of pregnancy, the period of embryogenesis the most sensitive for major congenital anomaly. A limitation of the study is the small size of pregnant women exposed to doxycycline (25 mothers during the second and third months, 119 during the whole pregnancy). On 1843 infants whose mothers had received a 10-day treatment with doxycycline (220 mg/day) during pregnancy for biothreat agents exposure-related scenarios, the proportion of infants with malformations was lower in the group of infants with fetal exposure to doxycycline (2.5%) compared to unexposed infants (2.9%) [44]. Most of the mothers received doxycycline during the first trimester of gestation, the most critical period for teratogenicity, suggesting that there was no increased risk to the foetus following doxycycline use during pregnancy. No congenital anomaly was detected in a small sample size of 43 children at 1 year of age after treatment of their mothers with 10-days doxycycline for Mycoplasma infections during the first trimester of gestation [31]. Molgaard-Nielsen and Hviid showed that the use of doxycycline or tetracycline during the second month of pregnancy led to increased risk of cleft lip or cleft palate [45]. However, this conclusion is based on only two cases of tetracycline exposure. Morever, the pregnant women were also exposed to other drugs in the second gestational month. In a national study on birth anomalies, there was no significant association between exposure to tetracyclines during the first months of pregnancy (46 mothers) and the presence of orofacial clefts [adjusted odds ratio (AOR) of 2.0, 95% CI 0.6-6.7] [46]. Additionally, the recommendation for the use of doxycycline in combination with steroids in in vitro fecundation as per-implantation prophylaxis to protect the embryo is favoured by its very weak toxicity against embryo [47,48]. The overall evidence suggests that the risk of congenital malformations in infants whose mother received doxycycline is very low [31,41,[43][44][45][46][49][50][51].


Potential yellow tooth discolouration

Concerning the adverse dental effects, tooth discolouration is the main adverse effect associated with tetracycline in pregnancy, by formation of a complex tetracycline-calcium orthophosphate that is irreversibly incorporated into teeth during tooth calcification that occurs at the beginning of the second trimester of gestation [52][53][54][55]. The prevalence of tooth discolouration due to tetracycline exposure during pregnancy was estimated at 3-6% [56]. However, no study has evaluated the risk of permanent yellow tooth discolouration in infants after doxycycline use during pregnancy. The only studies on the potential effect on tooth of doxycycline were assessed on children under 8 years of age treated with doxycycline and reported the safety of doxycycline [40,57]. Three studies found no significant differences in the incidence of tooth staining between doxycycline-treated cases and non-doxycycline exposed children [58][59][60]. A recent study on 36 children ranged between 0.6 to 7.9 years-old treated at 10 mg/kg/day during 2 to 28 days also reported that doxycycline does not lead permanent tooth discolouration [61].


Potential hepatotoxicity of doxycycline

Finally, doxycycline is afflicted with adverse hepatic effects for which no evidence can be found, in contrast to the well-documented hepatotoxicity of tetracycline [62][63][64]. Some cases of fatal hepatotoxicity after doxycycline administration were reported only in combination with other hepatotoxic agents. Hepatic failure was observed in a patient 5 days after this patient received doxycycline, paracetamol and acetylsalicylic acid, two hepatotoxic drugs [65]. A case of lethal hepatitis was reported in a patient with acute Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection and was likely caused by the combination of levofloxacin, doxycycline and naproxen [66]. Among 148,879 patients, 32 serious adverse events (renal toxicity and ventricular arrhythmias) were reported in patients exposed to doxycycline and no hepatic toxicity was observed in 136,554 patients [67]. In a study analysing 3377 patients exposed to either tetracycline or doxycycline and presented a case of hepatotoxicity (89% of toxic hepatitis, 6% of acute necrosis and 5% of hepatic coma), tetracycline was found to be associated with an increased risk of liver damage, with an OR of 3.70 (95% CI 1.19-11.45) [68]. Conversely, the authors concluded that doxycycline did not present a risk of hepatic toxicity, with an OR of 1.49 (95% CI 0.61-3.62]. In a retrospective comparative study on treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria with quinine-doxycycline and artemether-lumefantrine, quinine-doxycycline group showed a lower proportion of liver enzymes abnormalities (elevation of transaminases, alkaline phosphatase and total bilirubin) (5% versus 42%, p < 0.01) [69]. There is no evidence that doxycycline is associated with adverse hepatic effects.


Conclusion

Scientific and medical data suggest that the risk of congenital malformations in the fetus or of tooth staining in infants whose mothers take doxycycline and hepatotoxicity during pregnancy is very low or non-existent. Additionally, the use of doxycycline during the first and second trimesters leads to an increase in gestational age at delivery, a decrease in the number of preterm births and a reduction in neonatal morbidity and mortality due to the beneficial antimicrobial activity of doxycycline against other infections during pregnancy.

Furthermore, doxycycline has anti-malarial properties and is already recommended as prophylaxis for travellers and for treatment of falciparum malaria in combination with other anti-malarial drugs. Doxycycline might be an excellent candidate associated with SP in IPTp. Doxycycline at a dose of 200 mg could be administered with 1500 mg/75 mg of SP as soon as the 13 weeks of gestation, that limits the occurrence of potential teratogenic effects (the critical period is during the second and third months). Resistance to SP raises the question of the short-term effectiveness of IPTp strategy with SP. Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine 120 mg/960 mg once a day for 3 consecutive days administered at least three times during the pregnancy might be an option for IPTp. The combination of 200 mg of doxycycline once a day for 3 consecutive days seems to be a good option to retard the emergence and the spread of resistance to ACT in Africa and improve the effectiveness of ACT in term of preterm births, neonatal morbidity and mortality.


Abbreviations

ACT : artemisinin-based combination therapy; AOR: adjusted odds ratio; 50% CI: 50% confident interval; FDA: Food and Drug Administration; IPTp: intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy; OR: odds ratio; SP: sulfadoxinepyrimethamine; WHO: World Health Organization.

Authors' contributions TG, MB, MM, and BP drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. 


Author details


1 Fédération des Laboratoires, Hôpital d'Instruction des Armées Desgenettes, Lyon, France. 2 Unité Parasitologie et Entomologie, Département Microbiologie et Maladies Infectieuses, Institut de Recherche Biomédicale des Armées, 19-21 Boulevard Jean Moulin, 13005 Marseille, France. 3 Aix Marseille Univ, IRD, SSA, AP-HM, VITROME, IHU Méditerranée Infection, Marseille, France. 4 Centre National de Référence du Paludisme, Institut de Recherche Biomédicale des Armées, Marseille, France. 8. Gutman J, Mwandama D, Wiegand RE, Mathanga DP, Skarbinski J. Effectiveness of intermittent preventive treatment with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine during pregnancy on maternal and birth outcomes in Machinga district, Malawi. J Infect Dis. 2013;208:907-16. 9. Mace KE, Chalwe V, Katalenich BL, Nambozi M, Mubikayi L, Mulele CK, et al. Evaluation of sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine for intermittent preventive treatment of malaria in pregnancy: a retrospective birth outcomes study in Mansa, Zambia. Malar J. 2015;14:69. 10. Desai M, Gutman J, Taylor SM, Wiegand RE, Khairallah C, Kaventao K, et al. Impact of sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine resistance on effectiveness of intermittent preventive therapy for malaria in pregnancy at clearing infections and preventing low birth weight. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;62:323-33. 11. Chico RM, Chaponda EB, Ariti C, Chandramohan D. Sulfadoxinepyrimethamine exhibits dose-response protection against adverse birth outcomes related to malaria and sexually transmitted and reproductive tract infections. Clin Infect Dis. 2017;64:1043-51. 12. Ruizendaal E, Tahita MC, Geskus RB, Versteeq I, Scott S, d' Alessandro U, et al. Increase in the prevalence of mutations associated with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine resistance in Plasmodium falciparum isolates collected from early to late pregnancy in Nanoro, Burkina Faso. Malar J. 2017;16:179. 13. Cisse M, Awandare GA, Soulama A, Tinto H, Hayette MP, Guiguemdé RT. Recent uptake of intermittent preventive treatment during pregnancy with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine is associated with increased prevalence of Pfdhfr mutations in Bobo-Dioulasso, Burkina Faso. Malar J. 2017;16:38. 14. Desai M, Gutman J, L'Lanziva A, Otieno K, Juma E, Kariuki S, et al. Intermittent screening and treatment or intermittent preventive treatment with dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine versus intermittent preventive treatment with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine for the control of malaria during pregnancy in western Kenya: an open-label, three-group, randomized controlled superiority trial. Lancet. 2015;386:2507-19. 15. Kakuru A, Jagannathan P, Muhindo MK, Natureeba P, Awori P, Nakalembe M, et al. Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine for the prevention of malaria pregnancy. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:928-39. 16. Amaratunga C, Lim P, Suon S, Sreng S, Mao S, Sopha C, et al. Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine resistance in Plasmodium falciparum malaria
Centre National de Référence du Paludisme, Institut de Recherche Biomédicale des Armées, Marseille, France Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
AcknowledgementsNot applicable.Competing interests
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria. Geneva: World Health OrganizationWHO. Guidelines for the treatment of malaria. 3rd ed. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015.

. N J White, S Pukrittayakamee, T T Hien, M A Faiz, O A Mokuolu, Dondorp AM. Malaria. Lancet. 383White NJ, Pukrittayakamee S, Hien TT, Faiz MA, Mokuolu OA, Dondorp AM. Malaria. Lancet. 2014;383:723-35.

Provider and user acceptability of intermittent screening and treatment for the control of malaria in pregnancy in Malawi. D Almond, M Madanitsa, V Mwapasa, L Kalilani-Phiri, J Webster, Ter Kuile, F , Malar J. 15574Almond D, Madanitsa M, Mwapasa V, Kalilani-Phiri L, Webster J, Ter Kuile F, et al. Provider and user acceptability of intermittent screening and treatment for the control of malaria in pregnancy in Malawi. Malar J. 2016;15:574.

Recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience. Geneva: World Health Organization. WHOWHO. Recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2016.

Geneva: World Health Organization. WHO. World malaria report. WHO. World malaria report 2017. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2017.

Intermittent preventive therapy with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine for malaria in pregnancy: a cross-sectional study from Tororo. E Arinaitwe, V Ades, A Walakira, B Ninsiima, O Mugagga, T S Patil, Uganda. PLoS One. 873073Arinaitwe E, Ades V, Walakira A, Ninsiima B, Mugagga O, Patil TS, et al. Intermittent preventive therapy with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine for malaria in pregnancy: a cross-sectional study from Tororo, Uganda. PLoS One. 2013;8:73073.

The effect of malaria control on Plasmodium falciparum in Africa between. S Bhatt, D J Weiss, Cameron E Bisanzio, D Mappin, B Dalrymple, U , Nature. 526Bhatt S, Weiss DJ, Cameron E, Bisanzio D, Mappin B, Dalrymple U, et al. The effect of malaria control on Plasmodium falciparum in Africa between 2000 and 2015. Nature. 2015;526:207-11.

Cambodia: a multisite prospective cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis. 16in Cambodia: a multisite prospective cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2016;16:357-65.

Evidence of Plasmodium falciparum malaria multidrug resistance to artemisinin and piperaquine in Western Cambodia: dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine open-label multicenter clinical assessment. R Leang, Wrj Taylor, D M Bouth, L Song, J Tarning, M C Char, Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 59Leang R, Taylor WRJ, Bouth DM, Song L, Tarning J, Char MC, et al. Evidence of Plasmodium falciparum malaria multidrug resistance to artemisinin and piperaquine in Western Cambodia: dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine open-label multicenter clinical assessment. Antimicrob Agents Chem- other. 2015;59:4719-26.

Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine failure associated with a triple mutant including kelch13 C580Y in Cambodia: an observational cohort study. M D Spring, J T Lin, J E Manning, P Vanachayangkul, S Somethy, R Bun, Lancet Infect Dis. 15Spring MD, Lin JT, Manning JE, Vanachayangkul P, Somethy S, Bun R, et al. Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine failure associated with a triple mutant including kelch13 C580Y in Cambodia: an observational cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2015;15:683-91.

Investigating the efficacy of triple artemisinin-based combination therapies for treating Plasmodium falciparum malaria patients using mathematical modeling. S Dini, S Zaloumis, P Cao, R N Price, Fji Fowkes, R W Van Der Pluijm, Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 62Dini S, Zaloumis S, Cao P, Price RN, Fowkes FJI, van der Pluijm RW, et al. Investigating the efficacy of triple artemisinin-based combination thera- pies for treating Plasmodium falciparum malaria patients using math- ematical modeling. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018;62:e01068-718.

Tetracyclines in malaria. T Gaillard, M Madamet, B Pradines, Malar J. 14445Gaillard T, Madamet M, Pradines B. Tetracyclines in malaria. Malar J. 2015;14:445.

Health information for international travel. Yellow book 2018. Atlanta: Centers for Diseases Control and Prevention. CDCCDC. Health information for international travel. Yellow book 2018. Atlanta: Centers for Diseases Control and Prevention; 2018.

Haut Conseil de la Santé Publique. Recommandations sanitaires pour les voyageurs. Bulletin Epidémiologique Hebdomadaire. Santé Publique FranceHaut Conseil de la Santé Publique. Recommandations sanitaires pour les voyageurs 2018. Bulletin Epidémiologique Hebdomadaire. Paris: Santé Publique France; 2018.

Malaria prevention recommendations for risk groups visiting sub-Saharan Africa: a survey of European expert opinion and international recommendations. M Shellvarajah, C Hatz, P Schlagenhauf, Travel Med Infect Dis. 19Shellvarajah M, Hatz C, Schlagenhauf P. Malaria prevention recommenda- tions for risk groups visiting sub-Saharan Africa: a survey of European expert opinion and international recommendations. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2017;19:49-55.

Groupe recommandations de la Société de Pathologie Infectieuse de Langue Française. Prise en charge et prévention du paludismeGroupe recommandations de la Société de Pathologie Infectieuse de Langue Française. Prise en charge et prévention du paludisme.

Société de Pathologie Infectieuse de Langue Française. Mise à jour 2017 des RPC. Mise à jour 2017 des RPC 2007. Société de Pathologie Infectieuse de Langue Française, 2017. www.infec tiolo gie.com/fr/actua lites /palud isme-rcp-2017_n-html.

PHE Advisory Committee on Malaria Prevention in UK Travellers. UK malaria treatment guidelines 2016. D G Lalloo, D Shingadia, D J Bell, N J Beeching, C J Whitty, P L Chiodini, J Infect. 2Lalloo DG, Shingadia D, Bell DJ, Beeching NJ, Whitty CJ, Chiodini PL, PHE Advisory Committee on Malaria Prevention in UK Travellers. UK malaria treatment guidelines 2016. J Infect. 2016;2:635-49.

Severe malaria not responsive to artemisinin derivatives in man returning from Angola to Vietnam. N Van Hong, A Amambua-Ngwa, N Q Tuan, D Cuong Do, N T Giang, N Van Dung, Emerg Infect Dis. 20Van Hong N, Amambua-Ngwa A, Tuan NQ, Cuong do D, Giang NT, Van Dung N, et al. Severe malaria not responsive to artemisinin derivatives in man returning from Angola to Vietnam. Emerg Infect Dis. 2014;20:1199-202.

Antibiotics for prophylaxis of Plasmodium falciparum infections: in vitro activity of doxycycline against Senegalese isolates. B Pradines, A Spiegel, C Rogier, A Tall, J Mosnier, T Fusai, Am J Trop Med Hyg. 62Pradines B, Spiegel A, Rogier C, Tall A, Mosnier J, Fusai T, et al. Antibiotics for prophylaxis of Plasmodium falciparum infections: in vitro activ- ity of doxycycline against Senegalese isolates. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2000;62:82-5.

In vitro activities of antibiotics against Plasmodium falciparum are inhibited by iron. B Pradines, C Rogier, T Fusai, J Mosnier, W Daries, E Barret, Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 45Pradines B, Rogier C, Fusai T, Mosnier J, Daries W, Barret E, et al. In vitro activities of antibiotics against Plasmodium falciparum are inhibited by iron. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2001;45:1746-50.

Doxycycline inhibits experimental cerebral malaria by reducing inflammatory immune reactions and tissue-degrading mediators. K E Schmidt, J M Kuepper, B Schumak, J Alferink, A Hofmann, S W Hawland, PLoS One. 13192717Schmidt KE, Kuepper JM, Schumak B, Alferink J, Hofmann A, Hawland SW, et al. Doxycycline inhibits experimental cerebral malaria by reducing inflammatory immune reactions and tissue-degrading mediators. PLoS One. 2018;13:e0192717.

Effects of doxycycline treatment during pregnancy for birth outcomes. Z Kazy, E H Puho, A E Czeizel, Reprod Toxicol. 24Kazy Z, Puho EH, Czeizel AE. Effects of doxycycline treatment during pregnancy for birth outcomes. Reprod Toxicol. 2007;24:279-80.

The role of mycoplasma among 81 consecutive pregnancies: a prospective study. H W Horne, R B Kundsin, Int J Fertil. 25Horne HW, Kundsin RB. The role of mycoplasma among 81 consecutive pregnancies: a prospective study. Int J Fertil. 1980;25:315-7.

A twelve-year retrospective analysis of prevalence and microbial susceptibility patterns of Ureaplasma spp. and Mycoplasma hominis in the province of Lower Silesia in Poland. U Kasprzykowska, B Sobieszczanska, A Duda-Madej, A Secewicz, J Nowicka, G Gosciniak, Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 220Kasprzykowska U, Sobieszczanska B, Duda-Madej A, Secewicz A, Nowicka J, Gosciniak G. A twelve-year retrospective analysis of prevalence and microbial susceptibility patterns of Ureaplasma spp. and Mycoplasma hominis in the province of Lower Silesia in Poland. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2017;220:44-9.

Chlamydia trachomatis genital infections. C M O&apos;connell, M E Ferone, Microb Cell. 3O'Connell CM, Ferone ME. Chlamydia trachomatis genital infections. Microb Cell. 2016;3:390-403.

Ureaplasma urealyticum, Mycoplasma hominis and adverse pregnancy outcomes. R Capoccia, G Greub, D Baud, Curr Opin Infect Dis. 26Capoccia R, Greub G, Baud D. Ureaplasma urealyticum, Mycoplasma hominis and adverse pregnancy outcomes. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2013;26:231-40.

Preterm birth associated with group B Streptococcus maternal colonization worldwide: systematic review and meta-analyses. F Bianchi-Jassir, A C Seale, M Kohli-Lynch, J E Lawn, L Bartiett, C Cuttland, Clin Infect Dis. 652supplBianchi-Jassir F, Seale AC, Kohli-Lynch M, Lawn JE, Bartiett L, Cuttland C, et al. Preterm birth associated with group B Streptococcus maternal colonization worldwide: systematic review and meta-analyses. Clin Infect Dis. 2017;65(suppl 2):S133-42.

Is Ureaplasma spp. the leading causative agent of acute chorioamniotis in women with preterm birth?. J Kikhney, D Von Schöning, I Steding, J Schulze, A Petrich, A Hiergeist, Clin Microbiol Infect. 23119Kikhney J, von Schöning D, Steding I, Schulze J, Petrich A, Hiergeist A, et al. Is Ureaplasma spp. the leading causative agent of acute chorioamniotis in women with preterm birth? Clin Microbiol Infect. 2017;23:119.

Vaginal versus obstetric infection Escherichia coli isolates among pregnant women: antimicrobial resistance and genetic virulence profile. E Saez-Lopez, E Guiral, D Fernandez-Orth, S Villanueva, A Goncé, M Lopez, PLoS One. 11146531Saez-Lopez E, Guiral E, Fernandez-Orth D, Villanueva S, Goncé A, Lopez M, et al. Vaginal versus obstetric infection Escherichia coli isolates among pregnant women: antimicrobial resistance and genetic viru- lence profile. PLoS One. 2016;11:e0146531.

Pneumococcal carriage and antibiotic susceptibility patterns from two cross-sectional colonization surveys among children aged < 5 years prior to the introduction of 10-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine-Kenya. M Kobayashi, L M Conklin, G Bigogo, G Jagero, L Hampton, K E Fleming-Dutra, BMC Infect Dis. 1725Kobayashi M, Conklin LM, Bigogo G, Jagero G, Hampton L, Fleming- Dutra KE, et al. Pneumococcal carriage and antibiotic susceptibility patterns from two cross-sectional colonization surveys among children aged < 5 years prior to the introduction of 10-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine-Kenya, 2009-2010. BMC Infect Dis. 2017;17:25.

Antimicrobial resistance in Africa: a systematic review. B T Tadesse, E A Asley, S Ongarello, J Havumaki, M Wijegoonewardena, I J Gonzalez, BMC Infect Dis. 17616Tadesse BT, Asley EA, Ongarello S, Havumaki J, Wijegoonewardena M, Gonzalez IJ, et al. Antimicrobial resistance in Africa: a systematic review. BMC Infect Dis. 2017;17:616.

Revisiting doxycycline in pregnancy and early childhood-time to rebuild its reputation?. R Cross, C Ling, N P Day, R Mcgready, D H Paris, Expert Opin Drug Saf. 15Cross R, Ling C, Day NP, McGready R, Paris DH. Revisiting doxycycline in pregnancy and early childhood-time to rebuild its reputation? Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2016;15:367-82.

Prophylaxis and treatment of anthrax in pregnant women. D Meaney-Delman, S A Rasmussen, R H Beigi, M E Zotti, Y Hutchings, W A Bower, Obstet Gynecol. 122Meaney-Delman D, Rasmussen SA, Beigi RH, Zotti ME, Hutchings Y, Bower WA, et al. Prophylaxis and treatment of anthrax in pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol. 2013;122:885-900.

A population-based case-control teratologic study of oral oxytetracycline treatment during pregnancy. A E Czeizel, M Rockenbauer, Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 88Czeizel AE, Rockenbauer M. A population-based case-control terato- logic study of oral oxytetracycline treatment during pregnancy. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2000;88:27-33.

Teratogenic study of doxycycline. A E Czeizel, M Rockenbauer, Obstet Gynecol. 89Czeizel AE, Rockenbauer M. Teratogenic study of doxycycline. Obstet Gynecol. 1997;89:524-8.

Antibiotics potentially used in response to bioterrorism and the risk of major congenital malformations. W O Cooper, S Hernandez-Diaz, P G Arbogast, J A Dudley, S M Dyer, P S Gideon, Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol. 23Cooper WO, Hernandez-Diaz S, Arbogast PG, Dudley JA, Dyer SM, Gideon PS, et al. Antibiotics potentially used in response to bioterror- ism and the risk of major congenital malformations. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol. 2009;23:18-28.

Maternal use of antibiotics and the risk of orofacial clefts: a nationwide cohort study. D Molgaard-Nielsen, A Hviid, Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 21Molgaard-Nielsen D, Hviid A. Maternal use of antibiotics and the risk of orofacial clefts: a nationwide cohort study. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2012;21:246-53.

Antibacterial medication use during pregnancy and risk of birth defects. K S Crider, M A Cleves, J Reefhuis, Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 163Crider KS, Cleves MA, Reefhuis J. Antibacterial medication use dur- ing pregnancy and risk of birth defects. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2009;163:978-85.

Old habits die hard: retrospective analysis of outcomes with use of corticosteroids and antibiotics before embryo transfer. L Kaye, C Bartels, A Bartolucci, L Engmann, J Nulsen, C Benadiva, Fertil Steril. 107Kaye L, Bartels C, Bartolucci A, Engmann L, Nulsen J, Benadiva C. Old habits die hard: retrospective analysis of outcomes with use of corticosteroids and antibiotics before embryo transfer. Fertil Steril. 2017;107:1336-40.

A prospective, randomized, double-blind study for the evaluation of assisted hatching in patients with advanced maternal age. S E Lanzendorf, F Nehchiri, J F Mayer, S Oehninger, S J Muasher, Hum Reprod. 13Lanzendorf SE, Nehchiri F, Mayer JF, Oehninger S, Muasher SJ. A pro- spective, randomized, double-blind study for the evaluation of assisted hatching in patients with advanced maternal age. Hum Reprod. 1998;13:409-13.

Antibiotic use in pregnancy and lactation: what is and is not known about teratogenic and toxic risks. G G Nahum, K Uhl, D L Kennedy, Obstet Gynecol. 107Nahum GG, Uhl K, Kennedy DL. Antibiotic use in pregnancy and lacta- tion: what is and is not known about teratogenic and toxic risks. Obstet Gynecol. 2006;107:1120-38.

Alternatives for malaria prophylaxis during the first trimester of pregnancy: our personal view. U Hellgren, L Rombo, J Travel Med. 17Hellgren U, Rombo L. Alternatives for malaria prophylaxis during the first trimester of pregnancy: our personal view. J Travel Med. 2010;17:130-2.

Drug effect on the fetus and breast-fed infant. G G Briggs, Clin Obstet Gynecol. 45Briggs GG. Drug effect on the fetus and breast-fed infant. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 2002;45:6-21.

Tetracycline-induced discoloration of deciduous teeth: case series. V Venila, V Madhu, R Rajesh, K K Ealla, S R Velidandla, S Santoshi, J Int Oral Health. 3Venila V, Madhu V, Rajesh R, Ealla KK, Velidandla SR, Santoshi S. Tetracy- cline-induced discoloration of deciduous teeth: case series. J Int Oral Health. 2014;3:115-9.

Discoloration of deciduous teeth induced by administration of tetracycline antepartum. A H Kutscher, E V Zegarelli, H M Tovell, B Hochberg, B Hochberg, J Hauptman, Am J Obstet Gynecol. 96Kutscher AH, Zegarelli EV, Tovell HM, Hochberg B, Hochberg B, Hauptman J. Discoloration of deciduous teeth induced by administration of tetracy- cline antepartum. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1966;96:291-2.

Effect of administration of tetracycline in pregnancy on the primary dentition of the offspring. M T Genot, H P Golan, P J Porter, E H Kass, J Oral Med. 25Genot MT, Golan HP, Porter PJ, Kass EH. Effect of administration of tetracy- cline in pregnancy on the primary dentition of the offspring. J Oral Med. 1970;25:75-9.

Drug-induced disorders of teeth. C J Tredwin, C Scully, J V Bagan-Sebastian, J Dent Res. 84Tredwin CJ, Scully C, Bagan-Sebastian JV. Drug-induced disorders of teeth. J Dent Res. 2005;84:596-602.

Tetracycline and other tetracycline-derivative staining of the teeth and oral cavity. A R Sanchez, R S Rogers, P J Sheridan, Int J Dermatol. 43Sanchez AR, Rogers RS, Sheridan PJ. Tetracycline and other tetracy- cline-derivative staining of the teeth and oral cavity. Int J Dermatol. 2004;43:709-15.

The end of a dogma: the safety of doxycycline use in young children for malaria treatment. T Gaillard, S Briolant, M Madamet, B Pradines, Malar J. 16148Gaillard T, Briolant S, Madamet M, Pradines B. The end of a dogma: the safety of doxycycline use in young children for malaria treatment. Malar J. 2017;16:148.

No visible dental staining in children treated with doxycycline for suspected Rocky Mountain spotted fever. S R Todd, F S Dahlgren, M S Traeger, E D Beltrán-Aguilar, D W Marianos, C Hamilton, J Pediatr. 166Todd SR, Dahlgren FS, Traeger MS, Beltrán-Aguilar ED, Marianos DW, Hamilton C, et al. No visible dental staining in children treated with doxycycline for suspected Rocky Mountain spotted fever. J Pediatr. 2015;166:1246-51.

convenient online submission • thorough peer review by experienced researchers in your field • rapid publication on acceptance • support for research data, including large and complex data types • gold Open Access which fosters wider collaboration and increased citations maximum visibility for your research: over 100M website views per year your research ?. • Fast, Choose BMC and benefit from. • fast, convenient online submission • thorough peer review by experienced researchers in your field • rapid publication on acceptance • support for research data, including large and complex data types • gold Open Access which fosters wider collaboration and increased citations maximum visibility for your research: over 100M website views per year your research ? Choose BMC and benefit from:

Absence of tooth staining with doxycycline treatment in young children. B Volovitz, R Shkap, J Amir, S Calderon, I Varsano, M Nussinovitch, Clin Pediatr. 46Volovitz B, Shkap R, Amir J, Calderon S, Varsano I, Nussinovitch M. Absence of tooth staining with doxycycline treatment in young children. Clin Pediatr. 2007;46:121-6.

Doxycycline and staining of permanent teeth. M E Lochary, P B Lockhart, W T Williams, Pediatr Infect Dis J. 17Lochary ME, Lockhart PB, Williams WT. Doxycycline and staining of per- manent teeth. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1998;17:429-31.

Dental staining after doxycycline use in children. H Pöyhönen, M Nurmi, V Peitola, S Alaluusua, O Ruuskanen, T Lähdesmäki, J Antimicrob Chemother. 72Pöyhönen H, Nurmi M, Peitola V, Alaluusua S, Ruuskanen O, Lähdesmäki T. Dental staining after doxycycline use in children. J Antimicrob Chem- other. 2017;72:2887-90.

Hepatic reactions to tetracycline. H F Dowling, M H Lepper, JAMA. 188Dowling HF, Lepper MH. Hepatic reactions to tetracycline. JAMA. 1964;188:307-9.

Fatal liver disease after intravenous administration of tetracycline in high dosage. J C Schultz, J S Adamson, W W Workman, T D Norman, N Engl J Med. 269Schultz JC, Adamson JS, Workman WW, Norman TD. Fatal liver disease after intravenous administration of tetracycline in high dosage. N Engl J Med. 1963;269:999-1004.

Tetracycline and liver disease. R C Briggs, N Engl J Med. 2691386Briggs RC. Tetracycline and liver disease. N Engl J Med. 1963;269:1386.

Doxycycline and hepatotoxicity. F Lienart, M Morissens, P Jacobs, J Ducobu, Acta Clin Belg. 47Lienart F, Morissens M, Jacobs P, Ducobu J. Doxycycline and hepatotoxic- ity. Acta Clin Belg. 1992;47:205-8.

Fatal acute hepatitis after sequential treatment with levofloxacin, doxycycline, and naproxen in a patient presenting with acute Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection. M E Carrascosa, M I Lucena, R J Andrade, J R Caviedes, A C Lavin, J C Mones, Clin Ther. 31Carrascosa ME, Lucena MI, Andrade RJ, Caviedes JR, Lavin AC, Mones JC, et al. Fatal acute hepatitis after sequential treatment with levofloxacin, doxycycline, and naproxen in a patient presenting with acute Myco- plasma pneumoniae infection. Clin Ther. 2009;31:1014-9.

Adverse events associated with prolonged antibiotic use. S B Meropol, K A Chan, Z Chen, J A Finelstein, S Hennessy, E Lautenbach, Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 17Meropol SB, Chan KA, Chen Z, Finelstein JA, Hennessy S, Lautenbach E, et al. Adverse events associated with prolonged antibiotic use. Pharma- coepidemiol Drug Saf. 2008;17:523-32.

Association between tetracycline or doxycycline and hepatotoxicity: a population based case-control study. P C Heaton, S R Fenwick, D E Brewer, J Clin Pharm Ther. 32Heaton PC, Fenwick SR, Brewer DE. Association between tetracycline or doxycycline and hepatotoxicity: a population based case-control study. J Clin Pharm Ther. 2007;32:483-7.

Artemether-lumefantrine and liver enzyme abnormalities in non-severe Plasmodium falciparum malaria in returned travelers: a retrospective comparative study with quinine-doxycycline in a Portuguese centre. A Silva-Pinto, R Ruas, F Almeida, R Duro, A Silva, C Abreu, Malar J. 1643Silva-Pinto A, Ruas R, Almeida F, Duro R, Silva A, Abreu C, et al. Artemether-lumefantrine and liver enzyme abnormalities in non-severe Plasmodium falciparum malaria in returned travelers: a retrospective com- parative study with quinine-doxycycline in a Portuguese centre. Malar J. 2017;16:43.