(2019)

Valerie, Stabile, Luca, Vistocco, Domenico, RussiAldo Rizza 
Ste-Fano Pardi 
&amp; Buonanno 
Giorgio 

Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
University of Cassino and Southern Lazio
Italy


Department of Economics and Law
University of Cassino and Southern Lazio
Italy


Hospital St. Scholastica Cassino (Fr)
Italy


Department of Engineering
University "Parthenope"
NaplesItaly


Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Queensland University of Technology
BrisbaneAustralia


and Southern Lazio (Italy)
University of Cassino
Via Di Biasio 4303043Cassino (FR)
(2019)10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.09.385This may be the author's version of a work that was submitted/accepted for publication in the following source:


Introduction

The possible effect of the exposure to high levels of airborne particle concentration on human health represents a topic highly debated in the scientific literature (Pope and Dockery, 2006). In fact, while the previous investigations were mostly focused on the effects of short and long term-exposure to airborne particles on the respiratory system, the attention was recently moved to the cardiovascular issues (Chen et al., 2008;Franchini and Mannucci, 2011;Mills et al., 2008;Pope and Dockery, 2006). According to the latest research, cardiovascular health consequences of exposure to airborne particles can be even worse than those due to pulmonary ones. As an example, a recent study (Basagaña et al., 2015) examined the relationship between particulate matter constituents and daily hospital admissions in five European cities, showing that air pollution is strongly associated with hospitalization for cardiovascular diseases more than for respiratory ones. Similarly, Gold et al. (2000) observed higher rates of deaths due to cardiovascular diseases with respect to respiratory diseases (69% vs. 18%). More generally, several epidemiological studies


A C C E P T E D M A N U S C R I P T

3 showed increased cardiovascular mortality and morbidity in association to exposure to fine particulate matter (PM 2.5 , mass concentrations of particles smaller than 2.5 m) (Bhaskaran et al., 2009b;Brook, 2008;Brook et al., 2010a;Simkhovich et al., 2008) and traffic-related particles (Peters et al., 2005;Tonne et al., 2016).

Specific interest was given to the correlation between heart rate variability (HRV, i.e. the specific change in time between successive heart beats, usually referred as changes of "R-R interval") and the exposure to several air pollutants including carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide, ozone and particulate matter. Reduced HRV was recognized as a predictor of mortality after myocardial infarction (Mustafic et al., 2012). As an example (Cárdenas et al., 2008) used the HRV as a marker to identify cardiovascular effects associated with increased PM 2.5 concentrations and (Brook et al., 2010b) detected an association between decreased HRV and short-term exposures to PM in sensitive subjects such as eldest people and/or persons with previous illnesses. Other studies were also able to quantify the effect of PM levels on cardiovascular diseases. As an example, (Pope and Dockery, 2006) detected a significant growth of cardiovascular diseases in presence of PM 2.5 exposure estimating a 4.5% increase in coronary artery disease for a 10 µg/m 3 increase in PM 2.5 concentration, whereas (Gold et al., 2000) observed an increase of 0.5-1.5% for a 5-6 µg/m 3 increase in PM 2.5 . Nonetheless, the scientific findings regarding the correlation between PM 2.5 and cardiovascular issues are not unanimous; indeed, (Chuang et al., 2007) and (Shields et al., 2013) observed negative and positive associations, respectively, amongst HRV and exposure to PM 2.5 , and (Adar et al., 2007) found that fine particles are negatively linked with HRV.

Consistent findings have been also found, in several panel studies, referred to the correlation between cardiovascular responses/diseases and UFP exposure (Laumbach et al., 2014;Peters et al., 2015;Rich et al., 2012;Samet et al., 2009;Sun et al., 2015;Vora et al., 2014;Weichenthal et al., 2011;Zareba et al., 2009).

Nonetheless, a limited number of studies have been conducted. (Weichenthal, 2012) recently shown that UFPs (ultrafine particles, i.e. particles with a diameter smaller than 0.1 µm), which are measured in terms of number concentrations, can play a significant role in acute cardiovascular morbidity as already demonstrated for respiratory diseases  or lung cancer risk (Pacitto et al., 2018b;Stabile et al., 2017). This should not represent an unexpected finding since recent researches recognized that UFPs cause several damages through translocation into the systemic circulation (Campagnolo et al., 2017;Lee et al., 2014).


ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

A C C E P T E D M A N U S C R I P T 4 A decrease of HRV for higher exposure to particle number concentrations was recognized by Chan et al. (2004) in their study considering 9 young adults and 10 elderly patients with lung function impairments analyzed from 7 a.m. to 11 p.m. On the other hand, (Samet et al., 2009) observed an increase in frequency domain markers of heart rate variability in young healthy humans and further epidemiological studies (Laumbach et al., 2014;Weichenthal et al., 2011;Zareba et al., 2009) have reported no significant association between exposure to traffic particles and HRV outcomes.

The above-mentioned contradictory results can be due to a peculiar difference in the type of monitoring system of pollutants used in the research. In a recent structured review of panel studies concerning the link between short-term exposure to air pollution, particularly fine particulate matter (PM2.5), and adverse cardiovascular effects, (Buteau and Goldberg, 2016) analyzed thirty-one studies recognizing that twenty-one studies measured fine particle concentrations in one or multiple fixed-site monitoring stations positioned at different distances from participants, eight studies were performed using personal monitoring, and the remaining two studies measured fine particles through a mobile laboratory. Instead as regards the relationship between UFPs exposure and possible effects on the cardiovascular system, in a recent review, Weichenthal (2012) examined nine cases of association between controlled human exposure to ultrafine particles (assessed using personal monitors or by a mobile laboratory) and heart rate indices recognizing a significant association for six over nine studies. Indeed, personal air pollution measurements are still rare while ambient fixed-site monitors are ordinarily used for estimation of the personal exposure of the entire population (Hampel et al., 2014). Actually, fixed-site stations, in comparison to personal monitors, do not take into account for personal exposure factors, as well as for factors related to transport mode, traffic, weather conditions, and particle concentrations (Buonanno et al., 2011a;Buonanno et al., 2012;Buonanno et al., 2014) that can strongly affect the real exposure of the population. A further limitation of the mentioned researches concerns the small number of cases analyzed: they were mainly conducted for specific populations, such as elderly population or patients with particular diseases. Finally, an additional aspect to be considered is the lag time (i.e. timing of the electrocardiogram recording relative to the exposure) between the exposure period and the measurements of heart rate variability. In most of the cases analysed, the electrocardiogram monitoring was not simultaneous but it was performed before or after t to the exposure of the subjects to the airborne particle concentration.


ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

A C C E P T E D M A N U S C R I P T 5 To this end, in the present paper, a community-based study in a relatively large population of healthy individuals was conducted in order to detect possible short-term effects of ultrafine particles on cardiac autonomic function by measuring heart-rate (HR) continuously for a period of seven days. To this end, personal particle concentration monitors were adopted in order to assess the actual individual exposure of selected volunteers.


Materials and Methods


Methodology and experimental apparatus

The study was conducted from November 2016 to November 2017, and it involved fifty volunteers aged 18-60 years. All the participants lived in Cassino (resident population of 33000 inhabitants, surface area of 83 km 2 ), Central Italy, and in the surrounding areas.

A self-administered questionnaire was used to collect personal data, including gender, age, weight, height, body mass index (BMI), blood pressure, breath frequency, smoking status and remote pathological history.

Non-smokers, non-alcoholics and having a good health status volunteers (without a personal history of cardiovascular, pulmonary, neurological or endocrine disease) were selected. A personal monitoring system was used to detect both HRV and exposure to particles. In particular, the mobile experimental apparatus consisted of (a) a heart rate variability meter (Holter), (b) an accelerometer for physical activity tracking, (c) portable particle concentration monitors (NanoTracer or Discmini).

The Holter monitor used in the experimental analysis is the AthenaDiaX ECG recorder (ARES:

54×54×9.6 mm and ZEUS 2D: 57.4×57.4×9.6 mm) which is able to monitor the heart rate variability with an accuracy of 1 ms. The Holter was attached to the subject's chest using adhesive electrodes, bone planes were chosen for the position, in order to minimize the artefacts generated by muscle activity. The Holter is a battery-operated portable device measuring and recording the electrical activity of the heart (Electrocardiography, ECG) continuously for 24 hours or longer. Data were processed by means of the Themislight software (www.athenadiax.com) which allows to display and assess the ECG readings. The heart rate variability is automatically detected and frequency domain variables are also provided: high


ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT


A C C E P T E D M A N U S C R I P T

6 frequency (HF), low frequency (LF) and the ratio of LF to HF. The heart rate was quantified using heart rate variability: indeed, from the ECG data, the heart rate in bpm was determined for each R-R interval.

The physical activity was continuously monitored using a personal accelerometer classifying the activities of the volunteers in different types of activity: for the purpose of the research three types of physical activities (referred as "position") were considered, i.e. laying down, sitting and standing. The authors point out that monitoring the position is a key aspect since different activity levels could mislead or alter the associations between UFP concentrations and heart rate: this is the reason why activities at higher intensity (e.g. walking, running, etc.) were not considered.

Particle number concentrations were monitored through two portable diffusion chargers: a) a DISCmini (Matter Aerosol AG; 1-s sampling time resolution) and b) a Oxility Nanotracer particle counter (10-s sampling time resolution). The diffusion chargers were calibrated by comparison with a TSI 3068B Aerosol

Electrometer (Buonanno et al., 2014;) at the beginning of the experimental campaign in the European Accredited Laboratory of Industrial Measurements (LAMI) at the University of Cassino and Southern Lazio (Italy) to ensure data quality.

Participants were analysed for one week continuously, they were instructed to carry the mobile monitors when moving around or doing activities. When remaining in a confined microenvironment for a long time, they were allowed to locate the portable diffusion charger on a very close table or chair. In addition, the participants were instructed to record their daily activities in a journal taking note of start and end times of each activity performed and the corresponding microenvironment resided. Such activities/microenvironments were grouped in seven main microenvironments better detailed in Table 1 and adopted in our previous studies (Buonanno et al., 2011b;Pacitto et al., 2018a).


Data post-processing

The experimental campaign provided a large number of raw data, in terms of HR, particle number concentration and position, with different sampling times as a function of the device (Holter, DISCMini, Nanotracer, activity tracker). For this reason, the authors, firstly, performed a data preparation for further statistical analyses: in particular, for each volunteer, particle number concentration, heart rate and position data were aligned and reported as 10-s average data.


ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
A C C E P T E D M A N U S C R I P T 7
The statistical analysis of the results was performed applying linear mixed models in the open source R statistical software (Team, 2017) using the lme4 package (Bates et al., 2014). Indeed, the presence of repeated measurements for the same individuals does not allow the use of the classical linear regression that requires the independence among observations. The linear mixed models (Verbeke, 1997) are the extension of linear regression models useful for analyzing longitudinal data obtained from repeated observations on the same subjects as applied in the present study. The purpose of the statistical model was to study the relationship amongst the response variable y (i.e. the heart rate in the present study) and a set of covariates x (i.e. particle number concentration, position, age, and other anthropogenic parameters as hereinafter detailed), where each response y is the result of n i repeated observations of the covariates in a certain time interval for the i-th subject:

(1)

In a linear mixed model, the responses are assumed to depend linearly on unknown fixed population effects and on unknown individual-specific effects , known as random effects:

(2) where:

( 3) contains the observed values for the k time-dependent covariates, and:

contains the observed values for the l time-constant covariates, varying only across subjects.

Some variables of the x vector can be also included in the u vector, whereas the need to control for specific individual effects of the corresponding covariates is required. Both vectors contain the constant value 1 so that the linear predictor includes a fixed population intercept and a random intercept . The error terms are assumed to be independent and identically distributed normal variables. Mixed models allow the estimation of individual-specific effects taking into account correlations induced by repeated observations


ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

A C C E P T E D M A N U S C R I P T 8 from individuals. In the present study the set of covariates x consists of (i) particle number concentration and (ii) subjects' position (just considered as a dummy variable), whereas the set of covariates u consists of (i) gender, (ii) age, (iii) BMI, and (iv) particle number concentration. The particle number concentration variable was used also in the random part of the model: the random effects allow to control for subjectspecific factors in the relationship between both (i) HRV and (ii) particle number concentration and subjects'

position. The proposed research is not interested in the effects of such factors, nonetheless, their inclusion implies that the resulting fixed effects are able to capture the relationship among the involved variables by taking into account for the variability due to such factors. The variables heart rate and particle number concentration were log-transformed to mitigate the strong skewness. The covariates u, i.e. the random part of the model, were standardized to achieve convergence, as commonly done in this class of models (Harrell, 2015). The statistical analyses provided the estimates of the fixed population effect ( ) of the exposure to particle number concentration as a function of the three subjects' positions under investigation, such values are summarized in the result section.

In order to analyse the differences amongst distributions, a global Kruskal-Wallis test and a post-hoc pairwise comparison between subsequent groups through the Mann-Whitney test (Sprent and Smeeton, 2016) were performed. We adopted a non-parametric approach since the data did not meet the assumption of Gaussian distribution.


Results and discussion

As described in the methodology section, the study initially involved 50 people; nonetheless, the results here shown refer to 34 individuals (22 men and 12 women). Indeed, even if the volunteers were selected before the campaign on the basis of the certain characteristics, some of them were excluded due to unknown minor cardiovascular issues (of which the volunteers were not aware) recognized during the data post-processing.

Moreover, some other volunteers were excluded because of instrumental technical issues occurring during the tests. Table 2 shows the main descriptive statistics of the 34 subjects considered in the study for age and anthropometric characteristics.


ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT


A C C E P T E D M A N U S C R I P T

9 In Figure 1 the particle number concentrations experienced by the volunteers in the seven microenvironments are reported through "violin plots" (Hintze and Nelson, 1998) 3.60×10 4 part/cm 3 , respectively); similar trends were measured in a recent study by (Pacitto et al., 2018a) where the exposure to UFP concentrations was measured using the same method (a direct exposure assessment approach) in different cities. The p-value of the global Kruskal-Wallis test and the pairwise comparison between subsequent groups carried out through the Mann-Whitney test (Sprent and Smeeton, 2016), revealed that eating and cooking activities resulted the only activities/microenvironments characterized by an exposure level statistically larger than other microenvironments.

In Figure 2 the violin plots of the heart rate values as a function of the seven microenvironments are also reported. The heart rate resulted roughly uniform (about 80 bpm) in six out of seven microenvironments.

Indeed, a lower median HR value (around 60 bpm) was only detected during sleeping activities, likely due to the expected reduced activity of the volunteers. Summarizing, the microenvironments are not useful in recognizing a possible effect of the particle concentrations on HR since it could change under the influence of the physical activity performed, then hiding the real contribution of particle exposure. Therefore, in order to analyze a possible effect of the exposure to ultrafine particles on the heart rate, the three main positions (laying down, sitting, and standing) were investigated. amongst the involved variables. The trends revealed a positive correlation between HR and exposure to ultrafine particles: in particular, a logarithmic trend (linear for log-transformed variables) for the three positions was recognized. It presents a sharper increase for lower particle number concentrations followed by a reduced increase for higher exposures. The correlation resulted statistically significant for all the three positions investigated: a higher increase of HR due to the exposure to ultrafine particles was recognized for vertical positions (standing and sitting) with respect to laying down one. This could be due to the higher increase in HR related to the physical activities typical of such vertical positions (this is the reason why activities with even greater energy expenditure, such as walking, running, high-intensity exercises, were excluded a priori from the analysis). A slightly minor increase was detected for laying down position, this represents a remarkable finding since the horizontal position is the only activity characterized by a basal metabolic rate (and a basic HR level), thus, the possible effect of the exposure to airborne particles is poorly affected by the simultaneous increase in HR related to the physical activity itself.

In order to quantify the dependence of heart rate from the exposure levels, in Table 3 


ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT


A C C E P T E D M A N U S C R I P T

11 words, the two coefficients measure the differential effect of each position with respect the base level, keeping constant the other variables involved in the model. The authors point out that both the response variables HR and the particle number concentration were log-transformed, therefore, the corresponding coefficient (0.02) measures the percentage change in the response HR for a unit percent change in the particle number concentration covariate. Using the estimated regression coefficients, a prediction of the HR increase as a function of the particle concentration levels can be performed through the linear mixed model equation (eq. 2), from which the following equations for the three position are derived:

Once again, the authors point out that the covariates associated with the positions represents dummy variables. Such equations allowed to calculate the ratio between the variation of HR and variation of the particle number concentration (HR/N) for the three positions ( Figure 5a): the HR/N ratio resulted higher for low particle levels whatever the position considered (as also shown in Figure 4). A statistical significant variation of 4.4×10 -4 , 5.4×10 -4 , and 5.7×10 -4 bpm/(part/cm 3 ) was estimated for a short-term exposure to particle concentrations lower than 5.0×10 3 part/cm 3 for laying down, sitting and standing position, respectively. Such ratios suddenly drop to roughly 1×10 -4 bpm/(part/cm 3 ) for a short-term exposure to 1.0×10 4 part/cm 3 , then reaching 0.1-0.2×10 -4 bpm/(part/cm 3 ) for exposures of 1.0×10 5 part/cm 3 . Therefore, the cumulative increases in heart rate, referred to the base level, when exposed to median particle number concentrations (as reported in Figure 1) typical of the activities/microenvironment sleeping (considered as a laying down position), indoor (considered as a sitting position), sedentary working (considered as a sitting position), cooking (considered as a standing position), eating (considered as a sitting position), transport (considered as a sitting position), and outdoor (considered as a sitting position) resulted equal to 1.9, 2.9, 2.8, 5.2, 4.5, 3.6, and 3.3 bpm, respectively, as shown in Figure 5b. The authors point out that the HR trends obtained as a function of the particle number concentration values as well as the corresponding HR/N ratios can be considered useful for typical indoor exposures where particle number concentration increases


ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT


A C C E P T E D M A N U S C R I P T

12 are not abrupt like those typical of outdoor environments due to the intermittent traffic flow (Manigrasso et al., 2013).

Despite our findings a few study limitations should also be noted. Firstly, we focused our attention on UFP and gaseous pollutants are not considered in this study. Nonetheless a recent review (Bhaskaran et al., 2009a) revealed a concerning effect of ambient CO, NO 2 or SO 2 on cardiovascular function, in particular a short and long-term increase in myocardial infarction. Secondly, we used data from ECG recordings to assess the heart rate and other heart rate variability indices such as standard deviation of all beat-to-beat (or normal-to-normal R-R) intervals, root mean square of successive differences in consecutive R-R intervals (RMSSD), and high frequency power (HF) and low frequency power (LF) were not taken into account.

Therefore, further evaluation of the impact of UFP composition on cardiovascular health as well as alternative exposure measures such as particle surface area and size distribution and other cardiovascular parameters could be taken into consideration in future investigations.


Conclusions

In the present paper the effect of the short-term exposure to ultrafine particles on heart rate in a population of healthy individuals was analyzed. To this end, 50 volunteers were selected and involved in the study. Each volunteer was monitored for one week and each of them was asked to (i) install a portable holter for continuous heart rate measurements, (ii) carry a portable particle number concentration monitor to measure their exposure to ultrafine particle concentrations, (iii) wear an activity tracker to record their physical activity, (iv) fill a diary to report the activities performed and the microenvironments resided during the measurement days. The evaluation of the possible correlation between particle concentration data and heart rate data was performed through an ad-hoc statistical analysis: a linear mixed model, able to capture the mean dependence of heart rate on particle concentration taking into account the physical activities of the subjects and keeping under control subject-specific features.

Results of the statistical analysis revealed a positive logarithmic relationship between the heart rate variation and the airborne particle number concentrations: such effect was clearly recognizable for the three


ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

A C C E P T E D M A N U S C R I P T 13 physical activities considered: laying down, sitting and standing position. Activities characterized by a higher intensity were not considered in the study since the activity itself would have hidden the effect of the exposure to airborne particles.

The authors point out that the remarkable finding here shown are worthy of additional investigations: as an example, a further aspect to be considered in future works is the application of linear quantile mixed models (Geraci and Bottai, 2014) to an even larger number of subjects. Linear quantile mixed models will allow to extend the analysis to the whole conditional distribution of heart rate variability, unlike the linear mixed model, used in this study, that focuses only on the mean response. Differences (in signs and/or in strength)

among the effects of the exposure intensity on the conditional quantiles of the heart rate variability could reveal additional interesting findings in the possible effect of the exposure to high levels of airborne particle concentration on human health.  Tables   Table 1. Activities grouped in the seven main microenvironments under investigation. 


A C C E P T E D


Activity/Microenvironment Activities


Figures

Figure 1 -Statistics of the particle number concentration (N) measured in the seven microenvironments represented as


: such representation allows to depict simultaneously the full distribution of the data and the number of the data considered. Indeed, the height of each violin informs about the range of the detected values, while the position of the peak is provided by the width of the violin. The points inside each violin depict the median values. The violins associated to each environment were sorted in in ascending order according to the median values. The lowest concentrations were experienced during the sleeping activity (median value of 5.70×10 3 part/cm 3 ) whereas the largest exposures were received during eating and cooking activities (median values of 2.68×10 4 and

Figure 3
3summarizes heart rate and UFP concentration for the three positions under investigation (laying down, sitting, standing). Data clearly show that the minimum HR value is recorded during laying down position (median value of 60 bpm), as it is mainly affected by sleeping and resting activities, and it increases for sitting and standing positions (median values of 74 and 79 bpm, respectively). The adopted statistical test revealed no significant differences between sitting and standing positions supporting the hypothesis that the HR was poorly affected by changes between such two positions. On the contrary, a statistically significant HR values was recognized amongst vertical (sitting and standing) and horizontal (laying down) postures. A similar trend was recognized for particle number concentrations, with lower values measured for laying down position (median value of 4.86×10 3 part/cm 3 ) and higher (and statistically similar amongst themselves) values for sitting and standing positions (median values of 8.81×10 3 part/cm 3 and 8.50×10 3 part/cm 3 , respectively).As regard the dependence of HR from particle concentration, inFigure 4the fitted mixed response functions are reported for the three positions in terms of back-transformed heart rate and particle number concentration(N) variables. In the figure, individual measurements (grey points), subject-specific prediction (thin dashed lines, i.e. the random component of the model), and fixed component of the model (thicker solid line) are shown. The fixed component is a summary of the subject-specific patterns: it provides the main relationship


the estimated fixed population effect coefficients ( ) for the three positions, along with the corresponding 95% confidence intervals, are reported. The intercept (base level) refers to the laying down position, whereas, the coefficients of the other two positions (sitting and standing) indicates how much higher are the response functions for measurements taken during sitting or standing positions with respect to the laying down position. In other

Table 3 .
3TransportationTrip and use of time not specified, round-trip to work WorkingNon-industrial workplaces, Profitable work, Main and secondary job, Workingconnected activities, Studying, School, Institute or University, Voluntary job and meetings, Voluntary work in an organization Eating Eating and drinking (including home and restaurant) Cooking Cooking Outdoor day Gardening and animal care, Construction and restoration, Sport and outdoor activities, Physical workout, Productive exercise, Sports-connected activities Indoor day Personal care, Other personal care, Studying not specified, Studying in the free time, Activities for home and family not specified, Housework, Clothes care and folding, Purchasing goods and services, Home maintenance, Baby care, Helping adult family members, Helping other family members, Active Activities, Social Activities and entertainment, Social life, Entertainment and culture, Inactivity, Hobbies and computer science, Art and hobbies, Computing, Playing, Media, Reading, Watching TV, DVD or videos, Listening to the radio or recording Indoor evening and night Sleeping Table 2. General characteristics of the 34 subjects investigated in the study.A C C E P T E D M A N U S C R I P T Regression coefficients for the fixed part of the linear mixed model. All the coefficients are statistically significant.Age (years) 
Height (m) 
Weight (kg) 
BMI (kg/m 2 ) 

minimum 
median 
maximum 
minimum 
median 
maximum 
minimum 
median 
maximum 
minimum 
median 
maximum 


Focused Exposures to Airborne Traffic Particles and Heart Rate Variability in the Elderly. S D Adar, D R Gold, B A Coull, J Schwartz, P H Stone, H Suh, Epidemiology. 18Adar, S.D., Gold, D.R., Coull, B.A., Schwartz, J., Stone, P.H., Suh, H., 2007. Focused Exposures to Airborne Traffic Particles and Heart Rate Variability in the Elderly. Epidemiology 18, 95-103.

. X Basagaña, B Jacquemin, A Karanasiou, B Ostro, X Querol, D Agis, E Alessandrini, J Alguacil, B Artiñano, M Catrambone, J D De La Rosa, J Díaz, A Faustini, S Ferrari, F Forastiere, K Katsouyanni, C Linares, C Perrino, A Ranzi, I Ricciardelli, E Samoli, S Zauli-Sajani, J Sunyer, Basagaña, X., Jacquemin, B., Karanasiou, A., Ostro, B., Querol, X., Agis, D., Alessandrini, E., Alguacil, J., Artiñano, B., Catrambone, M., De La Rosa, J.D., Díaz, J., Faustini, A., Ferrari, S., Forastiere, F., Katsouyanni, K., Linares, C., Perrino, C., Ranzi, A., Ricciardelli, I., Samoli, E., Zauli-Sajani, S., Sunyer, J.,

. M Stafoggia, P Angelini, G Berti, L Bisanti, E Cadum, M Chiusolo, M Davoli, F De&apos;donato, Stafoggia, M., Angelini, P., Berti, G., Bisanti, L., Cadum, E., Chiusolo, M., Davoli, M., De'Donato, F.,

Short-term effects of particulate matter constituents on daily hospitalizations and mortality in five. M Demaria, M Gandini, M Grosa, P Pandolfi, R Pelosini, A Pietrodangelo, L Pizzi, V Poluzzi, G Priod, G Randi, M Rowinski, C Scarinzi, E Stivanello, K Dimakopoulou, K Elefteriadis, A Kelessis, T Maggos, N Michalopoulos, S Pateraki, M Petrakakis, S Rodopoulou, V Sypsa, J Barrera-Gómez, J De La Rosa, J Diaz, R Fernandez, N Perez, J Pey, P Salvador, A M Sanchez, A Tobias, M Bidondo, C Declercq, A Le Tertre, P Lozano, S Medina, L Pascal, M Pascal, Environment International. 75South-European cities: Results from the MED-PARTICLES projectDemaria, M., Gandini, M., Grosa, M., Pandolfi, P., Pelosini, R., Pietrodangelo, A., Pizzi, L., Poluzzi, V., Priod, G., Randi, G., Rowinski, M., Scarinzi, C., Stivanello, E., Dimakopoulou, K., Elefteriadis, K., Kelessis, A., Maggos, T., Michalopoulos, N., Pateraki, S., Petrakakis, M., Rodopoulou, S., Sypsa, V., Barrera-Gómez, J., De La Rosa, J., Diaz, J., Fernandez, R., Perez, N., Pey, J., Salvador, P., Sanchez, A.M., Tobias, A., Bidondo, M., Declercq, C., Le Tertre, A., Lozano, P., Medina, S., Pascal, L., Pascal, M., 2015. Short-term effects of particulate matter constituents on daily hospitalizations and mortality in five South-European cities: Results from the MED-PARTICLES project. Environment International 75, 151-158.

Fitting linear mixed-effects models using lme4. D Bates, M Mächler, B Bolker, S Walker, arXiv:1406.5823arXiv preprintBates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B., Walker, S., 2014. Fitting linear mixed-effects models using lme4. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.5823.

Effects of air pollution on the incidence of myocardial infarction. K Bhaskaran, S Hajat, A Haines, E Herrett, P Wilkinson, L Smeeth, Heart. 951746Bhaskaran, K., Hajat, S., Haines, A., Herrett, E., Wilkinson, P., Smeeth, L., 2009a. Effects of air pollution on the incidence of myocardial infarction. Heart 95, 1746.

The effects of air pollution on the incidence of myocardial infarction -A systematic review. K Bhaskaran, S Hajat, A Haines, E Herrett, P Wilkinson, L Smeeth, HeartBhaskaran, K., Hajat, S., Haines, A., Herrett, E., Wilkinson, P., Smeeth, L., 2009b. The effects of air pollution on the incidence of myocardial infarction -A systematic review. Heart.

Cardiovascular effects of air pollution. Robert D Brook, Clinical Science. 115175Brook, Robert D., 2008. Cardiovascular effects of air pollution. Clinical Science 115, 175.

Particulate matter air pollution and cardiovascular disease: an update to the scientific statement from the. R D Brook, S Rajagopalan, C A Pope, J R Brook, A Bhatnagar, A V Diez-Roux, F Holguin, Y Hong, R V Luepker, M A Mittleman, American Heart Association. Circulation. 121Brook, R.D., Rajagopalan, S., Pope, C.A., Brook, J.R., Bhatnagar, A., Diez-Roux, A.V., Holguin, F., Hong, Y., Luepker, R.V., Mittleman, M.A., 2010a. Particulate matter air pollution and cardiovascular disease: an update to the scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation 121, 2331-2378.

Particulate Matter Air Pollution and Cardiovascular Disease. Y Luepker, R V Mittleman, M A Peters, A Siscovick, D Smith, S C Whitsel, L Kaufman, J D , Circulation. 1212331Y., Luepker, R.V., Mittleman, M.A., Peters, A., Siscovick, D., Smith, S.C., Whitsel, L., Kaufman, J.D., 2010b. Particulate Matter Air Pollution and Cardiovascular Disease. Circulation 121, 2331.

Influential parameters on particle exposure of pedestrians in urban microenvironments. G Buonanno, F C Fuoco, L Stabile, Atmospheric Environment. 45Buonanno, G., Fuoco, F.C., Stabile, L., 2011a. Influential parameters on particle exposure of pedestrians in urban microenvironments. Atmospheric Environment 45, 1434-1443.

Tracheobronchial and alveolar dose of submicrometer particles for different population age groups in Italy. G Buonanno, G Giovinco, L Morawska, L Stabile, Atmospheric Environment. 45Buonanno, G., Giovinco, G., Morawska, L., Stabile, L., 2011b. Tracheobronchial and alveolar dose of submicrometer particles for different population age groups in Italy. Atmospheric Environment 45, 6216- 6224.

Corrigendum to " Tracheobronchial and alveolar dose of submicrometer particles for different population age groups in Italy. G Buonanno, G Giovinco, L Morawska, L Stabile, Atmos. Environ. 45Buonanno, G., Giovinco, G., Morawska, L., Stabile, L., 2012. Corrigendum to " Tracheobronchial and alveolar dose of submicrometer particles for different population age groups in Italy" [Atmos. Environ. 45

Health effects of daily airborne particle dose in children: Direct association between personal dose and respiratory health effects. G Buonanno, G B Marks, L Morawska, Environmental Pollution. 180Buonanno, G., Marks, G.B., Morawska, L., 2013. Health effects of daily airborne particle dose in children: Direct association between personal dose and respiratory health effects. Environmental Pollution 180, 246- 250.

Personal exposure to ultrafine particles: The influence of time-activity patterns. G Buonanno, L Stabile, L Morawska, Science of The Total Environment. 468Buonanno, G., Stabile, L., Morawska, L., 2014. Personal exposure to ultrafine particles: The influence of time-activity patterns. Science of The Total Environment 468-469, 903-907.

A structured review of panel studies used to investigate associations between ambient air pollution and heart rate variability. S Buteau, M S Goldberg, Environmental Research. 148Buteau, S., Goldberg, M.S., 2016. A structured review of panel studies used to investigate associations between ambient air pollution and heart rate variability. Environmental Research 148, 207-247.

. L Campagnolo, M Massimiani, L Vecchione, D Piccirilli, N Toschi, A Magrini, E Bonanno, Campagnolo, L., Massimiani, M., Vecchione, L., Piccirilli, D., Toschi, N., Magrini, A., Bonanno, E.,

Silver nanoparticles inhaled during pregnancy reach and affect the placenta and the foetus. M Scimeca, L Castagnozzi, G Buonanno, L Stabile, F Cubadda, F Aureli, P H B Fokkens, W G Kreyling, F R Cassee, A Pietroiusti, Nanotoxicology. 11Scimeca, M., Castagnozzi, L., Buonanno, G., Stabile, L., Cubadda, F., Aureli, F., Fokkens, P.H.B., Kreyling, W.G., Cassee, F.R., Pietroiusti, A., 2017. Silver nanoparticles inhaled during pregnancy reach and affect the placenta and the foetus. Nanotoxicology 11, 687-698.

Personal exposure to PM2.5 air pollution and heart rate variability in subjects with positive or negative head-up tilt test. Environmental Research. 1082008. Personal exposure to PM2.5 air pollution and heart rate variability in subjects with positive or negative head-up tilt test. Environmental Research 108, 1-6.

Personal Exposure to Submicrometer Particles and Heart Rate Variability in Human Subjects. C.-C Chan, K.-J Chuang, G.-M Shiao, L.-Y Lin, Environmental Health Perspectives. 112Chan, C.-C., Chuang, K.-J., Shiao, G.-M., Lin, L.-Y., 2004. Personal Exposure to Submicrometer Particles and Heart Rate Variability in Human Subjects. Environmental Health Perspectives 112, 1063-1067.

A systematic review of the relation between long-term exposure to ambient air pollution and chronic diseases. H Chen, M S Goldberg, P J Viileneuve, Reviews on Environmental Health. 23Chen, H., Goldberg, M.S., Viileneuve, P.J., 2008. A systematic review of the relation between long-term exposure to ambient air pollution and chronic diseases. Reviews on Environmental Health 23, 243-297.

The Effect of Urban Air Pollution on Inflammation, Oxidative Stress, Coagulation, and Autonomic Dysfunction in Young Adults. K.-J Chuang, C.-C Chan, T.-C Su, C.-T Lee, C.-S Tang, American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine. 176Chuang, K.-J., Chan, C.-C., Su, T.-C., Lee, C.-T., Tang, C.-S., 2007. The Effect of Urban Air Pollution on Inflammation, Oxidative Stress, Coagulation, and Autonomic Dysfunction in Young Adults. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 176, 370-376.

Thrombogenicity and cardiovascular effects of ambient air pollution. M Franchini, P M Mannucci, Blood. 1182405Franchini, M., Mannucci, P.M., 2011. Thrombogenicity and cardiovascular effects of ambient air pollution. Blood 118, 2405.

Linear quantile mixed models. M Geraci, M Bottai, Statistics and computing. 24Geraci, M., Bottai, M., 2014. Linear quantile mixed models. Statistics and computing 24, 461-479.

Ambient Pollution and Heart Rate Variability. D R Gold, A Litonjua, J Schwartz, E Lovett, A Larson, B Nearing, G Allen, M Verrier, R Cherry, R Verrier, Circulation. 1011267Gold, D.R., Litonjua, A., Schwartz, J., Lovett, E., Larson, A., Nearing, B., Allen, G., Verrier, M., Cherry, R., Verrier, R., 2000. Ambient Pollution and Heart Rate Variability. Circulation 101, 1267.

Impact of personally measured pollutants on cardiac function. R Hampel, R Rückerl, T Yli-Tuomi, S Breitner, T Lanki, U Kraus, J Cyrys, P Belcredi, I Brüske, T M Laitinen, K Timonen, H E Wichmann, A Peters, A Schneider, International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health. 217Hampel, R., Rückerl, R., Yli-Tuomi, T., Breitner, S., Lanki, T., Kraus, U., Cyrys, J., Belcredi, P., Brüske, I., Laitinen, T.M., Timonen, K., Wichmann, H.E., Peters, A., Schneider, A., 2014. Impact of personally measured pollutants on cardiac function. International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 217, 460-464.

Multivariable modeling strategies, Regression modeling strategies. F E Harrell, SpringerHarrell, F.E., 2015. Multivariable modeling strategies, Regression modeling strategies. Springer, pp. 63-102.

Violin plots: a box plot-density trace synergism. J L Hintze, R D Nelson, The American Statistician. 52Hintze, J.L., Nelson, R.D., 1998. Violin plots: a box plot-density trace synergism. The American Statistician 52, 181-184.

A controlled trial of acute effects of human exposure to traffic particles on pulmonary oxidative stress and heart rate variability. L Zhang, J Zhang, J Gong, M Veleeparambil, A J Gow, Particle and Fibre Toxicology. 11Zhang, L., Zhang, J., Gong, J., Veleeparambil, M., Gow, A.J., 2014. A controlled trial of acute effects of human exposure to traffic particles on pulmonary oxidative stress and heart rate variability. Particle and Fibre Toxicology 11.

Air Pollution Exposure and Cardiovascular Disease. B.-J Lee, B Kim, K Lee, Toxicological Research. 30Lee, B.-J., Kim, B., Lee, K., 2014. Air Pollution Exposure and Cardiovascular Disease. Toxicological Research 30, 71-75.

Influence of measurement frequency on the evaluation of short-term dose of sub-micrometric particles during indoor and outdoor generation events. M Manigrasso, L Stabile, P Avino, G Buonanno, Atmospheric Environment. 67Manigrasso, M., Stabile, L., Avino, P., Buonanno, G., 2013. Influence of measurement frequency on the evaluation of short-term dose of sub-micrometric particles during indoor and outdoor generation events. Atmospheric Environment 67, 130-142.

. N L Mills, K Donaldson, P W Hadoke, N A Boon, W Macnee, F R Cassee, T Sandström, Mills, N.L., Donaldson, K., Hadoke, P.W., Boon, N.A., MacNee, W., Cassee, F.R., Sandström, T.,

Adverse cardiovascular effects of air pollution. A Blomberg, D E Newby, Nature Clinical Practice Cardiovascular Medicine. 636Blomberg, A., Newby, D.E., 2008. Adverse cardiovascular effects of air pollution. Nature Clinical Practice Cardiovascular Medicine 6, 36.

Main air pollutants and myocardial infarction: a systematic review and meta-analysis. H Mustafic, P Jabre, C Caussin, M H Murad, S Escolano, M Tafflet, M C Perier, E Marijon, D Vernerey, J P Empana, X Jouven, Jama. 307Mustafic, H., Jabre, P., Caussin, C., Murad, M.H., Escolano, S., Tafflet, M., Perier, M.C., Marijon, E., Vernerey, D., Empana, J.P., Jouven, X., 2012. Main air pollutants and myocardial infarction: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Jama 307, 713-721.

The influence of lifestyle on airborne particle surface area doses received by different Western populations. A Pacitto, L Stabile, T Moreno, P Kumar, A Wierzbicka, L Morawska, G Buonanno, Pacitto, A., Stabile, L., Moreno, T., Kumar, P., Wierzbicka, A., Morawska, L., Buonanno, G., 2018a. The influence of lifestyle on airborne particle surface area doses received by different Western populations.

Are Ambient Ultrafine, Accumulation Mode, and Fine Particles Associated with Adverse Cardiac Responses in Patients Undergoing Cardiac Rehabilitation?. D Q Rich, W Zareba, W Beckett, P K Hopke, D Oakes, M W Frampton, J Bisognano, D Chalupa, J Bausch, K O&apos;shea, Y Wang, M J Utell, Environmental Health Perspectives. 120Rich, D.Q., Zareba, W., Beckett, W., Hopke, P.K., Oakes, D., Frampton, M.W., Bisognano, J., Chalupa, D., Bausch, J., O'Shea, K., Wang, Y., Utell, M.J., 2012. Are Ambient Ultrafine, Accumulation Mode, and Fine Particles Associated with Adverse Cardiac Responses in Patients Undergoing Cardiac Rehabilitation? Environmental Health Perspectives 120, 1162-1169.

. J M Samet, A Rappold, D Graff, W E Cascio, J H Berntsen, Y.-C T Huang, M Herbst, M Bassett, Samet, J.M., Rappold, A., Graff, D., Cascio, W.E., Berntsen, J.H., Huang, Y.-C.T., Herbst, M., Bassett, M.,

Concentrated ambient ultrafine particle exposure induces cardiac changes in young healthy volunteers. T Montilla, M J Hazucha, P A Bromberg, R B Devlin, American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine. 1791034Montilla, T., Hazucha, M.J., Bromberg, P.A., Devlin, R.B., 2009. Concentrated ambient ultrafine particle exposure induces cardiac changes in young healthy volunteers. American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine 179, 1034.

Trafficrelated air pollution exposures and changes in heart rate variability in Mexico City: A panel study. K N Shields, J M Cavallari, M J O Hunt, M Lazo, M Molina, L Molina, F Holguin, Environmental Health. 127Shields, K.N., Cavallari, J.M., Hunt, M.J.O., Lazo, M., Molina, M., Molina, L., Holguin, F., 2013. Traffic- related air pollution exposures and changes in heart rate variability in Mexico City: A panel study. Environmental Health 12, 7.

Air Pollution and Cardiovascular Injury. B Z Simkhovich, M T Kleinman, R A Kloner, Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 52719Simkhovich, B.Z., Kleinman, M.T., Kloner, R.A., 2008. Air Pollution and Cardiovascular Injury. Journal of the American College of Cardiology 52, 719.

Applied nonparametric statistical methods. P Sprent, N C Smeeton, CRC PressSprent, P., Smeeton, N.C., 2016. Applied nonparametric statistical methods. CRC Press.

Smokers' lung cancer risk related to the cigarettegenerated mainstream particles. L Stabile, G Buonanno, G Ficco, M Scungio, Journal of Aerosol Science. 107Stabile, L., Buonanno, G., Ficco, G., Scungio, M., 2017. Smokers' lung cancer risk related to the cigarette- generated mainstream particles. Journal of Aerosol Science 107, 41-54.

. A C C E P T E D M A N U S C R I P T, A C C E P T E D M A N U S C R I P T 19

Ultrafine particle generation through atomization technique: the influence of the solution. L Stabile, C V Trassierra, G Dell&apos;agli, G Buonanno, Aerosol Air Qual. Res. 13Stabile, L., Trassierra, C.V., Dell'Agli, G., Buonanno, G., 2013. Ultrafine particle generation through atomization technique: the influence of the solution. Aerosol Air Qual. Res 13, 1667-1677.

Size-fractioned ultrafine particles and black carbon associated with autonomic dysfunction in subjects with diabetes or impaired glucose tolerance in. Y Sun, X Song, Y Han, Y Ji, S Gao, Y Shang, S.-E Lu, T Zhu, W Huang, Particle and Fibre Toxicology. 12Sun, Y., Song, X., Han, Y., Ji, Y., Gao, S., Shang, Y., Lu, S.-E., Zhu, T., Huang, W., 2015. Size-fractioned ultrafine particles and black carbon associated with autonomic dysfunction in subjects with diabetes or impaired glucose tolerance in Shanghai, China. Particle and Fibre Toxicology 12, 8.

R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing. R C Team, Vienna, AustriaTeam, R.C., 2017. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. 2016.

Long-term traffic air and noise pollution in relation to mortality and hospital readmission among myocardial infarction survivors. C Tonne, J I Halonen, S D Beevers, D Dajnak, J Gulliver, F J Kelly, P Wilkinson, H R Anderson, International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health. 219Tonne, C., Halonen, J.I., Beevers, S.D., Dajnak, D., Gulliver, J., Kelly, F.J., Wilkinson, P., Anderson, H.R., 2016. Long-term traffic air and noise pollution in relation to mortality and hospital readmission among myocardial infarction survivors. International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 219, 72-78.

Linear mixed models for longitudinal data, Linear mixed models in practice. G Verbeke, SpringerVerbeke, G., 1997. Linear mixed models for longitudinal data, Linear mixed models in practice. Springer, pp. 63-153.

. R Vora, W Zareba, M J Utell, A P Pietropaoli, D Chalupa, E L Little, D Oakes, J Bausch, Vora, R., Zareba, W., Utell, M.J., Pietropaoli, A.P., Chalupa, D., Little, E.L., Oakes, D., Bausch, J.,

Inhalation of ultrafine carbon particles alters heart rate and heart rate variability in people with type 2 diabetes. Particle and Fibre Technology 11. J Wiltshire, M W Frampton, Wiltshire, J., Frampton, M.W., 2014. Inhalation of ultrafine carbon particles alters heart rate and heart rate variability in people with type 2 diabetes. Particle and Fibre Technology 11.

Selected physiological effects of ultrafine particles in acute cardiovascular morbidity. S Weichenthal, Environmental Research. 115Weichenthal, S., 2012. Selected physiological effects of ultrafine particles in acute cardiovascular morbidity. Environmental Research 115, 26-36.

Traffic-related air pollution and acute changes in heart rate variability and respiratory function in urban cyclists. S Weichenthal, R Kulka, A Dubeau, C Martin, D Wang, R Dales, Clinical report). 1191373ResearchWeichenthal, S., Kulka, R., Dubeau, A., Martin, C., Wang, D., Dales, R., 2011. Traffic-related air pollution and acute changes in heart rate variability and respiratory function in urban cyclists.(Research)(Clinical report). Environmental Health Perspectives 119, 1373.

ECG Parameters and Exposure to Carbon Ultrafine Particles in Young Healthy Subjects. W Zareba, J P Couderc, G Oberdörster, D Chalupa, C Cox, L.-S Huang, A Peters, M J Utell, M W Frampton, Inhalation Toxicology. 21Zareba, W., Couderc, J.P., Oberdörster, G., Chalupa, D., Cox, C., Huang, L.-S., Peters, A., Utell, M.J., Frampton, M.W., 2009. ECG Parameters and Exposure to Carbon Ultrafine Particles in Young Healthy Subjects. Inhalation Toxicology 21, 223-233.