Heuristics of constructing the architecture of an interpreted machine learning model


Petr Pylov pylovpa@kuzstu.ru 
T.F. Gorbachev
Kuzbass State Technical University
28 Vesennya st650000Kemerovo, Russian Federation

Anna Dyagileva 
T.F. Gorbachev
Kuzbass State Technical University
28 Vesennya st650000Kemerovo, Russian Federation

Andrey Protodyakonov 
T.F. Gorbachev
Kuzbass State Technical University
28 Vesennya st650000Kemerovo, Russian Federation

Roman Maitak 
T.F. Gorbachev
Kuzbass State Technical University
28 Vesennya st650000Kemerovo, Russian Federation

Heuristics of constructing the architecture of an interpreted machine learning model
3479613FC186E4224DD9C79ECED5424D10.1051/e3sconf/202453103008Artificial IntelligenceMachine LearningInterpreted Models
Interpretability is an important vector of development of modern applied artificial intelligence.It is also necessary to understand how and why machine learning models predict the end result.However, the implementation of such models is a complex process due to the need to meet the requirements of interpretability while maintaining high quality approximation.The article presents an overview of heuristics for constructing an interpreted machine learning model, which allows you to determine the most important features when predicting the target class of data.As an example, the subject area of mining was considered, and as a problem -the prediction of seismic hazard in the conditions of mining enterprises.However, the transformed concept of the interpreted machine learning model allows solving problems in many other subject areas, where positive numerical values are defined as input data, and the number of entries in the set does not exceed 50.Such restrictions on the set of input data are dictated by a feature of the real architecture of the interpreted model of applied artificial intelligence.In conclusion, the authors of the article consider methods that will allow to overcome such a "bottleneck" effect.

Introduction

The purpose of the research of this article is to implement the most optimal architecture of the interpreted machine learning model.As an applied field, the problem of predicting seismic hazard in the conditions of a mining complex was considered.Seismic hazards are understood as a disturbance of the mountain range, which will inevitably lead to the occurrence of seismic tremors that can destroy underground mining equipment and endanger the life and health of mine employees.Preventive determination of seismic hazard belongs to a number of creative tasks, therefore it is impossible to solve this problem by direct programming methods [1].Researchers from different countries [2] have used artificial intelligence algorithms to solve such problems, but machine learning models of scientists operate on the principle of a "black box" and do not imply interpretation of the predicted result.

The authors of this article set a goal to develop such an architecture of a machine learning model that would allow a domain expert to understand the "reasoning logic" of an artificial intelligence algorithm, which would greatly increase the credibility of the model and level out the severity of its errors, since erroneous logic can be determined when the expert understands the "reasoning" models.

The mathematical feature of the set of seismic data under study makes it possible to apply the heuristics of the developed interpreted machine learning model for a wide range of other subject areas.


Materials and Methods

Three sites of the Volkovsky coal seam were selected as the data acquisition site for the study: northern, central and south-western districts.Geographically, the formation is located within the coal basin of the Kemerovo region.

For preventive determination of the state of seismic hazard, seismologists use geophones that register disturbances within the mountain range in various frequency ranges of released energies: from 10 2 to 10 10 J, in increments of one order of magnitude (that is, the first range registers the number of disturbances in the range from 10 2 to 10 3 J, the second from 10 3 to 10 4 J and so on).Based on these data, a summary table of information about the current state of the rock mass of the soil is formed, the target variable in this data set is the criteria of a dangerous seismic state, which is expressed in binary form: either there is a dangerous seismic state (1), or there is not a dangerous seismic state (0).Depending on the geographical location (territorial area of the formation), it is necessary to take into account the different features of the subsurface, which affect the final result.

From the point of view of machine learning models, we are faced with the problem of binary classification, which can be successfully solved by neural networks in the black box format.As a basic solution, the architecture of a sequential neural network model was implemented, which is shown in Fig. 1.The accuracy of the implemented basic solution (Figure 1) was 99.94% according to the accuracy metric (Figure 3).However, it is worth noting that such a solution will not allow experts in the subject area (in this case, seismologists) to understand which features of the input measurements the model used to carry out its final forecast.

To achieve interpretability, the architecture of the basic neural network model was evaluated.Since the thinning of the neural network model (layers of the "dropout" type) did not introduce a significant drop in the accuracy of the approximation, but only, on the contrary, increased its credibility, it would be advisable [3] to present the elements of the basic neural network in the format of a superposition of non-linear primitive functions.To do this, from the second ordinal layer "dense" (figure 1), the output parameters of the network were transmitted to the input of the model of radial basis functions.Since the dimension of the data set did not exceed 20 parameters, the radial basis belonged to the class of small dimension [4].The output of the radial basis function model was transmitted to the input of the transformer model, which represented in natural language the relationship and importance of the neural network parameters in their relation to the target variable.


Results

Based on the upgraded structure of the machine learning model, the following results were obtained:

1.The accuracy of predicting the target forecast by the interpreted machine learning model has decreased -it has decreased from 99.94% to 73.95% (Figures 2 and 3).


Discussion

Examining the results obtained, it should be noted that the developed model correctly highlighted the importance of individual features for each territorial area.For the northern region, the signs registering the number of pulses in the energy range from 10 4 to 10 5 J turned out to be more significant, and for the southwestern region of the Volkovsky formation, the reference signs were ranging from 10 6 to 10 7 J and from 10 8 to 10 9 J.The authors of this article, while relying on the professional opinion of seismologists of territorial mining complexes, find in these differences a manifestation of soil features that were recorded by the interpreted machine learning model.It is worth noting that the interpreted machine learning model, built according to this heuristic, is not devoid of the "bottleneck" effect.It manifests itself in the fact that for its intermediate link -the method of radial basis functions, there is a mathematical system of restrictions on the dimension of input data.In other words, the developed architecture can be utilized in any applied field of knowledge, which will be based on a set of positive numerical data of a small dimension of variables (up to 50) [6].With an increase in the number of variables, there will be instability in the interpretation of the results of the machine learning model, manifested in a decrease in the credibility of forecasting and the accuracy of determining the values of their data set that are most significant for the forecast.

As a starting point for future research, it is necessary to replace the section of radial basis functions with a machine learning algorithm that will be able to process numerical data, while maintaining the possibility for interpretation of the results by experts of the applied field.It should also be remembered that the interpreted model should be universal, that is, suitable for solving problems in several subject areas in which a similar model of data is observed.


Conclusions

The implementation of the interpreted machine learning model should have a structure that includes a simple logical explanation of the "reasoning" of the model, accessible to an expert in the applied field of knowledge.The authors of the article have concluded that the quality of a good interpreted model is its usability in completely different areas of human knowledge, in which there is a uniformity of mathematical representation of the initial data set.Finding a common relationship in such data and the transparent structure of the machine learning model will allow us to characterize it as a "universal" model for solving applied problems.

As a future direction of the research, authors of this article considered for themselves the sequential replacement of the model of radial basis functions (which is part of the resulting interpreted model) with the model of superposition of nonlinear functions, and then with the model of generalized linear functions.This adaptation will avoid the "bottleneck" effect and expand the horizon of application of the developed model to any numerical data sets (at the moment, the data can only be positive and have a small dimension of variables).

Fig. 1 .
1
Fig. 1.The architecture of the developed basic solution is based on a sequential neural network operating on the "black box" principle.


Fig. 2 .Fig. 3 .
23
Fig. 2. Training a neural network model that is part of an interpreted machine learning model.The figure clearly shows that the accuracy at the last epoch of training reaches a value of 73.95%.




Conferences https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/202453103008531 UESF-2024 3008


Time series analysis. Jd Hamilton, 2020Princeton University Press

Coal production in China: past, present, and future projections. Bai, Ding, Lian, Ma, Yang, . . Sun, Chang, Int Geol Rev. 602018

Robust regression technique in LSMC proxy modeling. Nikolić, C Jonen, Zhu, Der Aktuar. 12017

Machine learning in least-squares Monte Carlo proxy modeling of life insurance companies. As Krah, Nikolić, Korn, 10.3390/risks8010021Risks. 812020

Zubov, Mccarthy, Ma, Calisto, Pagliarino, C Azeglio, Rackauckas, arXiv:2107.09443NeuralPDE: Automating physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) with error approximations. 2021arXiv preprint

Multilayer feedforward networks are universal approximators. Hornik, H Stinchcombe, White, 10.1051/e3sconf/202453103008Neural Netw. 2519890 (2024) E3S Web of Conferences