Clinical Ophthalmology Dovepress Accelerated corneal collagen cross-linking should be modified Dear editor


George D Kymionis 
Faculty of Medicine
Vardinoyiannion eye Institute of Crete
University of Crete
Heraklion, CreteGreece

Bascom Palmer eye Institute
Vardinoyiannion eye Institute of Crete (VeIC)
University of Miami
Miller School of Medicine
MiamiFLUSA

Faculty of Medicine
University of Crete
71003Heraklion, CreteGreece

Konstantinos I Tsoulnaras 
Faculty of Medicine
Vardinoyiannion eye Institute of Crete
University of Crete
Heraklion, CreteGreece

Clinical Ophthalmology Dovepress Accelerated corneal collagen cross-linking should be modified Dear editor
10.2147/OPTH.S72995submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Dovepress 2333 L e t t e r open access to scientific and medical research


Dear editor

We have read with interest the recently published comparative study regarding the accelerated versus conventional corneal collagen cross-linking (CXL) in the treatment of mild keratoconus. We would like to underline the importance of the CXL treatment time reduction in this time consuming operation. 1 Accelerated CXL became popular due to patient and doctor comfort in comparison to the previously widespread use of Dresden protocol which is successful in terms of safety and efficacy. Based on the Bunsen-Roscoe law of reciprocity many modifications to the time and irradiation settings have been proposed while the total energy dose delivered to the cornea should be maintained at 5.4 J/cm 2 . 2 We already proved, by measuring (with the use of anterior segment optical coherence tomography) the demarcation line depth at 1 month postoperatively after CXL, that the treatment depth was significantly different (significantly shallower in accelerated protocol) between the 10 minute accelerated protocol with ultraviolet-A (UV-A) irradiation intensity of 9 mW/cm 2 and the 30 minute standard Dresden protocol with UV-A of 3 mW/cm 2 . 2 Our results suggested that Bunsen-Roscoe law of reciprocity may not directly apply to CXL in living cornea tissue, thus, an increased total energy dose should probably be applied to the keratoconic cornea in order to achieve a treatment effect comparable to the already proven effective standard Dresden CXL protocol.

Consequently, we have proceeded with relevant modifications for the UV-A time settings of the currently proposed accelerated CXL protocol (10 minutes) by increasing the UV-A irradiation time to 14 minutes (40% increase) and we achieved a treatment effect comparable with the Dresden protocol (as indicated by the demarcation line depth). 3 In the recently published article by Sherif, it is presumed that the accelerated group of patients received CXL treatment according to Bunsen-Roscoe law which should have been 3 minutes of UV-A with irradiation intensity of 30 mW/cm 2 corresponding to 5.4 J/cm 2 total energy dose delivered to the cornea. 1 Interestingly, Sherif mentioned that the accelerated group received UV-A treatment with 30 mW/cm 2 for 4 minutes and 20 seconds; thus the accelerated group received about 40% more UV-A irradiation time, which is comparable to our time setting modifications (from 10 to 14 minutes). Moreover it should be clarified whether the author modified the time settings manually or if these modifications were made according to the UV-A device manufacturer's instructions (Avedro, Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). In addition we would like to enquire whether the author performed measurements (eg, endothelial cell density) concerning the safety of the time and irradiation intensity settings used in this study. 


2334


Kymionis and tsoulnaras

As we previously published, an indirect and non-contact method to measure the effectiveness of CXL treatment is the demarcation line depth provided with anterior segment optical coherence tomography; our results were the same with the reliable but more invasive (due to contact with the treated cornea) confocal microscopy. 5 Thus, measurement of the demarcation line depth at 1 month postoperatively could provide useful information in suggesting modifications to any of the CXL treatment settings. 6 It should be of great interest whether the author could provide such measurement results concerning the studied groups of this article. Moreover, we should bring to the attention that in cases of mild keratoconus it should probably need a longer follow-up period to establish reliable results concerning the effectiveness of treatment in arresting keratoconus progression.

In conclusion we believe that accelerated CXL treatment settings in agreement to Bunsen-Roscoe law of reciprocity should be revised thoroughly and new modifications have to be carefully made regarding time and irradiation intensity adjustments keeping the safety aspect of CXL treatment as the first priority.


Dear editor


I read the valuable comments of Dr Kymionis and Dr Tsoulnaras

Regarding the question relating to the duration of the accelerated cross-linking (CXL), duration was set according to the manufacturer (Avedro, Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) recommendations. The author agrees that Bunsen-Roscoe law of reciprocity may not directly apply for CXL in living cornea tissue as proved by Dr Kymionis et al. 1 Regarding the question whether the author performed endothelial cell density (ECD): ECD was not performed in the study group but there are several recent publications that evaluated the ECD after accelerated corneal collagen cross-linking. [2][3][4] The author is currently conducting a study evaluating different ultra violet-A settings where ECD is among the evaluation criteria. The results will be published in the coming months.

The author agrees with Dr Kymionis and Dr Tsoulnaras that modifications in ultra violet-A settings have to be carefully made regarding time and irradiation intensity keeping the safety aspect of CXL treatment as the first priority.


Disclosure

The author reports no conflicts of interest in the communication.


submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com4 

Correspondence: George D Kymionis 
Vardinoyiannion eye Institute of Crete 
(VeIC), University of Crete, Faculty 
of Medicine, 71003 Heraklion, 
Crete, Greece 
tel +30 28 1037 1800 
Fax +30 28 1039 4653 
email kymionis@med.uoc.gr 

This article was published in the following Dove Press journal: 
Clinical Ophthalmology 
21 November 2014 
Number of times this article has been viewed 

Clinical Ophthalmology 2014:8 

Dovepress 

Dovepress 


DisclosureThe authors report no conflicts of interest in this communication.
Accelerated versus conventional corneal collagen crosslinking in the treatment of mild keratoconus: a comparative study. A M Sherif, Clin Ophthalmol. 8Sherif AM. Accelerated versus conventional corneal collagen cross- linking in the treatment of mild keratoconus: a comparative study. Clin Ophthalmol. 2014;8:1435-1440.

Corneal stroma demarcation line after standard and high-intensity collagen crosslinking determined with anterior segment optical coherence tomography. G D Kymionis, K I Tsoulnaras, M A Grentzelos, J Cataract Refract Surg. 405Kymionis GD, Tsoulnaras KI, Grentzelos MA, et al. Corneal stroma demarcation line after standard and high-intensity collagen crosslink- ing determined with anterior segment optical coherence tomography. J Cataract Refract Surg. 2014;40(5):736-740.

Evaluation of Corneal Stromal Demarcation Line Depth Following Standard and a Modified-Accelerated Collagen Cross-linking Protocol. G D Kymionis, K I Tsoulnaras, M A Grentzelos, Am J Ophthalmol. 1584e1Kymionis GD, Tsoulnaras KI, Grentzelos MA, et al. Evaluation of Corneal Stromal Demarcation Line Depth Following Standard and a Modified-Accelerated Collagen Cross-linking Protocol. Am J Ophthalmol. 2014;158(4):671-675.e1.

Safety of highintensity corneal collagen crosslinking. G D Kymionis, M A Grentzelos, V P Kankariya, J Cataract Refract Surg. 408Kymionis GD, Grentzelos MA, Kankariya VP, et al. Safety of high- intensity corneal collagen crosslinking. J Cataract Refract Surg. 2014; 40(8):1337-1340.

Correlation of the corneal collagen cross-linking demarcation line using confocal microscopy and anterior segment optical coherence tomography in keratoconic patients. G D Kymionis, M A Grentzelos, A D Plaka, Am J Ophthalmol. 1571e1Kymionis GD, Grentzelos MA, Plaka AD, et al. Correlation of the corneal collagen cross-linking demarcation line using confocal microscopy and anterior segment optical coherence tomography in keratoconic patients. Am J Ophthalmol. 2014;157(1):110-115.e1.

Evaluation of the corneal collagen cross-linking demarcation line profile using anterior segment optical coherence tomography. G D Kymionis, M A Grentzelos, A D Plaka, Cornea. 327Kymionis GD, Grentzelos MA, Plaka AD, et al. Evaluation of the corneal collagen cross-linking demarcation line profile using anterior segment optical coherence tomography. Cornea. 2013;32(7):907-910.

Corneal stroma demarcation line after standard and high-intensity collagen crosslinking determined with anterior segment optical coherence tomography. G D Kymionis, K I Tsoulnaras, M A Grentzelos, J Cataract Refract Surg. 405Kymionis GD, Tsoulnaras KI, Grentzelos MA, et al. Corneal stroma demarcation line after standard and high-intensity collagen crosslinking determined with anterior segment optical coherence tomography. J Cataract Refract Surg. 2014;40(5):736-740.

Transient corneal endothelial changes following accelerated collagen cross-linking for the treatment of progressive keratoconus. A K Cingü, E Sogutlu-Sari, Y Cınar, Cutan Ocul Toxicol. 332Cingü AK, Sogutlu-Sari E, Cınar Y, et al. Transient corneal endothelial changes following accelerated collagen cross-linking for the treatment of progressive keratoconus. Cutan Ocul Toxicol. 2014;33(2):127-131.

Pulsed vs continuous light accelerated corneal collagen crosslinking: in vivo qualitative investigation by confocal microscopy and corneal OCT. C Mazzotta, C Traversi, S Caragiuli, M Rechichi, Eye (Lond). 2810Mazzotta C, Traversi C, Caragiuli S, Rechichi M. Pulsed vs con- tinuous light accelerated corneal collagen crosslinking: in vivo qualitative investigation by confocal microscopy and corneal OCT. Eye (Lond);2014;28(10): 1179-1183.

Accelerated corneal collagen cross-linking in pediatric patients: two-year follow-up results. R Shetty, H Nagaraja, C Jayadev, N K Pahuja, M K Kummelil, R Nuijts, Bio Med Res Int. Epub. Shetty R, Nagaraja H, Jayadev C, Pahuja NK, Kummelil MK, Nuijts R. Accelerated corneal collagen cross-linking in pediatric patients: two-year follow-up results. Bio Med Res Int. Epub 2014, Sept 11.