Molecular studies of viral pathogenesis in the central nervous system The Linacre Lecture 1991
April 1992. April 1992

MDPeter G E Kennedy 
Department of Neurology
Department of Neurology
University of Glasgow
University
Institute of Nerological Sci-ences

ProfessorPeter G E Kennedy 
Southern General Hospital
G51 4TFGlasgow

Glasgow 
Southern General Hospital
G51 4TFGlasgow

Molecular studies of viral pathogenesis in the central nervous system The Linacre Lecture 1991

Journal of the Royal College of Physicians of London
262April 1992. April 1992College lectures CNS viral pathogenesis; some of the more important are shown in Table 1. The kind of information that has been obtained from such sources is indicated in 204 Address for correspondence:
What is the molecular biological basis of viral pathogenesis in the central nervous system (CNS), ie by what molecular mechanisms do different viruses produce particular patterns of neurological disease in man and animal models, and can one use molecular techniques to ascertain the viral aetiology of certain neurological conditions? This complex subject can be approached in three different but interrelated ways. First, one may relate molecular techniques to specific biological properties such as viral spread to the CNS, to neurotropism, ie the affinity of the virus for particular neural regions and cells, and to neurovirulence, which refers to the actual ability to cause neurological disease. Second, the reverse approach can be adopted by considering these different aspects of virus-host relationships and then how the techniques have contributed to their understanding. Third, one can select specific neurotropic viruses, such as polio or herpes viruses, and then relate these to both particular techniques and pathogenetic mechanisms[1]. The second component of this paper will deal with the immunopathological mechanisms seen in three specific CNS viral infections, all of which have been the focus of study in the author's laboratory over the past six years.Molecular techniquesA wide variety of techniques is now available to study motor neurone disease (MND) as well as from a normal control case[10]. This is of considerable interest in view of the possible association between this disease and previous poliovirus infection. A very recent study using ISH has reported the presence of JC viral DNA
 Table 2 
where the properties of a number of neurotropic viruses are shown. Of particular note is the frequent idendfication of specific target cell surface receptors which interact with specific 'cell attachment' proteins located on the virus [1,2]. Viral gene and protein detection For many years it has been possible to localise viral proteins in pathological tissues using conventional immunocytochemical techniques such as immunoperoxidase and immunofluorescence [3,4]. But our understanding of viral involvement has been greatly enhanced by methods such as Southern blot and in situ hybridisation (ISH) whereby viral genetic information (DNA for Southern blot, RNA for Northern blot, and both for ISH) can be detected in infected tissues [1]. All these techniques utilise complementary binding of radiolabeled or biotin-labelled viral DNA or RNA probes to nucleic acids which have been extracted from tissues and immobilised on a hybridisation membrane following which autoradiography demonstrates the presence of viral genes on an X-ray plate or, in the case of ISH, on individual tissue sections mounted on glass slides. ISH is a very sensitive technique and can localise viral genes within small areas in a large tissue region. Recently, two additional procedures have proved to be of great value in such studies. First, ISH can be combined with immunocytochemistry using specific antibodies to co-localise viral genes and proteins in individual cells so that it becomes possible, for instance, to make a distinction between a latent and a productive viral infection or to identify viral DNA in marker-identified cell types [5,6]. Second, the amplification of viral DNA by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) allows the detection of single copies of specific viral or other nucleic acid sequences even when infected cells comprise only a minute fraction of the total cell number in the specimen under test [7] These techniques have been applied to tissues obtained from patients with a variety of neurological diseases in which viral infection has been thought to play a role. In some cases, such as herpes simplex virus encephalitis, the presence of viral genome is to be expected [5], whereas in many other studies the exercise takes the form of a 'fishing expedition' in which even positive results may be difficult to interpret. Even if a virus can be convincingly demonstrated in a particular disease, it is quite another matter to assume that there is a cause and effect relationship between the two. Such demonstrations also need to be repeatable in different patients, and the need for valid normal and pathological control tissues cannot be overstated.

In spite of these caveats, ISH and PCR have recently provided potentially exciting insights into the causation of a number of neurological diseases. The long history of multiple sclerosis (MS) research has been bedevilled by unconfirmed reports of apparent viral isolation. However, a recent careful study using ISH Molecular studies of viral pathogenesis in the central nervous system   [8]. This is of particular interest in view of the consistently noted and significant rise in measles antibody titres in patients with this disease [9]. It is critical that such studies be repeated in larger groups of patients and also by the PCR technique. The exquisite sensitivity of the latter technique is, however, something of a two-edged weapon in that, despite its vastly improved ability to detect very low levels of viral DNA, it is very susceptible to contamination during the procedure with nucleic acids from other sources. A similar study has recently demonstrated picornovirus RNA (polio or Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV) sequences in the spinal cord from a case of and viral capsid antigens in 4 out of 10 brain tissues from elderly patients aged between 68 and 96 years [1]. The JC virus is known to be the cause of progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy (PML), a progressive demyelinating disease usually seen in immunocompromised humans [12]; its detection in normal individuals was therefore unexpected despite the presence of antibody to JC virus in about 70% of normal adults. Molecular studies commonly reveal viral nucleic acid sequences in normal as well as diseased tissues, but these findings are difficult to evaluate. Some of the problems may be partially resolved by the use of very specific gene probes whereby only selected genes can be localised, thereby reducing the risk of artefacts. For example, herpes simplex virus (HSV) is well known to remain latent in the sensory ganglia of humans and animals [13,14]. Its latent state is associated with the presence of latency-associated RNA transcripts (LATs) [15]; their main role is in the viral reactivation process [13]. Detection of such transcripts in human tissues will give better insights into pathogenesis and latency than the detection of very large portions of the HSV genome. In [16]. The resulting reassortant viruses contain gene segments derived from each original virus, eg types 1 and 3, and these segments can be identified by restriction enzyme analysis. Since type 1 and 3 reoviruses have different neural cell tropisms, eg type 1 has an affinity for ependymal cells but not neurones whereas type 3 virus infects neurones but not ependymal cells and produces a lethal encephalitis in mice, it has been possible to correlate this specific neuotropism with particular regions of the genome [16]. The critical region in determining this tropism is the SI gene which codes for the outer capsid protein sigma-1 [16] (Fig. 1 (Fig. 2).


Analysis of viral isolates from patients

Restriction enzyme analysis and gene mapping of viruses obtained from patients, and the use of PCR to detect low levels of virus in such isolates, has proved to be of considerable value in both pathogenetic and diagnostic studies. A classic example of the former was the demonstration by Evans et al. [19] that the live attenuated poliovirus vaccine (Sabin type 3) acquires increasingly neurovirulent properties on passage through the infected gastrointestinal tract, and that this property is associated with a single nucleotide change in the viral genome. The latter occurred in the 5' non-coding region of the genome and consisted of a single nucleotide change from uridine to cytidine at position 472. It is significant that this new genetic sequence is also found in naturally neurovirulent poliovirus strains. It is clearly remarkable that such a specific and minute genomic mutation in the virus should have resulted in such a profound alteration in its biological properties and calls for further studies of the precise mechanisms of this alteration. Molecular analysis has also proved useful in the study of herpes viruses in man. Restriction enzyme analysis has led to advances in HSV epidemiology, and has also helped to clarify some aspects of HSV latency in human sensory ganglia [20] as well as the pathogenesis of HSV encephalitis [21]. In the latter study it was shown that HSV encephalitis could be the result of a primary HSV infection, a secondary infection, or a reactivation of virus that had remained latent.  PCR has been used with increasing effectiveness in neurological and other conditions. For example, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) has been detected in patients' blood prior to the appearance of antiviral antibody [22] and is likely to be used in monitoring the appearance of virus in the CNS in relation to neurological symptoms. The diagnosis of HSV encephalitis has also been considerably facilitated using the PCR to detect virus in cerebrospinal fluid [23], This is likely to be of great practical value in view of the rapidity with which the virus can be detected which is of considerable importance in this condition.


Ultrastructural studies

Considerable insight into the basis of viral neurotropism has been gained by high resolution X-ray crystallography in which the three-dimensional structure of viruses such as poliovirus and rhinovirus has been studied [24,25]. Through the mapping of specific viral antigenic sites the structure?function properties of these viruses have been elucidated in detail. For example, the surface of the poliovirus has been shown to contain probable viral attachment proteins for specific target cell receptors, the former consisting of Peaks' and 'valleys' [24]. Viral mutants as tools for pathogenetic studies Three main types of mutant are recognised. Temperature-sensitive (ts) mutants can replicate at the 'permis-sive' temperature (31?C) but not at the non-permissive' temperature (38.5?C) because of a small neucleotide mutation in the DNA sequence [26], Deletion mutants have a larger nucleotide change with a corresponding absence of particular regions of the genome [27]. Third, monoclonal antibody-derived viral mutants have been generated by treating viruses with neutralising monoclonal antibodies of varying specificities leading to in vitro selection of variants which are no longer neutralised owing to the emergency of codon changes leading to specific protein alterations [17]. Such mutants have applications to neurovirulence studies in a very wide range of viruses, including reovirus, bunyavirus, rabies virus, poliovirus, mouse hepatitis virus and Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus, as well as HSV latency [1]. The general principle is a relatively simple one and consists of attempting to correlate the absence of a particular region of the viral nucleic acid sequence with a demonstrable in vitro or in vivo property such as neurovirulence or, in the case of HSV, the ability to produce latency in neuronal cells. Once the apparent biological function has been identified, proof of the correlation can be provided by 'rescue techniques' in which the missing region of the genome is reinserted, leading to restoration of the original biological function. The latter technique has been successfully applied by Brown and her colleagues using a deletion mutant of HSV-2 with a 1,488 base pair deletion [28]. Although this mutant fails to produce neurological disease in mice, neurovirulence is restored by correction of the deletion, thereby allowing the assignment of the function of neurovirulence to this region of the genome. Similar techniques have been used to study HSV latency in mice [1,13]. Particularly elegant studies by Fields and colleagues have shown that monoclonal antibody-derived reovirus type-3 mutants with alterations of the viral haemagglutinin (sigma-1 polypeptide) have impaired neurovirulence in mice compared with wild-type viruses [2,16]. Molecular analysis of the viral mutants was then carried out and the specific nucleotide changes that were detected could then be correlated with the property of neurovirulence.


Infectious viral DNA

The use of viral infectious DNA clones has been discussed in detail by O'Hara and Roos [29]. This approach has proved to be of considerable importance in this field. The principle has been to general viral infectious cDNA clones with specific genomic alterations from positive strand RNA viruses such as poliovirus. These can then be tested for neurovirulence, thereby allowing the identification of DNA sequences relevant to disease production; in addition, the technique has been combined with other methods such as the generation of intertypic recombinant viruses.  The use of transgenic animals in neurobiological studies has recently been reviewed by Messing [30]. The relevant approach has been to insert viral DNA into fertilised mouse eggs by microinjection techniques leading to integration of the DNA into the progeny cells. In a now classic study, for example, this technique has been used to insert JC virus promoter/ enhancer nucleic acid sequences containing large and small T antigens into mouse embryos [31]. JC virus is the cause of PML, a human demyelinating disease. The progency mice developed a neurological disorder with many pathological changes similar to human PML, and expression of T antigens was detected in oligodendrocytes which are the cells that make CNS myelin. It is possible that in some way the T antigens interfere with the normal functioning of the oligodendrocytes, thereby leading to demyelination in the experimental animals and also possibly in the human disease. It is likely that the transgenic techniques will produce major insights into other neurological disorders including those thought to be produced by viral infection.


Viral immunopathogenesis studies

This brief survey of molecular techniques has emphasised a number of principles, but perhaps one of the most important is that relatively minor alterations of the genomic sequence of a virus may lead to profound alterations in its neurovirulence. In the second part of this overview I shall outline some recent work which has highlighted the important role of immune mechanisms in the molecular pathogenesis of viral infections. A common feature of these three conditions described is the marked alteration of immune antigen regulation in the context of restricted viral gene expression in tissues.

Visna-maedi of sheep For many years this was regarded as an interesting area of veterinary study, if not something of an oddity, but its importance as an animal model relevant to human disease was underpinned by the recent realisation that it showed remarkable in vitro and in vivo similarities to HIV infection in man [32]. These viruses have now been classified as lentiviruses, a recently recognised taxonomic group which also includes caprine arthritis encephalitis virus (CAEV) of goats, equine infectious anaemia virus (EIAV) of horses, simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) of nonhuman primates, feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) of cats, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) of humans [33]. These viruses are all RNA-containing non-oncogenic retrovirsues which after prolonged, sometimes asymptomatic, incubation periods cause persistent infections in their natural hosts. Paradoxically, these agents show restrict-ed replication in vivo but produce marked cytopathic effects including cell lysis and fusion in vitro [33].

The visna-maedia disease complex is the prototype 'slow virus' disease, a term introduced by Sigurdsson in Iceland to describe this condition in the 1950s [34]. 'Visna' is Icelandic for wasting, whereas the term 'maedi' means dyspnoea. This reflects the two important features of the disease, namely an encephalitis and an indolent interstitial pneumonitis. The neurological manifestation of the disease, ie visna, is a relatively rare complication of the pneumonic form, ie maedi, and is seen more frequently in Icelandic than in European sheep, indicating a strong breed specificity for the neurological and pneumonic forms of the disease [35]. The third characteristic feature of the disease is an arthritis. Clinically the neurological disease is characterised by hind limb paralysis and ataxia, and the disease may show relapses and remissions. The insidious pneumonitis leads to respiratory failure and usually death. Pathologically the lesions in the CNS and systemic tissues are typified by marked inflammation, with infiltration and proliferation of lymphocytes and macrophages producing considerable lymph node enlargement. The CNS lesions occur in both white and grey matter and are characteristically found in periventricular areas with marked perivascular cuffing with lymphocytes and macrophages, leading to demyelination in some cases [33,36].

Our studies of visna were directed towards an understanding of the pathogenesis of the disease, in particular the markedly restricted viral replication seen in both systemic and neural tissues and the mode of tissue destruction. It is known that the host target cells of the visna virus are those of the monocyte-macrophage lineage. This has been gleaned from a variety of sources, the most definitive of which was the demonstration by combined immunocytochemistry and in situ hybridisation, both in vitro and in vivo, of viral nucleic acid in marker-identified monocytes and macrophages [6,37]. The tissue culture studies using sheep alveolar macrophages demonstrated amplification of both transcription and translation of the viral genome in the infected monocytes as they matured into macrophages. Also, such studies have allowed the identification of a unique lentivirus-induced interferon which is produced as a result of the interaction between virally infected macrophages and T lymphocytes [38]. This interferon increases MHC class II (la) antigen expression in macrophages and can also curtail viral replication [4].

It has been possible to correlate the in vitro observations with the actual disease process using experimental sheep which have been infected via the transbronchial route. Following infection is was found using in situ hybridisation and immunocytochemical techniques that the organs which were primarily infected, such as the spleen, lung and mediastinal lymph nodes, contained infected macrophages, although the level of this infection was limited [4]. A small proportion of promonocytes in the bone marrow was also infected [6]. Most interestingly, the persistent and increased level of la antigen expression was located in the infected target organs showing lymphoproliferation and viral RNA expression, whereas this was not the case in uninfected tissues. Class II (la) antigens are required on the surface of macrophages in order to present viral antigen to T-helper lymphocytes. Further, double-labelling experiments demonstrated the presence of la antigens in a small proportion of infected macrophages in the target tissues [4].

We have interpreted these findings as representing important clues as to the pathogenesis of the persistent inflammation seen in the disease. Figure 3 shows a possible sequence of events which may occur in vivo.

The model envisages local production of interferon within the lesions since they contain both infected macrophages and lymphocytes prerequisites for interferon production. However, interferon release is seen as a two-edged weapon. On the one hand it may restrict viral replication thus leading to the slow progression of the disease; on the other hand it has the disadvantage of increasing macrophage la expression, thereby attracting T-helper lymphocytes which in turn lead to cytokine production and lymphoproliferation, and thereby cause lymphadenopathy [4]. The presence of infected promonocytes in the bone marrow might well explain the persistent nature of the disease These techniques have also allowed us to analyse the neurological component of the visna-maedia complex [35]. The marked breed susceptibility to the encephalitis has already been alluded to. Moroever, there is a qualitative difference in that the encephalitis seen in Icelandic sheep is characteristically chronic and progressive, contrasting with the disease in European sheep which tends to be episodic leading to focal scar formation and repair [36]. Intracranial inoculation of British sheep with visna virus resulted in the development of encephalitic lesions. However, in contrast to the systemic tissues which contain viral RNA, it was not possible to detect by in situ hybridisation more than an occasional virus-containing cell in the brains ?f these animals. This was not due to the strain of virus inoculated because similar results were obtained using a neurotropic Icelandic visna virus strain. However, when these techniques were applied to brain sections from an Icelandic sheep which had died with visna encephalitis, the results were very different in that abundant viral nucleic acid and increased la expression were detected within the inflammatory lesions [35]. Double-label experiments showed that the virus had extended its cell specificity in that both macrophages and a few oligodendrocytes contained viral RNA [39], which are summarised in Fig. 4.

These findings indicate that different genes have a role in controlling the systemic and neurological manifestations of the visna-maedia complex, and the experimental data are consistent with the characteristic features seen in the natural disease. The exact pathogenesis of the brain disease is still not known for certain, but we can suggest a possible scenario for the neurological events. Infected monocytes in the blood must cross the blood-brain barrier, possibly via the CSF the 'Trojan horse' mechanism [40]. In the brain   Antigen labelling on brain tissue sections using avidin biotin peroxidase technique. Cerebral hemisphere sections were stained immunocytochemically and counterstained with haematoxylin. (a) HIV encephalitis case showing perivascular and parenchymal labelling with antibody against class II MHC antigens (x428). This contrasts with (b) which shows the absence of staining with this antibody on a normal control brain (x428). In (c) class II antigen labelling is seen in a multinucleated giant cell from a case with HIV encephalitis (x 1,071). This contrasts with (d) which shows absence of labelling on a consecutive section from this same case with an antibody against class I MHC antigens (xl,07l) (From Ref. 49).

the monocytes mature into macrophages with the production of viral RNA and protein. This amplification process is accompanied by increased expression of la antigens in macrophages, leading to lymphoproliferation as suggested above in the case of the systemic lesions. Viral infection of oligodendrocytes resulting in alteration of host gene function could partly explain the demyelination observed, although the paucity of viral RNA-containing cells suggests that other mechanisms are almost certainly important. The latter could include local release of cytokines and interferon, causing membrane-mediated damage to neural cells, and inflammation [35].


Human immunodeficiency virus infection of humans

It has been apparent for some time that HIV is neurotropic as well as lymphotropic. The CNS is infected early in the disease, about 10% of all patients with HIV infection presenting with neurological features, [41,42]. Moreover, up to 90% of all patients with AIDS have pathological evidence of CNS involvement [43]. The neurological manifestations are protean and have been reviewed in detail elsewhere [43,44]. They can broadly be divided into infection, malignancies, vascular and neuromuscular disorders. The infectious diseases may be due either to the effect of HIV itself or to secondary infection with a variety of opportunistic agents including viruses, bacteria, fungi and protozoa [45]. One of the most important, frequent and enigmatic of the complications is HIV encephalitis which may be associated with a rapidly progressive dementia indeed this term has also been known as the AIDSdementia complex [12,44]. Patients with this condition generally have a degree of immunosuppression and it is a relatively late complication of HIV infection. Cognitive impairment of a subcortical nature in HIV encephalitis is progressive and followed by a variety of neurological problems including focal signs, seizures and eventually coma and death [12]. The pathological features include the presence of multinucleated giant cells, microglial nodules, diffuse white matter astrocytic proliferation, and perivascular and parenchymal macrophage and lymphocytic infiltration [12,44]. Although HIV has been demonstrated within the brains of such patients [44,46], viral nucleic acid and protein expression is limited and appears to be confined to macrophages, multinucleated giant cells and probably endothelial cells [44,47,48]. To date there is no really convincing evidence to show the presence of HIV within glial cells (oligodendrocytes and astrocytes) or neurons. In order to address the pathogenesis of HIV encephalitis we have recently carried out a study using immunocytochemical analysis and monoclonal antibodies to look for increased expression of MHC class II antigens in the brains from patients who had died with this condition [49]. Only a minority of the brain sections from cases of HIV encephalitis contained HIV antigens. However, about two-thirds of the cases showed increased and inappropriate expression of class II antigens compared with control sections (Fig. 5). Class I antigens were also detected in the HIV sections but at a much lower level. The interpretation of these findings is difficult at this stage of our knowledge of the disease, but Fig. 6 summarises a possible scenario for pathogenesis. In the peripheral blood both macrophages and T4 helper cells are infected, but the latter are killed while some infected macrophages cross the blood-brain barrier and infect other macrophages and tissue-fixed microglia within the brain. The infected microglia may secrete cytokines and/or other toxic substances which could directly damage the cell membranes of neural cells, thereby leading to neural disfunction with clinical features; and they may also increase class II antigen expression in macrophages and microglia. It is possible that upregulation of MHC class II molecules on macrophages within the brain may help set in train a more general autoimmune cascade, but it seems likely that, as in visna-maedi infection in sheep, indirect mechanisms of neurological disease are likely to be important in HIV infection of the nervous system.


Herpes virus infections in humans

Molecular techniques have helped to elucidate the pathogenesis of CNS and peripheral nervous system (PNS) disease caused by HSV and varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infections in man. HSV produces a number of neurological conditions, and by far the most important of these is an acute, often fatal, sporadic encephalitis [50,51]. The number of neurological syndromes associated with VZV is even greater and includes an encephalomyelitis, although this is generally a less serious disorder than that caused by HSV [50].

Reference has already been made to the ability of HSV to produce a latent infection in the spinal sensory and trigeminal ganglia of animals and humans. While a good deal has been learned about the molecular events associated with HSV latency, there is little understanding of how latent HSV, which is so frequent in humans, can on rare occasions be reactivated to produce such a devastating encephalitis. Some insight has been gleaned from molecular studies of viral isolates from patients with simultaneous oral and encephalitic lesions, as well as studies of possible viral spread along olfactory pathways to the temporal lobes which bear the brunt of the illness [50]. We were interested in comparing the nature of the infection in HSV encephalitis with that seen in VZV-associated encephalitis, and used a combination of in situ hybridisation and immunocytochemistry to co-localise viral RNA and proteins in brain sections from patients who had suffered from these conditions [5,52]. The essential finding was that in HSV encephalitis high levels of HSV-1 RNA and proteins could be co-localised in macrophages, neurones and some glial cells, contrasting with the situation seen in VZV encephalitis where neither viral nucleic acid nor protein could be demonstrated in immunocompetent patients. However, class II MHC antigen expression was markedly upregulated in the inflammatory lesions in VZV encephalitis, whereas such antigens were generally not detected in HSV encephalitis cases. These findings indicated that in HSV encephalitis there is a productive viral infection, whereas in VZV encephalitis the inflammatory changes seem more likely to be due to immune-mediated indirect mechanisms, possibly similar to those observed in other retroviral infections [33,52]. It should be emphasised, however, that the situation in immunosuppressed individuals with VZV infections is probably very different since it is easier to demonstrate the presence of VZV in the CNS of such patients. Also, the far more sensitive PCR technique needs to be used in such tissues to examine these important questions in the future.


Conclusions

At least three general principles are evident from this overview of viral pathogenesis in the nervous system.

First, viral neurotropism strongly depends on the binding of specific target neural cell surface receptors to viral cell attachment proteins. Second, limited and specific changes in the genomic structure of a neurotropic virus may profoundly alter its neurovirulence but the precise mechanisms of such alterations may be complex. Third, indirect mechanisms of neural cell damage appear to play an important role in certain viral infections of the CNS, and in some cases, such as lentiviruses, the neuropathogenicity seems to be closely related to alteration of immune antigen regulation against a background of restricted viral gene expression. Further significant advances in our understanding of neurovirological diseases should accrue over the next decade as molecular biological techniques are increasingly brought to bear on these phenomena. It is also likely that therapeutic approaches will be facilitated by the use of molecular biology, although these developments may take longer to be realised. 1 Kennedy PGE. The use of molecular techniques in studying viral pathogenesis in the nervous system. Trends Neurosci 1990;13:424-31.   

Fig. 1 .
1Schematic diagram of the outer capsid of mammalian serotype 1, 2, 3. On the right is shown a negatively stained electron micrograph of an intact virion. On the left is a tentative schematic drawing showing how the three outer capsid proteins (ol, o3, (ilC) and the core protein (^2) are organised on the outside of the virion (From Nature 1982;300:[19][20][21][22][23].

Fig. 1 .
1Schematic diagram of the outer capsid of mammalian serotype 1, 2, 3. On the right is shown a negatively stained electron micrograph of an intact virion. On the left is a tentative schematic drawing showing how the three outer capsid proteins (ol, o3, |ilC) and the core protein (^2) are organised on the outside of the virion (From Nature 1982;300:[19][20][21][22][23].

Fig. 2 .
2Preparation of reassortant viruses. Related viruses with segmental genomes can be recombined to generate hybrid virions. These two strains of the California serogroup are used to co-infect a tissue culture cell line. Individual clones containing gene segments from the two strains can be typed by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and/or RNA-RNA hybridisation. All viruses with segmental genomes can be recombined in this fashion (From Ref. 17).

Fig. 2 .
2Preparation of reassortant viruses. Related viruses with segmental genomes can be recombined to generate hybrid virions. These two strains of the California serogroup are used to co-infect a tissue culture cell line. Individual clones containing gene segments from the two strains can be typed by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and/or RNA-RNA hybridisation. All viruses with segmental genomes can be recombined in this fashion (From Ref. 17). Journal of the Royal College of Physicians of London Vol. 26 No.

Fig. 3 .Fig. 4 .Fig. 4 .
344Chart showing the suggested course of events leading to restriction of visna virus replication and the development of inflammation (From Ref. Chart slioxuing that the degree of restricted visna virus replication in the animal depends on the tissue as well as the breed of animal (From Ref. Chart showing that the degree of restricted visna virus replication in the animal depends on the tissue as well as the breed of animal (From Ref. 35).

Fig. 5 .
5Fig. 5. Antigen labelling on brain tissue sections using avidin biotin peroxidase technique. Cerebral hemisphere sections were stained immunocytochemically and counterstained with haematoxylin. (a) HIV encephalitis case showing perivascular and parenchymal labelling with antibody against class II MHC antigens (x428). This contrasts with (b) which shows the absence of staining with this antibody on a normal control brain (x428). In (c) class II antigen labelling is seen in a multinucleated giant cell from a case with HIV encephalitis (x 1,071). This contrasts with (d) which shows absence of labelling on a consecutive section from this same case with an antibody against class I MHC antigens (xl,07l) (From Ref. 49).

Fig
Fig. 6. Chart showing suggested sequence of events leading to neurological damage in HTV encephalitis. (From Ref. 49).

Fig
Fig. 6. Chart showing suggested sequence of events leading to neurological damage in HTV encephalitis. (From Ref. 49).

Table 1 .
1Molecular techniques used in viral neuropathogenesis studies Technique Examples of neurological applications Viral gene and protein detection (ISH, Southern blot, PCR, monoclonal antibodies)Viral reassortants and recombinants 

Restriction enzyme analysis of viral isolates and 
gene sequencing 

Viral mutants (temperature-sensitive, deletion and 
monoclonal antibody generated) 

Infectious viral DNA manipulation 

Transgenic mice techniques 

Herpes virus latency and encephalitis 

HIV encephalitis 

SSPE, PML, MND 

Reovirus spread and neurotropism 

Herpes virus spread 
Bunyavirus neuroinvasiveness 

Poliovirus neurovirulence 

Herpes virus epidemiology and encephalitis 

Herpes simplex virus latency 
Neurovirulence of reovirus, poliovirus, 

TMEV, rabies virus 

Poliovirus neurovirulence 

TMEV neuropathogenicity 

SV40 in the CNS 

JC virus and PML model 



Table 2 .
2Characteristics of some neurotropic viruses [1]Virus 

Herpes simplex virus 

Varicella-zoster virus 
Rabies 

Reovirus type 1 

Reovirus type 3 

Poliovirus 

Nucleic acid 

Major host target cell (s) 
Special features 

dsDNA 

dsDNA 

ssRNA 

dsRNA 

dsRNA 

ssRNA 

ssRNA 

Theiler's murine 

encephalomyelitis virus 

Human immunodeficiency ssRNA 

virus 

Visna-maedi 
ssRNA 

Neurone 

Neurone? non-neuronal cells 

Neuromuscular junction 

Limbic system 

Ependymal cells 

Anterior pituitary gland 

Neurone 

Neurone 

Anterior horn spinal cord 

Neurone oligodendrocyte 

T4 lymphocyte 

CNS macrophages 

Monocyte-macrophage lineage 
? oligodendrocyte 

Latency in sensory ganglia 
Latency in sensory ganglia 
? Acetylcholine receptor is cell receptor 

SI gene determines cell and tissue tropism 

SI gene determines cell and tissue tropism 
Receptor is beta-adrenergic receptor 
Receptor is immunoglobulin superfamily 
membrane protein 

Produces acute poliomyelitis and chronic 
spinal cord demyelination 

Cell receptor is CD4 molecule to 

which viral gp 120 binds 

Produces persistent infection with restricted 
viral replication in systemic and CNS tissues 

found measles N genomic sequences in the brains of 

two out of eight MS cases and in one of 56 control 

brains 
Journal of the Royal College of Physicians of London Vol. 26 No. 2 April 1992
Journal of the Royal College of Physicians of LondonVol. 26 No. 2 April 1992
AcknowledgementsIt is a pleasure to acknowledge the help and collabora-
Pathogenesis of viral infections. K L Tyler, B N Fields, Virology (ed B. Fields, DM Knipe et alRaven PressNew York2nd ednTyler KL, Fields BN. Pathogenesis of viral infections. In Virology (ed B. Fields, DM Knipe et al), 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1990:191-239.

Reactivation of latent herpes simplex virus from dissociated identified dorsal root ganglion cells in culture. Pge Kennedy, S A Al-Saadi, G B Clements, /Gen Virol. 64Kennedy PGE, Al-Saadi SA, Clements GB. Reactivation of latent herpes simplex virus from dissociated identified dorsal root gan- glion cells in culture./Gen Virol 1983;64:1629-35.

Persistent expression of la antigen and viral genome in visna-maedi virus-induced inflammatory cells: possible role of lentivirus-induced interferon. Pge Kennedy, O Narayan, Z Ghotbi, J Hopkins, H E Gendelman, J E Clements, I Exp Med. 162Kennedy PGE, Narayan O, Ghotbi Z, Hopkins J, Gendelman HE, Clements JE. Persistent expression of la antigen and viral genome in visna-maedi virus-induced inflammatory cells: possi- ble role of lentivirus-induced interferon. I Exp Med 1985;162: 1970-82.

A clinicopathological study of herpes simplex encephalitis. Pge Kennedy, J H Adams, D I Graham, G B Clements, Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 14Kennedy PGE, Adams JH, Graham DI, Clements GB. A clinico- pathological study of herpes simplex encephalitis. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 1988;14:395-415.

Slow persistent replication of lentiviruses: role of macrophages and macrophage precursors in bone marrow. H E Gendelman, O Narayan, S Molineaux, Proc Natl Acad Sri. 82Gendelman HE, Narayan O, Molineaux S, et al. Slow persistent replication of lentiviruses: role of macrophages and macrophage precursors in bone marrow. Proc Natl Acad Sri USA 1985;82:7086-90.

The polymerase chain reaction. J Bell, Immunol Today. 10~ Bell J. The polymerase chain reaction. Immunol Today 1989;10:351-5.

Examination of eight cases of multiple sclerosis and 56 neurological and non-neurological controls for genomic sequences of measles virus, canine distemper virus, simian virus 5 and rubella virus. S L Cosby, S Mcquaid, M J Taylor, J Gen Virol. 70Cosby SL, McQuaid S, Taylor MJ, et al. Examination of eight cases of multiple sclerosis and 56 neurological and non-neuro- logical controls for genomic sequences of measles virus, canine distemper virus, simian virus 5 and rubella virus. J Gen Virol 1989;70:2027-36.

Significance of virus antibodies in multiple sclerosis. M Haire, Br Med Bull. 33Haire M. Significance of virus antibodies in multiple sclerosis. Br Med Bull 1977;33:40-4.

Detection of picornovirus sequences in nervous tissue of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and control patients. M Brahic, R A Smith, C J GibbsJr, R M Garruto, W W Tourtellotte, E Cash, Ann Neurol. 18Brahic M, Smith RA, Gibbs CJ Jr, Garruto RM, Tourtellotte WW, Cash E. Detection of picornovirus sequences in nervous tissue of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and control patients. Ann Neurol 1985;18:337-43.

JC virus detection by in situ hybridisation in brain tissue from elderly patients. M Mori, H Murata, M Tajima, H Shimada, Ann Neurol. 29H Mori M, Murata H, Tajima M, Shimada H. JC virus detection by in situ hybridisation in brain tissue from elderly patients. Ann Neurol 1991;29:428-32.

Infections in AIDS and other immunosuppressed patients. R W Price, B A Navia, Infections of the nervous system. Price RW, Navia BA. Infections in AIDS and other immunosup- pressed patients. In Infections of the nervous system (ed. PGE Kennedy, RTJohnson). London: Butterworths, 1987:248-73.

Herpes simplex virus: neuroinvasiveness, neurovirulence and latency. J G Stevens, Semin Neurosri. 3Stevens JG. Herpes simplex virus: neuroinvasiveness, neuroviru- lence and latency. Semin Neurosri 1991;3:141-7.

An inquiry into the mechanisms of herpes simplex virus latency. B Roizman, A E Sears, Ann Rev Microbiol. 41Roizman B, Sears AE. An inquiry into the mechanisms of herpes simplex virus latency. Ann Rev Microbiol 1987; 41:543-71.

RNA complementary to a herpes virus mRNA is prominent in latently infected neurons. J G Stevens, E K Wagner, G B Devi-Rao, M L Cook, I Feldman, Science. 235Stevens JG, Wagner EK, Devi-Rao GB, Cook ML, Feldman I. RNA complementary to a herpes virus mRNA is prominent in latently infected neurons. Science 1987;235:1056-9.

Pathogenesis of viral infections: basic concepts derived from the reovirus model. A H Sharpe, B N Fields, N Engl J Med. 312Sharpe AH, Fields BN. Pathogenesis of viral infections: basic concepts derived from the reovirus model. N Engl J Med 1985;312:486-97.

Molecular pathogenesis of neurotropic viral infections. F Gonzalez-Scarano, K L Tyler, Ann Neurol. 22Gonzalez-Scarano F, Tyler KL. Molecular pathogenesis of neu- rotropic viral infections. Ann Neurol 1987;22:565-74.

Pathogenesis of reovirus infections of the central nervous system. K L Tyler, Semin Neurosri. 3Tyler KL. Pathogenesis of reovirus infections of the central ner- vous system. Semin Neurosri 1991 ;3:117-24.

Increased neurovirulence associated with a single nucleotide change in a non-coding region of the Sabin type 3 polio vaccine genome. Dma Evans, G Dunn, P D Minor, Nature. 314Evans DMA, Dunn G, Minor PD, et al. Increased neurovirulence associated with a single nucleotide change in a non-coding region of the Sabin type 3 polio vaccine genome. Nature 1985;314:548-50.

The polypeptide and the DNA restriction enzyme profiles of spontaneous isolates of herpes simplex virus type 1 from explains of human trigeminal, superior cervical and vagus ganglia. D M Lonsdale, S M Brown, J H Subak-Sharpe, K G Warren, H Koprowski, /Gen Virol. 43Lonsdale DM, Brown SM, Subak-Sharpe JH, Warren KG, Koprowski H. The polypeptide and the DNA restriction enzyme profiles of spontaneous isolates of herpes simplex virus type 1 from explains of human trigeminal, superior cervical and vagus ganglia./Gen Virol 1979;43:151-71.

DNA restriction enzyme analysis of herpes simplex virus isolates obtained from patients with encephalitis. R Whidey, A D Lakeman, A Nahmias, B Roizman, N Engl J Med. 307Whidey R, Lakeman AD, Nahmias A, Roizman B. DNA restric- tion enzyme analysis of herpes simplex virus isolates obtained from patients with encephalitis. N Engl J Med 1982;307:1060-2.

Duration of human immunodeficiency virus infection before detection of antibody. C R HorsburghJr, C Y On, Jason J , ii:637?40Lancet. Horsburgh CR Jr, On CY, Jason J, et al. Duration of human immunodeficiency virus infection before detection of antibody. Lancet 1989;ii:637?40.

Rapid diagnosis of herpes simplex encephalitis by nested polymerase chain reaction assay of cerebrospinal fluid. E Aurelius, B Johansson, B Skoldenberg, A Staland, M Forsgren, Lancet. 337Aurelius E.Johansson B, Skoldenberg B, Staland A, Forsgren M. Rapid diagnosis of herpes simplex encephalitis by nested poly- merase chain reaction assay of cerebrospinal fluid. Lancet 1991;337:189-92.

Three-dimensional structure of poliovirus at 2.9 A resolution. J M Hogle, M Chow, D J Filman, Science. 229Hogle JM, Chow M, Filman DJ. Three-dimensional structure of poliovirus at 2.9 A resolution. Science 1985;229:1358-65.

Structure of a human common cold virus and functional relationship to other picornoviruses. M G Rossman, Arnold E Erickson, J W , Nature. 317Rossman MG, Arnold E, Erickson JW, et al. Structure of a human common cold virus and functional relationship to other picornoviruses. Nature 1985;317:145-53.

The genetics of herpes virus. J H Subak-Sharpe, Cancer Res. 33Subak-Sharpe JH. The genetics of herpes virus. Cancer Res 1973;33:1385-92.

Isolation of restriction endonuclease site deletion mutants of herpes simplex virus. S M Brown, Harlandj, J H Subak-Sharpe, J Gen Virol. 65Brown SM, HarlandJ, Subak-Sharpe JH. Isolation of restriction endonuclease site deletion mutants of herpes simplex virus. J Gen Virol 1984;65:1053-68.

The herpes simplex virus type 2 (HG52) variant JH2604 has a 1488 bp deletion which eliminates neurovirulence in mice. M Y Taha, G B Clements, S M Brown, /Gen Virol. 70Taha MY, Clements GB, Brown SM. The herpes simplex virus type 2 (HG52) variant JH2604 has a 1488 bp deletion which eliminates neurovirulence in mice./Gen Virol 1989;70:3073-8.

Viral infectious complementary-DNA studies may identify non-viral genes critical to central nervous system disease. Y O&apos;hara, R P Roos, Ann Neurol. 25O'Hara Y, Roos RP. Viral infectious complementary-DNA stud- ies may identify non-viral genes critical to central nervous sys- tem disease. Ann Neurol 1989;25:305-9.

Transgenic mice and neurological disease. A Messing, The molecular biology of neurological disease. Rosenberg, AE HardingMessing A. Transgenic mice and neurological disease. In The molecular biology of neurological disease (ed. RN Rosenberg, AE Harding). London: Butterworths, 1988:125-34.

The early region of human papovirusJC induces dysmyelination in transgenic mice. J A Small, G A Scangos, L Cork, G Jay, G Khoury, Cell. 46Small JA, Scangos GA, Cork L, Jay G, Khoury G. The early region of human papovirusJC induces dysmyelination in trans- genic mice. Cell 1986;46:13-8.

Sequence homology and morphologic similarity of HTLV and visna virus, a pathogenic lentivirus. M A Gonda, F Wong-Staal, R C Gallo, Science. 227Gonda MA, Wong-Staal F, Gallo RC, et al. Sequence homology and morphologic similarity of HTLV and visna virus, a pathogenic lentivirus. Science 1985;227:173-7.

Neurological aspects of lentiviral infections in animals. Pge Kennedy, Retroviral infections of the CNS (ed. P Rudge). Baillier's Clinical Neurology. in pressKennedy PGE. Neurological aspects of lentiviral infections in animals. In Retroviral infections of the CNS (ed. P Rudge). Bailli- er's Clinical Neurology, in press.

Observations on three slow infections of sheep: maedi; paratuberculosis; rida, a slow encephalitis of sheep; with general remarks on infections which develop slowly and some of their special characteristics. B Sigurdsson, Br Vet J. 110Sigurdsson B. Observations on three slow infections of sheep: maedi; paratuberculosis; rida, a slow encephalitis of sheep; with general remarks on infections which develop slowly and some of their special characteristics. Br Vet J 1954;110:255-70, 307-22, 341-54.

The pathogenesis of visna, a lentivirus induced immunopathologic disease of the central nervous system. Pge Kennedy, O Narayan, M C Zink, Clinical and molecular aspects of neurotrophic virus infection. Gilden, HL LiptonKluwer Academic PublishersKennedy PGE, Narayan O, Zink MC, et al. The pathogenesis of visna, a lentivirus induced immunopathologic disease of the central nervous system. In Clinical and molecular aspects of neu- rotrophic virus infection (ed DH Gilden, HL Lipton). Kluwer Aca- demic Publishers, 1989:393?421.

Aspects of the pathogenesis of visna in sheep. O Narayan, J D Strandberg, D E Griffin, J E Clements, R J Adams, Symposium on viruses and demyelinating diseases. ed. CA Mims, ML Cuzner, RE Kelly; New YorkAcademic PressNarayan O, Strandberg JD, Griffin DE, Clements JE, Adams RJ. Aspects of the pathogenesis of visna in sheep. In Symposium on viruses and demyelinating diseases (ed. CA Mims, ML Cuzner, RE Kelly). New York: Academic Press, 1984;125-40.

Tropism of sheep lentiviruses for monocytes: susceptibility to infection and virus gene expression increase during maturation of moncytes to macrophages. H E Gendelman, O Narayan, S Kennedy-Stoskopf, J Virol. 58Gendelman HE, Narayan O, Kennedy-Stoskopf S, et al. Tropism of sheep lentiviruses for monocytes: susceptibility to infection and virus gene expression increase during maturation of mon- cytes to macrophages. J Virol 1986;58:67-74.

Restricted replication of lentiviruses: visna viruses induce a unique interferon during interaction between lymphocytes and infected macrophages. O Narayan, D Sheffer, J E Clements, G Tennekoon, J Exp Med. 162Narayan O, Sheffer D, Clements JE, Tennekoon G. Restricted replication of lentiviruses: visna viruses induce a unique inter- feron during interaction between lymphocytes and infected macrophages. J Exp Med 1985;162:1954-69.

Detection of visna virus antigens and RNA in glial cells in foci of demyelination. L Stowring, A T Haase, G Petursson, Virology. 141Stowring L, Haase AT, Petursson G, et al. Detection of visna virus antigens and RNA in glial cells in foci of demyelination. Virology 1985;141:311-8.

Pathogenesis of lentivirus infections. A T Haase, Nature. 322Haase AT. Pathogenesis of lentivirus infections. Nature 1986;322:130-6.

Neurological complications of acquired immune deficiency syndrome analysis of 50 patients. W D Snider, D M Simpson, S Nielsen, Jwm Gold, C E Metroka, J B Posner, Ann Neurol. 14Snider WD, Simpson DM, Nielsen S, Gold JWM, Metroka CE, Posner JB. Neurological complications of acquired immune deficiency syndrome analysis of 50 patients. Ann Neurol 1983;14:403-18.

Neurological manifestations of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS): experience at UCSF and review of the literature. R M Levy, D E Bredesen, M L Rosenblum, J Neurosurg. 62Levy RM, Bredesen DE, Rosenblum ML. Neurological manifes- tations of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS): experience at UCSF and review of the literature. J Neurosurg 1985;62:475-95.

Neurological complications of human immunodeficiency virus. Pge Kennedy, Postgrad Med. 64Kennedy PGE. Neurological complications of human immuno- deficiency virus. Postgrad Med 1988;64:180-7.

Human immunodeficiency virus infection of the nervous system. Pge Kennedy, Curr Opinion Neurol Neurosurg. 2Kennedy PGE. Human immunodeficiency virus infection of the nervous system. Curr Opinion Neurol Neurosurg 1989;2:191-4.

Neurologic manifestations of AIDS. J B Mcarthur, Medicine. 66McArthur JB. Neurologic manifestations of AIDS. Medicine 1987; 66:407-37.

HTLV-III infection in brains of children and adults with AIDS encephalopathy. G M Shaw, M H Harper, B H Hahn, Science. 227Shaw GM, Harper MH, Hahn BH, et al HTLV-III infection in brains of children and adults with AIDS encephalopathy. Science 1985;227:177-82.

The widening spectrum of infectious neurological disease. Pge Kennedy, J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 53Kennedy PGE. The widening spectrum of infectious neurologi- cal disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1990;53: 629-32.

Cellular localization of human immunodeficiency virus infection within the brains of acquired immune deficiency syndrome patients. C A Wiley, R D Schrier, J A Nelson, P W Lampert, Mba Oldstone, Proc Natl Acad Sci. 83Wiley CA, Schrier RD, Nelson JA, Lampert PW, Oldstone MBA. Cellular localization of human immunodeficiency virus infec- tion within the brains of acquired immune deficiency syndrome patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1986;83:7089-93.

Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigen expression in HIV encephalitis. Pge Kennedy, J Gairns, Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. in pressKennedy PGE, Gairns J. Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigen expression in HIV encephalitis. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 1992;in press.

Herpes simplex virus and the nervous system. Pge Kennedy, Postgrad Med J. 60Kennedy PGE. Herpes simplex virus and the nervous system. Postgrad Med J 1984;60:253-9.

A retrospective analysis of 46 cases of herpes simplex encephalitis seen in Glasgow between 1962 and 1985. Pge Kennedy, QJ Med. 67Kennedy PGE. A retrospective analysis of 46 cases of herpes sim- plex encephalitis seen in Glasgow between 1962 and 1985. QJ Med 1988;67:533-40.

Studies on the pathogenesis of neurological diseases associated with varicella-zoster virus. Pge Kennedy, J D Barrass, D I Graham, G B Clements, Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 16Kennedy PGE, Barrass JD, Graham DI, Clements GB. Studies on the pathogenesis of neurological diseases associated with varicel- la-zoster virus. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 1990;16:305-16.