-NC-ND license Ergothioneine, recent developments
2021

Irwin K Cheah 
Department of Biochemistry
Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine
National University of Singapore
117596Singapore

Life Science Institute
Centre for Life Sciences
Neurobiology Programme
National University of Singapore
117456Singapore

Barry Halliwell 
Department of Biochemistry
Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine
National University of Singapore
117596Singapore

Life Science Institute
Centre for Life Sciences
Neurobiology Programme
National University of Singapore
117456Singapore

-NC-ND license Ergothioneine, recent developments

Redox Biology
42101868202110.1016/j.redox.2021.101868Available online 26 January 2021 2213-2317/A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Ergothioneine OCTN1 Antioxidant Thiol/thione Mushroom A B S T R A C T
There has been a recent surge of interest in the unique low molecular weight dietary thiol/thione, ergothioneine. This compound can accumulate at high levels in the body from diet and may play important physiological roles in human health and development, and possibly in prevention and treatment of disease. Blood levels of ergothioneine decline with age and onset of various diseases. Here we highlight recent advances in our knowledge of ergothioneine.

Introduction

The unique sulphur-based chemistry of thiols plays an important role in cellular function and protection of cellular components (reviewed in Ref. [1]). The body has evolved to rely on highly abundant low molecular weight thiols such as glutathione (GSH), to maintain redox homeostasis but also play other important roles including xenobiotic detoxification and signalling [1,2]. Some of these thiols may also be derived from diet, such as the trimethyl-betaine derivative of histidine, ergothioneine (ET). Discovered more than a century ago, there has been a resurgence in interest in this low molecular weight thiol/thione, owing in part to its unique chemistry (e.g. its unusual stability, reviewed in Refs. [3,4]) and also the identification of a transporter, the organic cation transporter novel-type 1 (OCTN1), responsible for ET uptake and accumulation in human tissues from our diet and also the selective distribution to tissues owing to differential transporter expression [5][6][7]. Consistent with the recent attention on ET is the exponential growth in publications mentioning this compound (Fig. 1). These include a wide range of studies uncovering association of blood levels of ET with health and disease, mechanisms of cellular and tissue protection, potential therapeutic applications of ET, transporter expression and tissue distribution, biosynthetic mechanisms, and many others. This review highlights new insights and recent findings on this extraordinary compound.


The ergothioneine transporter


The organic cation transporter novel-type 1, an ergothioneine transporter?

It was discovered in 2005 that OCTN1 (encoded by the gene slc22a4) is primarily a transporter for ET, with higher transport efficiency than many other related metabolites [5], and without it (as seen in knockout animal models) there is an absence of ET in cells and tissues [8,9]. From the initial notion that OCTN1 primarily serves as an ET transporter, numerous other studies surfaced declaring that OCTN1 was involved in the transport of compounds such as nucleosides [10], acetylcholine [11], tetraethylammonium, spermine, L-carnitine, sulpiride, homostachydrine [12], cytarabine, gemcitabine, gabapentin, oxaliplatin, and metformin. However, many of these claims used unconventional models that were far from physiological. Recently the selective preference of ET as a substrate for OCTN1 was reaffirmed using both natively expressed [7] and over-expressed [6] OCTN1 in human cells, endorsing a suggestion to rename OCTN1 as the ergothioneine transporter (ETT) [13].

Abbreviations: 7KC, 7-ketocholesterol; AD, Alzheimer disease; AMD, age-related macular degeneration; ARE, antioxidant response element; CD, Crohn's disease; CDNB, 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene; COX, cyclooxygenase; DMN, dimethylnitrosamine; EFSA, European Food Safety Authority; ET, ergothioneine; ETT, ergothioneine transporter; GSH, reduced glutathione; GST, glutathione-S-transferases; HMEC, human mammary epithelial cells; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; ICAM, intercellular adhesion molecule; IL, interleukin; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; NF-κB, nuclear factor kappa B; NOX, NADPH oxidase; Nrf2, nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2; OCTN1, organic cation transporter novel type-1; PD, Parkinson disease; ROS, reactive oxygen species; SNPs, single nucleotide polymorphisms; SOD, superoxide dismutase; TNFα, tumor necrosis factor alpha; VCAM, vascular cell adhesion molecule.

However, as most groups still use the term OCTN1, we will follow that for this review.

The transporter is responsible for the avid uptake of ET from diet, with a wide distribution in many tissues (Fig. 2) [5,14]. ET is found in most, if not all, tissues of laboratory rats and mice despite there only being trace levels of ET in their diet [4,15], indicating efficient uptake and retention of this nutrient. OCTN1 expression is also seen on the rat proximal renal tubules [16], presumably important for renal reabsorption of ET, which may facilitate ET accumulation in the body. Indeed, OCTN1 knockout mice administered with ET intravenously revealed higher urinary excretion rates (>50% of administered dose) compared with wildtype animals (<10%) [17]. This impressive ability for ET to amass in the body and the selective distribution in tissues (through differential expression of the transporter), suggests that ET plays important physiological roles. However, OCTN1 knockout models (lacking tissue ET), have not yet revealed any substantial overt phenotypes or deficiency syndromes [8,9,18]. This could be due to compensatory defence pathways to maintain homeostasis in the absence of ET in healthy animals, although when these knockout models are stressed the phenotype is more pronounced [8,9]. Consequences of deficiency are hard to demonstrate in humans due to the abundant presence of ET in diet and its avid retention by the body. However, lower blood levels of ET have been associated with incidence of several disorders including Parkinson disease (PD) [19], mild cognitive impairment (MCI) [20], Crohn's disease (CD) [21] and frailty [22], while correspondingly higher levels of blood ET are correlated with lower risk of cardiometabolic disorders and associated mortality [23] and lower prevalence of peripheral neuropathy [24]. This is consistent with the notion that a deficiency in ET may elevate the risk of disease. Whether this decline in ET is a cause or consequence of disease remains to be established by in-depth, longitudinal studies.


Factors affecting ergothioneine transport

ET can be found in most (if not all) tissues, with differential rates of accumulation [4,15], owing to differing expression of the transporter [5]. High expression of the transporter, and hence high levels of ET, is observed in certain cells (e.g. blood cells, bone marrow, ocular tissues, brain etc.; Fig. 2) that are likely predisposed to oxidative stress, although other tissues can accumulate high levels of ET with sustained administration [4,15]. In certain animal disease models e.g. fatty liver disease [25], CD [14] and chronic kidney disease [26], an elevation in the OCTN1 transporter (via transcriptional activators including RUNXI, Sp1, and NFκB [27]) was seen in response to tissue injury. This has been suggested to be an adaptive physiological response to elevate ET in the damaged tissue and thereby limit further injury [28].

Although ET is obtained from diet [4,29,30], studies suggest that tissue levels of ET are closely associated with OCTN1 expression or polymorphisms of the transporter [14,31]; populations possess a number of single-nucleotide polymorphic variants (SNPs) of OCTN1 which affect ET transport kinetics [31]. Supporting this notion, subjects with higher basal blood levels of ET also had a greater uptake and accumulation of ET following oral administration, possibly due to polymorphisms of the transporter [32]. However, it is not yet known whether polymorphisms of OCTN1 (possibly accounting for lower blood levels of ET) may predispose certain individuals to disease. Although earlier studies associated the L503F variant of OCTN1, and the elevated ET in these individuals [33], with an increased risk of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), CD and ulcerative colitis [34,35], this was found to be a case of genetic hitch-hiking due to the association of this OCTN1 variant with the IBD5 haplotype, a known risk factor for CD [36]. The authors proposed that this variant, which results in up to 50% greater transport efficiency and 3-fold greater affinity for ET [33], was an adaptive mutation resulting from lower ET in the diets of these historic populations or positive selection due to high UV exposure (see section 3.2.6) of ancient farmers from this region [36]. The claimed associations between OCTN1 polymorphisms and IBD or rheumatoid arthritis remain controversial [36,37]. Longitudinal studies into SNPs of OCTN1 in populations, their blood levels of ET, and association with disease, should give further insights.  


Cellular location

Early studies [38][39][40] suggested (but did not rigorously establish) that OCTN1 is found in the mitochondria, allowing ET accumulation in this organelle [41]. Indeed, ET could protect mitochondrial DNA from oxidative damage due to hydrogen peroxide [39] or UV exposure [42].

Since then, few studies have investigated the intracellular localization of OCTN1 and ET. Mitochondrial dysfunction is implicated in a wide range of disorders and the therapeutic benefits of ET have been suggested to be mediated through protection of this organelle [43]. We recently demonstrated that ET protects mitochondrial morphology in transgenic Drosophila models of PD (unpublished data). Definitive evidence of ET uptake and accumulation in the mitochondria is required.


An alternative transporter?

A recent study of an orphaned solute carrier (the superfamily to which OCTN1 belongs) SLC22A15, demonstrated its capability to transport ET into transfected HEK293 cells, although with much lower transport efficiency than OCTN1 [44]. The authors suggest that SLC22A15, which has a higher expression than OCTN1 in the brain, may be important for deposition of ET in the brain, or perhaps translocation across the BBB [44] where the level of OCTN1 expression remains uncertain [45,46]. However, SLC22A15 does not appear to be involved in uptake into the body from the diet since OCTN1 knockout mice do not have appreciable levels of ET in blood and tissues following oral administration (ref. [8] and our unpublished data). Indeed, SLC22A15 expression is low in the gastrointestinal tract [44]. However, when ET was intravenously administered levels appear to be comparable, albeit low, in the brain between OCTN1 knockout and wildtype mice [17]. Further studies are needed to establish if SLC22A15 is indeed involved in brain uptake and accumulation of ET.


A gerontological perspective


Infants and children -possible role of ergothioneine in human development?

Almost nothing is known about the role of ET during development in human infants, although there is evidence of its presence in blood [47], urine [48], and brain [49] of new-borns and infants. Studies have identified the expression of OCTN1 on the rat placenta [50], which may facilitate transport of ET from the mother to offspring [4,47]. Our preliminary studies (unpublished data) indeed indicate a high correlation of blood ET levels between human mothers and children, suggesting that it is transported from mother to child and thus may play a role in infant development. OCTN1 is also expressed in human mammary glands [51] and a 4-fold upregulation of OCTN1 was observed in lactating human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC) compared with non-lactating HMEC [52]. Indeed, ET is present in human breast milk [47] and is also present in cow [53] and goat milk [47]. Nakamichi et al. [54] and Ishimoto et al. [55] demonstrated that ET promotes neurogenesis in mice, which may enhance memory [56], or alleviate symptoms of neuropsychiatric disorders [54]. It may therefore be plausible that ET plays a role in neuronal differentiation during growth and maturation of the brain in the developing child.

The administration of high levels of ET to pregnant female rats did not reveal any overt toxicity in either mother or offspring, however no observations were reported about possible beneficial outcomes for the offspring [57]. In part due to the absence of overt effects and the possible nutritional benefits of ET, the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) granted approval for ET to be used as a supplement in pregnant and breastfeeding women, children and infants [58]. Further research is needed to determine if ET is beneficial or essential for human development, and if so raises the question whether supplementation in infants may be advantageous (e.g. in infant formulas, although many of the formulas are based on cow's milk and already contain some ET [47,53]). A study of healthy males in Saudi Arabia found that blood levels of ET increase from infanthood to teenage years, peaking at early adulthood, again suggesting the possible importance of ET for human development [59].


Adulthood -role of ergothioneine in disease prevention


Role of ergothioneine in overall adult health

We previously demonstrated the uptake and retention of ET following oral administration to young (21-29 years of age) healthy adult males [32]. The administration of ET to these young healthy individuals, did not significantly decrease oxidative damage biomarkers, although the basal oxidative damage levels were already low. The absence of a significant change may indicate that ET is not a primary defence against oxidative stress, but rather acts as a secondary antioxidant buffer whenever the redox homeostasis is perturbed and/or when primary antioxidants are depleted through chronic exposure to oxidative stress. Indeed, the unique chemistry of ET, favouring the thione tautomer at physiological pH, gives rise to its stability and resistance to autooxidation (relative to other low-molecular weight thiols such as GSH), slow turnover, and ability to accumulate in the tissues. Despite the lack of significance, ET administration still revealed a trend toward lower levels of some oxidative damage biomarkers, relative to placebo controls [32]. Hence, although ET has potent antioxidant properties in vitro [3,60], protection against oxidative stress may not be its only, or even the primary physiological role (as suggested from an evolutionary perspective [61,62]).

ET promotes neuronal stem cell differentiation [55] which could be important in development and maintenance of the central nervous system. Knockdown of OCTN1 in K562 (erythroid progenitor cells) decreased cell proliferation and differentiation, supporting the view that ET is important for erythropoiesis [4,63]. One of the highest levels of ET is found in the bone marrow [64] (Fig. 2) with a correspondingly high expression of OCTN1 [5], which may act as a reservoir for ET, which could be incorporated into erythrocytes during erythropoiesis [4]. Indeed, erythrocytes possess high levels of ET (more than 50 times higher than plasma) and in our human studies whole blood levels continued to increase for up to 4 weeks beyond the point where ET administration had ceased [32], consistent with this hypothesis. The expression of OCTN1 is also seen in monocytes and macrophages [5,14] and a recent study suggested that ET plays a role in immunoregulation through toll-like receptor signalling in macrophages [65].


Nutrient for reproductive health?

Expression of OCTN1 has been demonstrated in testes and seminal vesicles [8] with high levels of ET reported in seminal plasma of animals and humans [66][67][68]. Although the level of ET in seminal plasma is highly variable, the levels are typically much greater than that of GSH and cysteine [66,68]. ROS play a role in sperm function and fertilization, hence a delicate balance of ROS for physiological function versus prevention of oxidative damage is needed [69,70]. ET may be an ideal agent to maintain redox homeostasis since it does not interfere with the critical roles of ROS but may become active during times of excessive oxidative stress [28,47]. The anti-cancer drug cisplatin causes testicular damage and dysfunction of the Leydig cells leading to infertility [71]. Administration of cisplatin to Wistar rats decreased sperm count and motility and increased the incidence of abnormal sperm morphologies, decreased testosterone levels and led to necrosis of testicular interstitial cells [72]. Oral supplementation with ET for 14 days before cisplatin administration abolished these detrimental effects [72]. Interestingly, oral administration of ET alone (without cisplatin) was found to increase sperm counts and motility, decrease sperm abnormalities, and significantly decrease basal levels of malondialdehyde compared with control rats [72]. Hence ET may play a role in preserving reproductive health. In recent times average sperm counts have dropped significantly, with one study in European men indicating average sperm numbers falling from 100 million/ml in 1940s to around 40 million/ml at present, increasing the risk of infertility [73]. Perhaps ET supplementation could help, and warrants this investigation.


Prevention of tissue injury and fibrosis

Exposure of tissues to chronic inflammation and persistent oxidative stress due to environmental (chemical or radiation) insults, allergies, persistent infections, autoimmune reactions, and so on, can lead to damage and remodelling of tissue, eventually triggering fibrosis, which may ultimately lead to organ failure [74]. Multiple studies in cell cultures and animal models have demonstrated that ET not only modulates levels of inflammatory cytokines and mitigates oxidative or nitrosative damage [75][76][77], but may also slow or prevent fibrosis [26,78,79].

For example, the hepatotoxin dimethylnitrosamine (DMN), elevated oxidative damage and smooth muscle α-actin (a marker for fibrosis) in human hepatic stellate cells, but pre-treatment of the cells with ET decreased DMN-induced elevations in 4-hydroxynonenal and fibrosis [78]. Moreover, OCTN1 expression in hepatocytes was elevated in wild-type mice following DMN treatment [78], which is consistent with an earlier study demonstrating an increase of liver OCTN1 expression and tissue ET in a guinea pig model of fatty liver disease [25]. Another study claimed that ET protected rat kidney and liver against oxidative damage caused by ferric-nitrilotriacetate [75]. Conversely, OCTN1-knockout in mice exacerbated indoxyl sulfate-induced kidney [26] and DMN-induced liver injury [78] and aggravated oxidative damage, inflammation and fibrosis in both models. The ROS-generating NADPH oxidase, NOX4, which is highly expressed in hepatocytes and may play a role in liver fibrosis, was significantly elevated in OCTN1 knockout animals, while ET supplementation of human hepatic stellate cells decreased expression of NOX4 [78].

Multiple studies also demonstrate lung protection by ET. In a mouse model of acute respiratory distress syndrome using cytokine insufflated (IL-1 and IFNγ) rats, ET protected against acute lung injury [80]. Likewise, in a model of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, using cigarette smoke extract to promote oxidative stress and cell migration in human alveolar epithelial cells, ET treatment prevented not only cell death [81,82], but also cell migration (fibrosis) [79]. When mice were exposed to cigarette smoke over 6 months, elevated numbers of inflammatory cells in the broncho-alveolar lavage fluid, alveolar damage and increased inflammatory cytokines were observed; these effects were more severe in OCTN1-knockout mice [82]. Collectively, these studies indicate that the distribution and accumulation of ET in organs may serve as a protectant against injury and permanent scarring. Whether these benefits of ET involve its antioxidant, or other, properties, remains to be seen.


Pre-eclampsia

Pre-eclampsia, a serious complication of pregnancy, is characterized by hypertension, oxidative stress, placental ischaemia, and proteinuria [83,84]. In a rodent model of pre-eclampsia, ET supplementation decreased hypertension and circulating sFlt-1(a marker of pre-eclampsia), and increased expression of placental Nrf2, superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD-1), mitochondrial enzymes (PGC-1α, UCP-1 and SOD2) and decreased mitochondrial ROS in maternal rats, leading to increased foetal weight [43,85]. Furthermore, prior studies showed that ET could also be beneficial in protecting against ischaemia-reperfusion injury [77,86,87]. These studies highlight the potential therapeutic application of ET for pre-eclampsia [84]; and EFSA has granted approval for supplementation in pregnant women [58].


Concomitant application in cancer therapy

While there are few studies assessing association of ET blood levels with cancers [4], some studies have explored the benefits of ET in reducing the detrimental side effects, or enhancing the effectiveness of, chemotherapies. Chronic peripheral neuropathy is a common side effect in patients undergoing chemotherapy for colorectal cancer, however Winkels et al. [24] suggest that high blood levels of ET were associated with less neuropathy. In Sprague-Dawley rats, oxaliplatin (chemotherapy for metastatic or advanced colorectal cancer) induced peripheral neuropathy, but co-administration with ET (15 mg/kg) ameliorated neuropathy, apparently by decreasing oxaliplatin accumulation in dorsal root ganglion neurons [24].

Anthracyclines such as doxorubicin, are effective and widely used chemotherapeutics for breast cancers, lymphomas, lung cancers and many others, but their clinical application is limited by the occurrence of cardiotoxicity with high doses or prolonged use [88]. Our preliminary studies in mice suggest that ET accumulates in the heart and offers protection against anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity (manuscript in preparation).

Another study demonstrated that ET may augment the response of tumour-associated macrophages and thereby prevent an immunosuppressive microenvironment caused by cytotoxic T lymphocytes and thus enhance the efficacy of cancer vaccine immunotherapy [65,89].


Protection of the skin

Several studies demonstrated that ET protects skin cells from UVirradiation [42,[90][91][92]. Although this may be partially attributed to the UV-absorbing properties of ET, it was also shown to protect by raising endogenous antioxidant levels via Nrf2/ARE in human keratinocytes [91]. Silencing Nrf2 or OCTN1 expression in the keratinocytes inhibited these protective effects [91]. Another study demonstrated that ET protected against UV-induced mitochondrial DNA damage [42]. Not surprisingly, ET has found its way into various cosmetics and topical skin products.


Elderly; ET as a longevity nutrient


Blood levels of ET with age

A study in Saudi males found that blood ET levels increase with age until early adulthood but then gradually decline with advancing age [59]. A similar trend was seen in rats where blood ET levels increase up to 11 weeks of age then decline [41]. Plasma ET levels continue to decline in an elderly Asian population (beyond 60 years of age) [20], and an Australian epidemiological study revealed that serum ET levels were inversely correlated with age (55-85 years) [93]. This decline in blood ET with age could be due to numerous factors such as increased turnover, dietary changes or altered transport function (decreased OCTN1 expression or impaired transporter functionality). We demonstrated in a Singaporean elderly population [20] that blood ET levels were correlated to self-reported mushroom consumption, but there was no significant trend between age and mushroom consumption, indicating that the decrease in ET may not be due to altered diet in this case.

Blood (and likely tissue) levels of ET are also significantly decreased in individuals with a variety of age-related disorders [19,20,23]. This suggests that lower blood levels of ET are a risk factor for age-related disorders and supplementation could be beneficial. Indeed, Ames [94] suggested that ET should be classified as a "longevity vitamin", i.e. it may play a role in lowering the risk, or progression, of age-related disorders, and promote healthy longevity. Consistent with this, a study investigating 131 blood metabolites and their association with frailty, identified that a declining blood ET level correlates with markers associated with frailty [22].


Ocular health

The cornea of the eye is constantly exposed to atmospheric levels of oxygen [1], and coupled with the fact that retina is one of the highest oxygen-consuming tissues in the human body [95], results in an organ that is exposed to high levels of oxidative stress [1] and may require high levels of antioxidant defences to maintain redox homeostasis. Earlier studies identified that high levels of ET are present in ocular tissues including the lens, retina, cornea and retinal pigmented epithelium [96,97]. Corresponding to this some of the highest levels of OCTN1 mRNA expression can be found in the eye in pigs [68], zebrafish [9] and humans (Fig. 2). In humans, ET is present in tears and aqueous humour [47]. Hence ET may help protect the eye against oxidative damage, whereas lower ET levels might predispose to ocular disorders. Indeed, ET levels in human eye lens decreased significantly with increasing severity of cataract formation [98,99]. Another ocular disease, age-related macular degeneration (AMD), the leading cause of irreversible blindness, has pathogenic mechanisms involving oxidative damage and immune dysregulation (reviewed in [1]), implying that ET could be protective for this condition. Indeed, ET protected corneal endothelial cells against hydrogen peroxide-mediated oxidative stress and the unfolded protein response [100]. However, few studies have investigated any protective role of ET in AMD and other ocular diseases.


Neurological disorders

The ability of ET to accumulate in the brain (although more work needs to be done to establish the distribution and cellular location of ET in the human brain, peripheral nervous system and cerebrospinal fluid) and its neuroprotective capabilities in a range of models both in vitro and in vivo, have been previously reviewed (see Refs. [3,47,101]), hence we will focus on more recent advances. Evidence suggests that ET may protect the brain against oxidative damage [102,103] and neuroinflammation [104,105], target underlying pathologies in neurodegeneration such as mitochondrial dysfunction [39,43] and toxic amyloid accumulation [106,107], and even promote neurogenesis [55,108,109]. Silencing OCTN1 prevented ET uptake in Neuro2a (mouse neuroblastoma) cells, leading to a decrease in cell proliferation and differentiation while concurrently downregulating the neurite marker GAP43 and increasing oxidative stress markers HO-1 and SOX2 [108]. Subsequently it was demonstrated that ET induced differentiation in neural progenitor cells as evidenced by a decrease in neurospheres, the upregulation of neuronal marker βIII-tubulin, and differentiation activator gene Math1, while silencing OCTN1 abolished these effects [109]. This differentiation was said to be mediated through activation of S6K1 and neurotrophin 4/5-TrkB signalling [55] and studies have shown that S6K1 overexpression promotes dopaminergic neuronal differentiation of human neural stem cells [110]. Mice administered ET for 14 days demonstrated a dose-dependent increase of ET in the hippocampus, with an enhancement of memory and learning ability, and an increase in neuronal spines in the dentate gyrus at doses greater than 20 mg/kg [56]. In cultured primary hippocampal neurons, administration of ET, elevated the expression of βIII-tubulin, synapsin I, and neurotrophins 3 and 5, suggesting that ET promotes hippocampal neuron maturation by increasing neurite and synapse formation [56]. This may also have implications for the use of ET in counteracting neurodegenerative disorders. Indeed, the ability of ET to promote neuronal differentiation may be a mechanism behind enhanced object recognition memory and prevention of neuropsychiatric disorders such as depression, as evidenced from studies in mouse models [54,56].

Chronic sleep loss and depressive symptoms are both risk factors for neurodegenerative disorders [111][112][113]. Moreover, the treatment of depressive symptoms may impede the pathological progression of AD [114]. In a mouse model of depression, oral administration of ET exhibited antidepressant-like effects, improving spleen and body weights [54]. Similarly, in a rat model of major depressive disorder, leading to sleep abnormalities and depressive social avoidance behaviours, the oral administration of ET for 7 days prior to social defeat stress ameliorated these effects [115]. The authors attributed the beneficial effects of ET on sleep and depression to a possible reduction in inflammation around the brainstem and peripheral nervous system together with management of intracerebral oxidative stress [115], and the possible involvement of ET in neurogenesis.

Another neurological condition, epilepsy, characterized by abnormal electrical-mediated activity in the brain leading to recurrent seizures, was found to be exacerbated by OCTN1 uptake of homostachydrine in the brain of mouse models [12]. However, ET administration to these mice decreased homostachydrine uptake in the brain (presumably through competing transport of ET) leading to decreased seizures and prolonged survival of the animals [12]. Glutamate receptor-mediated hyperexcitation plays a key role in seizures, but a study demonstrated that ET protected rat retinal neurons against N-methyl-D-aspartate excitotoxicity [116].

Glucose dysregulation, in part due to oxidative damage to key enzymes and dysfunction of the mitochondria, is a major component of AD [117,118]. ET restored cell viability following hyperglycaemia-induced cytotoxicity in rat pheochromocytoma cells by decreasing formation of ROS, protein carbonyls, and advanced glycation end products, and inhibiting NF-κB activation [104]. A similar rescue was observed from ET administration to human brain endothelial cells under hyperglycaemic conditions [119]. Moreover, D-galactose administration in mice triggered learning and memory deficits, but ET administration to animals not only significantly improved performance in both tasks but also decreased β-amyloid accumulation in the hippocampus and lipid peroxidation in the brain [103].

Declines in blood ET are not only seen in PD and MCI subjects but also with vascular dementia (manuscript in preparation). Indeed, the vascular endothelium plays a critical role in brain function by maintaining blood-brain barrier permeability and cerebral blood flow, and dysfunction of this system aggravates many neurodegenerative disorders [120,121]. ET administration to human brain microvascular endothelial cells prevented pyrogallol, xanthine/xanthine oxidase or high glucose-induced cell death by protecting against oxidative stress and enhancing the expression of antioxidant enzymes, while decreasing NADPH oxidase 1 (NOX1) expression [119,122]. In a diabetic rat model, these same stressors impaired acetylcholine-induced relaxation in brain basilar arteries, however ET dose-dependently decreased this impairment in relaxation [119]. The cholesterol oxidation product, 7-ketocholesterol (7KC), is elevated in the cortical tissue of AD patients [123] and is implicated in other neurodegenerative disorders [124,125]. In human brain endothelial cells 7KC induced the expression of proinflammatory genes and cyclooxygenase-2, but treatment with ET reduced the 7KC-induced expression of IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, TNFα and COX-2 [105].

The evidence suggesting that ET is beneficial against neurodegeneration comes from cell culture and animal models. Many antioxidants and other therapeutic compounds have shown promise in animal models but failed to translate the benefits to human neurological disorders such as AD (reviewed in Ref. [1]). While ET overcomes the major hurdle of translocation across the BBB and accumulation in the brain, randomized placebo-controlled clinical studies are needed to establish any human therapeutic benefits.


Cardiovascular disorders

Evidence that ET may influence cardiovascular health comes from a longitudinal study associating changes in blood metabolites with cardiometabolic diseases in 3236 subjects over 20 years [23]. Out of 112 metabolites, higher blood ET had the most significant association with lower risk of cardiometabolic disease and mortality, independent of age, gender, fasting glucose, cholesterol and triglyceride levels, alcohol intake, and smoking status [23].

Dysfunction of the vascular endothelium is central to a wide range of cardiovascular disorders, including hypertension, atherosclerosis, chronic heart failure, coronary artery disease, and diabetes [126]. A possible major underlying mechanism for the benefits of ET in the cardiovascular system is protection of the vascular endothelium, as previously mentioned for brain endothelium [105,119]. Other studies revealed that ET protects endothelium from oxidative damage and cell death due to paraquat, hydrogen peroxide, high glucose [127] or oxidized-LDL [128] exposure. Moreover, ET significantly inhibited proinflammatory cytokine or oxidized LDL-induction of inflammatory cell adhesion molecules, VCAM-1, ICAM-1 and E-selectin [129].


Sources of ergothioneine


A culinary perspective

ET is present in a wide array of foods, but the highest dietary levels of ET are found in certain mushrooms [29,30,47,130] and Spirulina [131], which produce their own ET [132]. Several studies have investigated the putative health benefits of mushroom consumption. These include the association of increased mushroom consumption with decreased risks of dementia [133,134], cardiovascular disease, certain cancers (e.g. prostate and breast cancer) [135,136], IBD [137], metabolic syndrome [138], PD and other neurological disorders [139], viral infections [140] and many other conditions. Some of the studies attributed these perceived health benefits of mushrooms to the ET present [129,[141][142][143]. However, mushrooms contain many other compounds (e.g. β-glucans, polysaccharides, etc.) which could also be beneficial [30].


Biosynthesis of ET by gut microflora?

The gut microbiota play a pivotal role in human health and disease. The genes encoded by this vast pool of microorganisms outnumber those of the host by more than 100-fold and are responsible for some essential metabolic functions including the production of certain vitamins and amino acids [144,145]. Although animals and humans are only known to obtain ET from dietary sources [4], certain bacteria can synthesise ET, including Mycobacterium spp. [146][147][148] and Burkholderia spp. [149] belonging to the phyla Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria, respectively. They produce ET from histidine, albeit through distinct mechanisms [150]. Transforming Escherichia coli (not naturally capable of ET biosynthesis) with egtBD genes, enables them to produce ET [149], although addition of egtACE genes enhanced ET production in E. coli [151,152]. Deeper in silico analysis of bacteria from the phyla Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, Cyanobacteria and Proteobacteria, present in normal gut microflora, reveals that many of these bacteria appear to possess the egtBD genes, or homologs of them. This therefore raises the question as to whether gut microflora can produce ET. Although evidence suggests that this does not occur (reviewed in Ref. [4]), this probably needs re-examination using more sensitive and accurate methods for ET analysis. If so, could ET production by the microbiome contribute to tissue levels of ET, and would changes in gut microflora, as seen in a wide range of diseases, influence the levels of ET in the body? This may also present another explanation for lower blood levels of ET seen in many disorders. Indeed, with the increasing evidence of an intricate link between the gut microbiota and the brain [153], an altered microbiome leading to reduced ET levels in the body could contribute to disease.

No studies to date have definitively established that gut microbiota can produce ET [4], but one study indicated that Lactobacillus reuteri may produce ET in vitro and that an elevation of L. reuteri correlated with an increase in faecal ET levels in rats [115]. However, the presence of ET in a microorganism is not definitive evidence of ET production since some bacteria can take up ET from their environment [4,149]. Studies with isotopically labelled precursors or isolation of ET biosynthetic enzymes are needed to confirm ET production. The authors did identify that elevated faecal ET correlated with an increase in L. reuteri in a rat stress model, and administration of ET in this model improved sleep abnormalities and social avoidance behaviours [115]. However, studies by our laboratory using isotopically labelled histidine as a precursor did not reveal any indication of ET biosynthesis by L. reuteri (our unpublished data), and the Lactobacilli spp. genome does not appear to contain ET biosynthetic genes. Perhaps the authors identified that Lactobacilli can accumulate ET from their environment. Nevertheless, the uptake and utilisation of ET by gut microbiota may still play a crucial role in influencing ET uptake by the host. More work is needed to study this.

Indeed, cell-free extracts of E. coli can break down ET to yield thiourocanic acid and trimethylamine, attributed to the trimethylamine-lyase, ergothionase [154]. Some other microorganisms including Burkholderia sp. [155], Treponema denticola [156], and Alcaligenes faecalis [157,158], also possess ergothionase. Further studies are needed to evaluate if other commensal bacteria can degrade ET and if this contributes to decreased absorption of ET from the gut.


Biosynthetic mechanisms

EFSA has permitted the use of ET as a food additive and supplement [159] even in pregnant women and infants [58]. Meanwhile, the US Food and Drug Administration has granted ET the status of "Generally Recognized as Safe" (GRAS) to be used as a food additive and supplement. This facilitates the broader application of ET for use in general health and wellbeing or application against a range of diseases.

Besides chemical synthesis (Tetrahedron), several groups have demonstrated the bio-production of ET in the yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae (not naturally capable of ET biosynthesis), through cloning of two ET biosynthetic genes from the mushroom Grifola frondosa [160] or a combination of bacterial and fungal genes from Mycobacterium smegmatis and Claviceps purpurea (the ergot fungus, where ET was first identified) [161]. Other groups have enhanced biosynthesis by recombinantly enhancing copy numbers of the ET biosynthesis genes and enhancing the histidine precursor availability (by removing histidine ammonia-lyase) in Methylobacterium [162]. Other methods have also been utilized to harness synthetic biology to produce ET and scale up its production using a range of bacterial and fungal microorganisms [151,152,161,163] and even to generate isotopically labelled variants of ET for research [164].


Role of ergothioneine in infectious diseases


Coronavirus infectious disease 2019 (COVID-19)

The highly contagious severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 responsible for the devastating COVID-19 pandemic, has infected more than 100 million individuals and led to almost 2.2 million deaths across the globe at the time of writing (WHO COVID-19 situation reports). The battle to curb coronavirus infections has given rise to both repurposed and novel therapeutics to reduce the severity and duration of illness. We suggested that ET might alleviate symptoms and improve prognostic outcomes of COVID-19 patients [165], since it can protect against the underlying pathologies implicated in COVID-19, e.g. acute respiratory distress syndrome (the main cause of mortality in COVID-19) [80], excessive oxidative damage [60,166,167], inflammation [76,77,168], and endothelial dysfunction [119,127]. The presence of ET in major organs could also protect them from injury due to a hyperactive immune response and prevent permanent damage (e.g. fibrosis) [25,26,54,72,78,79,169].


Opportunistic pathogens

A darker side of ET is that certain pathogens can synthesise ET including Burkholderia and Mycobacteria tuberculosis, as a means of protecting against host defences, or enhancing antibiotic resistance [149,170]. Indeed, in M. tuberculosis, which causes tuberculosis, ET maintains bioenergetic homeostasis and protects against oxidative stress, enhancing virulence in animal models [170]. The opportunistic fungal pathogen A. fumigatus is also capable of ET biosynthesis, which may enhance its resistance to environmental heavy metals and host-generated ROS [171].

As mentioned earlier, while most microorganisms are incapable of ET biosynthesis, some can accumulate and utilize ET from their surrounding environment [4], especially some opportunistic pathogens e.g. E. coli [154] and the oral pathogen Treponema denticola [156]. Drugs targeting the uptake mechanisms may thus be useful in limiting their pathogenicity. A clearer understanding of the role of ET in pathogenic I.K. Cheah and B. Halliwell microorganisms could reveal mechanisms to reduce virulence and/or drug resistance, for example by targeting ET biosynthesis.


Alternative applications of ergothioneine

With the distinctive chemistry of ET, it is not surprising that there has been a myriad of alternative applications for it. S-methyl ergothioneine and hercynine have been identified as likely metabolites of ET in the body. Indeed their levels are highly correlated with ET in blood [32] and most tissues (although there are some exceptions e.g. the brain which typically has higher levels of hercynine) [15]. However, their function remains unknown. Glutathione-S-transferases (GST) catalyse the detoxification of various xenobiotics utilizing GSH and may facilitate the methylation of GSH. Whether another such enzyme exists for ET, or if GST can also utilize ET, is unknown. One study described ET as a xenobiotic amino acid, facilitating nucleophilic substitution-type reactions to counteract toxins in vitro in a similar manner to GSH, as demonstrated by reaction with 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (CDNB) to form an ET-CDNB product in human lung epithelial cells, improving cell viability [172]. Although the enzymes involved remain unknown, the ET-CDNB product is suggested to efflux from the cells using multi-drug resistance transporters [172]. Further studies are needed to validate this and elucidate the enzymes involved.

ET has also been used as a food preservative [30]. Extracts of edible Enoki mushroom were shown to prevent melanosis or blackspot formation in harvested shrimps, which were attributed to the anti-melanosic and antioxidant properties of ET [173]. Likewise, studies demonstrated that ET prevented oxidation of lipids and myoglobin in beef and fish meat, preventing discoloration for more than a week on ice [174]. As such, patents (US20130035361A1 and CA2680223A1) were filed in the US and Canada for the use of ET as a preservative in foods, medicines and beverages.

Beyond this, the unique chemistry of ET may enable robust photostabilization of various fluorophores (personal communication), and recent studies have also shown that ET has an intense surface-enhanced Raman scattering spectrum, which the authors suggest may enable noninvasive analysis of ET in biofluids as a prognostic tool [175]. Interestingly, ET has also been suggested as a metabolite to estimate the age of bloodstains at crime scenes, due to its stability and slow time-dependent degradation [176].


Final thoughts

The unique chemistry of ET gives rise to its high stability and ability to accumulate in the body, enabling a wide range of cytoprotective and disease mitigating properties. While associations have been made between low blood levels of ET and various human disorders, there is much still unknown. Nevertheless, the uptake in the foetus and infant, the near, if not fully, ubiquitous presence in tissues and the avid retention by the body are strong evidence that ET plays a critical role in human development and health. Numerous animal studies have also demonstrated its benefits, whereas preventing uptake through silencing OCTN1 appears to worsen pathology in these disease models. It remains to be seen whether supplementation in humans, especially the elderly or the subset of individuals with lower blood levels of ET (due to polymorphic variants of the transporter or diet), could reduce the risk of age-related and other diseases, or act as a therapeutic by slowing or halting disease progression. The safety profile of ET and regulatory approvals facilitate such studies. With the rapid surge in interest (Fig. 1), it is undoubtedly exciting times for this unique low molecular weight compound.


Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Fig. 1 .
1Since its first isolation in 1905, there was initially significant interest in ET, however the interest waned until the discovery of its transporter (ETT/ OCTN1) in 2005 and has since been the focus of intense research. The graph shows the number of publications on PubMed (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih. gov/) by time period for the keyword 'ergothioneine'.

Fig. 2 .
2RNA expression of slc22a4 (encoding OCTN1) in the human body using normalized consensus RNA expression data from 3 data sets (genotype-tissue expression project, human protein atlas dataset, and the FANTOM5 project). Graph and data adapted from the Human Protein Atlas (https://www.proteina tlas.org/)[177].
Redox Biology 42 (2021) 101868
AcknowledgementsThe authors thank Tetrahedron (14 avenue de l'Opera, Paris, France) for the provision of L-ergothioneine used in our studies. The authors also thank the Tan Chin Tuan Centennial Foundation, the National Medical Research Council (Individual Research Grant NMRC/1264/2010/082/ 12) and the Ministry of Health Singapore, Healthy Longevity Catalyst Award (HLCA20Jan-0057) for financial support.
B Halliwell, J M Gutteridge, Free Radicals in Biology and Medicine. Oxford, UKClarendon Pressfifth ed.B. Halliwell, J.M. Gutteridge, Free Radicals in Biology and Medicine, fifth ed., Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK, 2015.

The versatile low-molecular-weight thiols: beyond cell protection. M Wang, Q Zhao, W Liu, Bioessays. 3712M. Wang, Q. Zhao, W. Liu, The versatile low-molecular-weight thiols: beyond cell protection, Bioessays 37 (12) (2015) 1262-1267.

Halliwell, Ergothioneine; antioxidant potential, physiological function and role in disease. I K Cheah, B , Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 18225I.K. Cheah, B. Halliwell, Ergothioneine; antioxidant potential, physiological function and role in disease, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1822 (5) (2012) 784-793.

. D B Melville, Ergothioneine , Vitam Horm. 17D.B. Melville, Ergothioneine, Vitam Horm 17 (1959) 155-204.

Discovery of the ergothioneine transporter. D Grundemann, S Harlfinger, S Golz, A Geerts, A Lazar, R Berkels, N Jung, A Rubbert, E Schomig, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 10214D. Grundemann, S. Harlfinger, S. Golz, A. Geerts, A. Lazar, R. Berkels, N. Jung, A. Rubbert, E. Schomig, Discovery of the ergothioneine transporter, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102 (14) (2005) 5256-5261.

Substrate selectivity check of the ergothioneine transporter. J Tschirka, M Kreisor, J Betz, D Grundemann, Drug Metab. Dispos. 466J. Tschirka, M. Kreisor, J. Betz, D. Grundemann, Substrate selectivity check of the ergothioneine transporter, Drug Metab. Dispos. 46 (6) (2018) 779-785.

Specificity of the ergothioneine transporter natively expressed in HeLa cells. R A J Tucker, I K Cheah, B Halliwell, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 5131R.A.J. Tucker, I.K. Cheah, B. Halliwell, Specificity of the ergothioneine transporter natively expressed in HeLa cells, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 513 (1) (2019) 22-27.

Gene knockout and metabolome analysis of carnitine/organic cation transporter OCTN1. Y Kato, Y Kubo, D Iwata, S Kato, T Sudo, T Sugiura, T Kagaya, T Wakayama, A Hirayama, M Sugimoto, K Sugihara, S Kaneko, T Soga, M Asano, M Tomita, T Matsui, M Wada, A Tsuji, Pharm. Res. (N. Y.). 275Y. Kato, Y. Kubo, D. Iwata, S. Kato, T. Sudo, T. Sugiura, T. Kagaya, T. Wakayama, A. Hirayama, M. Sugimoto, K. Sugihara, S. Kaneko, T. Soga, M. Asano, M. Tomita, T. Matsui, M. Wada, A. Tsuji, Gene knockout and metabolome analysis of carnitine/organic cation transporter OCTN1, Pharm. Res. (N. Y.) 27 (5) (2010) 832-840.

Knockout of the ergothioneine transporter ETT in zebrafish results in increased 8-oxoguanine levels, Free Radic. C Pfeiffer, M Bach, T Bauer, J Campos Da Ponte, E Schomig, D Grundemann, Biol. Med. 83C. Pfeiffer, M. Bach, T. Bauer, J. Campos da Ponte, E. Schomig, D. Grundemann, Knockout of the ergothioneine transporter ETT in zebrafish results in increased 8- oxoguanine levels, Free Radic. Biol. Med. 83 (2015) 178-185.

OCTN1 is a high-affinity carrier of nucleoside analogues. C D Drenberg, A A Gibson, S B Pounds, L Shi, D P Rhinehart, L Li, S Hu, G Du, A T Nies, M Schwab, N Pabla, W Blum, T A Gruber, S D Baker, A Sparreboom, Canc. Res. 778C.D. Drenberg, A.A. Gibson, S.B. Pounds, L. Shi, D.P. Rhinehart, L. Li, S. Hu, G. Du, A.T. Nies, M. Schwab, N. Pabla, W. Blum, T.A. Gruber, S.D. Baker, A. Sparreboom, OCTN1 is a high-affinity carrier of nucleoside analogues, Canc. Res. 77 (8) (2017) 2102-2111.

Acetylcholine and acetylcarnitine transport in peritoneum: role of the SLC22A4 (OCTN1) transporter. L Pochini, M Scalise, S Di Silvestre, S Belviso, A Pandolfi, A Arduini, M Bonomini, C Indiveri, Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 18584L. Pochini, M. Scalise, S. Di Silvestre, S. Belviso, A. Pandolfi, A. Arduini, M. Bonomini, C. Indiveri, Acetylcholine and acetylcarnitine transport in peritoneum: role of the SLC22A4 (OCTN1) transporter, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1858 (4) (2016) 653-660.

Homostachydrine is a xenobiotic substrate of OCTN1/ SLC22A4 and potentially sensitizes pentylenetetrazole-induced seizures in mice. M Nishiyama, N Nakamichi, T Yoshimura, Y Masuo, T Komori, T Ishimoto, J I Matsuo, Y Kato, Neurochem. Res. 4511M. Nishiyama, N. Nakamichi, T. Yoshimura, Y. Masuo, T. Komori, T. Ishimoto, J. I. Matsuo, Y. Kato, Homostachydrine is a xenobiotic substrate of OCTN1/ SLC22A4 and potentially sensitizes pentylenetetrazole-induced seizures in mice, Neurochem. Res. 45 (11) (2020) 2664-2678.

The ergothioneine transporter controls and indicates ergothioneine activity-a review. D Grundemann, Prev. Med. 54SupplD. Grundemann, The ergothioneine transporter controls and indicates ergothioneine activity-a review, Prev. Med. 54 (Suppl) (2012) S71-S74.

Increased ergothioneine tissue concentrations in carriers of the Crohn's disease risk-associated 503F variant of the organic cation transporter OCTN1. D Taubert, N Jung, T Goeser, E Schomig, Gut. 582D. Taubert, N. Jung, T. Goeser, E. Schomig, Increased ergothioneine tissue concentrations in carriers of the Crohn's disease risk-associated 503F variant of the organic cation transporter OCTN1, Gut 58 (2) (2009) 312-314.

Distribution and accumulation of dietary ergothioneine and its metabolites in mouse tissues. R M Y Tang, I K Cheah, T S K Yew, B Halliwell, Sci. Rep. 81Article 1601R.M.Y. Tang, I.K. Cheah, T.S.K. Yew, B. Halliwell, Distribution and accumulation of dietary ergothioneine and its metabolites in mouse tissues, Sci. Rep. 8 (1) (2018). Article 1601.

Functional characterization of apical transporters expressed in rat proximal tubular cells (PTCs) in primary culture. T Nakanishi, A Fukushi, M Sato, M Yoshifuji, T Gose, Y Shirasaka, K Ohe, M Kobayashi, K Kawai, I Tamai, Mol. Pharm. 86T. Nakanishi, A. Fukushi, M. Sato, M. Yoshifuji, T. Gose, Y. Shirasaka, K. Ohe, M. Kobayashi, K. Kawai, I. Tamai, Functional characterization of apical transporters expressed in rat proximal tubular cells (PTCs) in primary culture, Mol. Pharm. 8 (6) (2011) 2142-2150.

Functional expression of carnitine/organic cation transporter OCTN1/SLC22A4 in mouse small intestine and liver. T Sugiura, S Kato, T Shimizu, T Wakayama, N Nakamichi, Y Kubo, D Iwata, K Suzuki, T Soga, M Asano, S Iseki, I Tamai, A Tsuji, Y Kato, Drug Metabol. Dispos. 3810T. Sugiura, S. Kato, T. Shimizu, T. Wakayama, N. Nakamichi, Y. Kubo, D. Iwata, K. Suzuki, T. Soga, M. Asano, S. Iseki, I. Tamai, A. Tsuji, Y. Kato, Functional expression of carnitine/organic cation transporter OCTN1/SLC22A4 in mouse small intestine and liver, Drug Metabol. Dispos. 38 (10) (2010) 1665-1672.

Knockout of a putative ergothioneine transporter in Caenorhabditis elegans decreases lifespan and increases susceptibility to oxidative damage. I K Cheah, R L Ong, J Gruber, T S Yew, L F Ng, C B Chen, B Halliwell, Free Radic. Res. 4712I.K. Cheah, R.L. Ong, J. Gruber, T.S. Yew, L.F. Ng, C.B. Chen, B. Halliwell, Knockout of a putative ergothioneine transporter in Caenorhabditis elegans decreases lifespan and increases susceptibility to oxidative damage, Free Radic. Res. 47 (12) (2013) 1036-1045.

Identification of novel biomarkers for Parkinson's disease by metabolomic technologies. T Hatano, S Saiki, A Okuzumi, R P Mohney, N Hattori, J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry. 873T. Hatano, S. Saiki, A. Okuzumi, R.P. Mohney, N. Hattori, Identification of novel biomarkers for Parkinson's disease by metabolomic technologies, J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 87 (3) (2016) 295-301.

Ergothioneine levels in an elderly population decrease with age and incidence of cognitive decline; a risk factor for neurodegeneration?. I Cheah, L Feng, R M Y Tang, K H M Lim, B Halliwell, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 4781I. Cheah, L. Feng, R.M.Y. Tang, K.H.M. Lim, B. Halliwell, Ergothioneine levels in an elderly population decrease with age and incidence of cognitive decline; a risk factor for neurodegeneration? Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 478 (1) (2016) 162-167.

Serum metabolomics identifies altered bioenergetics, signaling cascades in parallel with exposome markers in Crohn's disease. Y Lai, J Xue, C W Liu, B Gao, L Chi, P Tu, K Lu, H Ru, Molecules. 243449Y. Lai, J. Xue, C.W. Liu, B. Gao, L. Chi, P. Tu, K. Lu, H. Ru, Serum metabolomics identifies altered bioenergetics, signaling cascades in parallel with exposome markers in Crohn's disease, Molecules 24 (3) (2019) 449.

Frailty markers comprise blood metabolites involved in antioxidation, cognition, and mobility. M Kameda, T Teruya, M Yanagida, H Kondoh, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 11717M. Kameda, T. Teruya, M. Yanagida, H. Kondoh, Frailty markers comprise blood metabolites involved in antioxidation, cognition, and mobility, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 117 (17) (2020) 9483-9489.

Ergothioneine is associated with reduced mortality and decreased risk of cardiovascular disease. E Smith, F Ottosson, S Hellstrand, U Ericson, M Orho-Melander, C Fernandez, O Melander, Heart. 1069E. Smith, F. Ottosson, S. Hellstrand, U. Ericson, M. Orho-Melander, C. Fernandez, O. Melander, Ergothioneine is associated with reduced mortality and decreased risk of cardiovascular disease, Heart 106 (9) (2020) 691-697.

Are ergothioneine levels in blood associated with chronic peripheral neuropathy in colorectal cancer patients who underwent chemotherapy?. R M Winkels, L Van Brakel, H Van Baar, R B Beelman, F J B Van Duijnhoven, A Geijsen, H K Van Halteren, B M E Hansson, J P Richie, D Sun, E Wesselink, M Van Zutphen, E Kampman, D E Kok, Nutr. Canc. 723R.M. Winkels, L. van Brakel, H. van Baar, R.B. Beelman, F.J.B. van Duijnhoven, A. Geijsen, H.K. van Halteren, B.M.E. Hansson, J.P. Richie, D. Sun, E. Wesselink, M. van Zutphen, E. Kampman, D.E. Kok, Are ergothioneine levels in blood associated with chronic peripheral neuropathy in colorectal cancer patients who underwent chemotherapy? Nutr. Canc. 72 (3) (2020) 451-459.

Liver ergothioneine accumulation in a Guinea pig model of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. A possible mechanism of defence?. I K Cheah, R Tang, P Ye, T S Yew, K H Lim, B Halliwell, Free Radic. Res. 501I.K. Cheah, R. Tang, P. Ye, T.S. Yew, K.H. Lim, B. Halliwell, Liver ergothioneine accumulation in a Guinea pig model of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. A possible mechanism of defence? Free Radic. Res. 50 (1) (2016) 14-25.

Impairment of the carnitine/organic cation transporter 1-ergothioneine axis is mediated by intestinal transporter dysfunction in chronic kidney disease. Y Shinozaki, K Furuichi, T Toyama, S Kitajima, A Hara, Y Iwata, N Sakai, M Shimizu, S Kaneko, N Isozumi, S Nagamori, Y Kanai, T Sugiura, Y Kato, T Wada, Kidney Int. 926Y. Shinozaki, K. Furuichi, T. Toyama, S. Kitajima, A. Hara, Y. Iwata, N. Sakai, M. Shimizu, S. Kaneko, N. Isozumi, S. Nagamori, Y. Kanai, T. Sugiura, Y. Kato, T. Wada, Impairment of the carnitine/organic cation transporter 1-ergothioneine axis is mediated by intestinal transporter dysfunction in chronic kidney disease, Kidney Int. 92 (6) (2017) 1356-1369.

Mechanism of the regulation of organic cation/carnitine transporter 1 (SLC22A4) by rheumatoid arthritis-associated transcriptional factor RUNX1 and inflammatory cytokines. T Maeda, M Hirayama, D Kobayashi, K Miyazawa, I Tamai, Drug Metab. Dispos. 353T. Maeda, M. Hirayama, D. Kobayashi, K. Miyazawa, I. Tamai, Mechanism of the regulation of organic cation/carnitine transporter 1 (SLC22A4) by rheumatoid arthritis-associated transcriptional factor RUNX1 and inflammatory cytokines, Drug Metab. Dispos. 35 (3) (2007) 394-401.

Ergothioneine, an adaptive antioxidant for the protection of injured tissues? A hypothesis. B Halliwell, I K Cheah, C L Drum, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 4702B. Halliwell, I.K. Cheah, C.L. Drum, Ergothioneine, an adaptive antioxidant for the protection of injured tissues? A hypothesis, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 470 (2) (2016) 245-250.

Is ergothioneine a 'longevity vitamin' limited in the American diet?. R B Beelman, M D Kalaras, A T Phillips, J P Richie, J. Nutr. Sci. 952R.B. Beelman, M.D. Kalaras, A.T. Phillips, J.P. Richie, Is ergothioneine a 'longevity vitamin' limited in the American diet? J. Nutr. Sci. 9 (2020) e52.

Bio-functional components in mushrooms, a health opportunity: ergothionine and huitlacohe as recent trends. G A Martinez-Medina, M L Chávez-González, D K Verma, L A Prado-Barragán, J L Martínez-Hernández, A C Flores-Gallegos, M Thakur, P P Srivastav, C N Aguilar, Journal of Functional Foods. 77104326G.A. Martinez-Medina, M.L. Chávez-González, D.K. Verma, L.A. Prado-Barragán, J.L. Martínez-Hernández, A.C. Flores-Gallegos, M. Thakur, P.P. Srivastav, C. N. Aguilar, Bio-functional components in mushrooms, a health opportunity: ergothionine and huitlacohe as recent trends, Journal of Functional Foods 77 (2021) 104326.

Functional analysis of novel variants in the organic cation/ergothioneine transporter 1 identified in Singapore populations. D S Toh, F S Cheung, M Murray, T K Pern, E J Lee, F Zhou, Mol. Pharm. 107D.S. Toh, F.S. Cheung, M. Murray, T.K. Pern, E.J. Lee, F. Zhou, Functional analysis of novel variants in the organic cation/ergothioneine transporter 1 identified in Singapore populations, Mol. Pharm. 10 (7) (2013) 2509-2516.

Administration of pure ergothioneine to healthy human subjects; Uptake, metabolism and effects on biomarkers of oxidative damage and inflammation. I K Cheah, R M Y Tang, T S Yew, K C Lim, B Halliwell, Antioxidants Redox Signal. 265I.K. Cheah, R.M.Y. Tang, T.S. Yew, K.C. Lim, B. Halliwell, Administration of pure ergothioneine to healthy human subjects; Uptake, metabolism and effects on biomarkers of oxidative damage and inflammation, Antioxidants Redox Signal. 26 (5) (2017) 193-206.

Functional role of the 503F variant of the organic cation transporter OCTN1 in Crohn's disease. D Taubert, G Grimberg, N Jung, A Rubbert, E Schomig, Gut. 5410D. Taubert, G. Grimberg, N. Jung, A. Rubbert, E. Schomig, Functional role of the 503F variant of the organic cation transporter OCTN1 in Crohn's disease, Gut 54 (10) (2005) 1505-1506.

Functional variants of OCTN cation transporter genes are associated with Crohn disease. V D Peltekova, R F Wintle, L A Rubin, C I Amos, Q Huang, X Gu, B Newman, M Van Oene, D Cescon, G Greenberg, A M Griffiths, P H St George-Hyslop, K A Siminovitch, Nat. Genet. 365V.D. Peltekova, R.F. Wintle, L.A. Rubin, C.I. Amos, Q. Huang, X. Gu, B. Newman, M. Van Oene, D. Cescon, G. Greenberg, A.M. Griffiths, P.H. St George-Hyslop, K. A. Siminovitch, Functional variants of OCTN cation transporter genes are associated with Crohn disease, Nat. Genet. 36 (5) (2004) 471-475.

OCTN1 variant L503F is associated with familial and sporadic inflammatory bowel disease. Z Lin, L Nelson, A Franke, L Poritz, T Y Li, R Wu, Y Wang, C Macneill, N J Thomas, S Schreiber, W A Koltun, J Crohns Colitis. 42Z. Lin, L. Nelson, A. Franke, L. Poritz, T.Y. Li, R. Wu, Y. Wang, C. MacNeill, N. J. Thomas, S. Schreiber, W.A. Koltun, OCTN1 variant L503F is associated with familial and sporadic inflammatory bowel disease, J Crohns Colitis 4 (2) (2010) 132-138.

Crohn's disease and genetic hitchhiking at IBD5. C D Huff, D J Witherspoon, Y Zhang, C Gatenbee, L A Denson, S Kugathasan, H Hakonarson, A Whiting, C T Davis, W Wu, J Xing, W S Watkins, M J Bamshad, J P Bradfield, K Bulayeva, T S Simonson, L B Jorde, S L Guthery, Mol. Biol. Evol. 291C.D. Huff, D.J. Witherspoon, Y. Zhang, C. Gatenbee, L.A. Denson, S. Kugathasan, H. Hakonarson, A. Whiting, C.T. Davis, W. Wu, J. Xing, W.S. Watkins, M. J. Bamshad, J.P. Bradfield, K. Bulayeva, T.S. Simonson, L.B. Jorde, S.L. Guthery, Crohn's disease and genetic hitchhiking at IBD5, Mol. Biol. Evol. 29 (1) (2012) 101-111.

SLC22A4 polymorphisms implicated in rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn's disease are not associated with rheumatoid arthritis in a Canadian Caucasian population. B Newman, R F Wintle, M Van Oene, M Yazdanpanah, J Owen, B Johnson, X Gu, C I Amos, E Keystone, L A Rubin, K A Siminovitch, Arthritis Rheum. 522B. Newman, R.F. Wintle, M. van Oene, M. Yazdanpanah, J. Owen, B. Johnson, X. Gu, C.I. Amos, E. Keystone, L.A. Rubin, K.A. Siminovitch, SLC22A4 polymorphisms implicated in rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn's disease are not associated with rheumatoid arthritis in a Canadian Caucasian population, Arthritis Rheum. 52 (2) (2005) 425-429.

Novel localization of OCTN1, an organic cation/ carnitine transporter, to mammalian mitochondria. A M Lamhonwah, I Tein, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 3454A.M. Lamhonwah, I. Tein, Novel localization of OCTN1, an organic cation/ carnitine transporter, to mammalian mitochondria, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 345 (4) (2006) 1315-1325.

The unusual amino acid L-ergothioneine is a physiologic cytoprotectant. B D Paul, S H Snyder, Cell Death Differ. 177B.D. Paul, S.H. Snyder, The unusual amino acid L-ergothioneine is a physiologic cytoprotectant, Cell Death Differ. 17 (7) (2010) 1134-1140.

Role of organic cation/carnitine transporter 1 in uptake of phenformin and inhibitory effect on complex I respiration in mitochondria. Y Shitara, N Nakamichi, M Norioka, H Shima, Y Kato, T Horie, Toxicol. Sci. 1321Y. Shitara, N. Nakamichi, M. Norioka, H. Shima, Y. Kato, T. Horie, Role of organic cation/carnitine transporter 1 in uptake of phenformin and inhibitory effect on complex I respiration in mitochondria, Toxicol. Sci. 132 (1) (2013) 32-42.

Studies on ergothioneine. VI. Distribution and fluctuations of ergothioneine in rats. H Kawano, M Otani, K Takeyama, Y Kawai, T Mayumi, T Hama, Chem. Pharm. Bull. (Tokyo). 305H. Kawano, M. Otani, K. Takeyama, Y. Kawai, T. Mayumi, T. Hama, Studies on ergothioneine. VI. Distribution and fluctuations of ergothioneine in rats, Chem. Pharm. Bull. (Tokyo) 30 (5) (1982) 1760-1765.

Eris, l-Ergothioneine protects skin cells against UV-induced damage-a preliminary study. K Bazela, A Solyga-Zurek, R Debowska, K Rogiewicz, E Bartnik, I , Cosmetics. 11K. Bazela, A. Solyga-Zurek, R. Debowska, K. Rogiewicz, E. Bartnik, I. Eris, l- Ergothioneine protects skin cells against UV-induced damage-a preliminary study, Cosmetics 1 (1) (2014) 51-60.

L-(+)-Ergothioneine significantly improves the clinical characteristics of preeclampsia in the reduced uterine perfusion pressure rat model. R D Williamson, F P Mccarthy, S Manna, E Groarke, D B Kell, L C Kenny, C M Mccarthy, Hypertension. 752R.D. Williamson, F.P. McCarthy, S. Manna, E. Groarke, D.B. Kell, L.C. Kenny, C. M. McCarthy, L-(+)-Ergothioneine significantly improves the clinical characteristics of preeclampsia in the reduced uterine perfusion pressure rat model, Hypertension 75 (2) (2020) 561-568.

Deorphaning a solute carrier 22 family member, SLC22A15, through functional genomic studies. S W Yee, D Buitrago, A Stecula, H X Ngo, H C Chien, L Zou, M L Koleske, K M Giacomini, FASEB J. 3412S.W. Yee, D. Buitrago, A. Stecula, H.X. Ngo, H.C. Chien, L. Zou, M.L. Koleske, K. M. Giacomini, Deorphaning a solute carrier 22 family member, SLC22A15, through functional genomic studies, FASEB J 34 (12) (2020) 15734-15752.

Proteomic quantification of human blood-brain barrier SLC and ABC transporters in healthy individuals and dementia patients. Z M Al-Majdoub, H Feteisi, B Achour, S Warwood, S Neuhoff, A Rostami-Hodjegan, J Barber, Mol. Pharm. 163Z.M. Al-Majdoub, H. Al Feteisi, B. Achour, S. Warwood, S. Neuhoff, A. Rostami- Hodjegan, J. Barber, Proteomic quantification of human blood-brain barrier SLC and ABC transporters in healthy individuals and dementia patients, Mol. Pharm. 16 (3) (2019) 1220-1233.

Influx transporters and drug targeting: application of peptide and cation transporters. A Tsuji, Int. Congr. 1277Tsuji, A., Influx transporters and drug targeting: application of peptide and cation transporters. Int. Congr., 2005. 1277: p. 75-84.

Ergothioneine -a diet-derived antioxidant with therapeutic potential. B Halliwell, I K Cheah, R M Y Tang, FEBS Lett. 59220B. Halliwell, I.K. Cheah, R.M.Y. Tang, Ergothioneine -a diet-derived antioxidant with therapeutic potential, FEBS Lett. 592 (20) (2018) 3357-3366.

Ultraviolet-absorbing compounds in urine of normal newborns and young children. J M Vavich, R R Howell, Clin. Chem. 168J.M. Vavich, R.R. Howell, Ultraviolet-absorbing compounds in urine of normal newborns and young children, Clin. Chem. 16 (8) (1970) 702-706.

Metabolomic profiling of brain from infants who died from Sudden Infant Death Syndrome reveals novel predictive biomarkers. S F Graham, O P Chevallier, P Kumar, O Türko Gcaron, R O Lu, Bahado-Singh, J. Perinatol. 371S.F. Graham, O.P. Chevallier, P. Kumar, O. Türko Gcaron Lu, R.O. Bahado-Singh, Metabolomic profiling of brain from infants who died from Sudden Infant Death Syndrome reveals novel predictive biomarkers, J. Perinatol. 37 (1) (2017) 91-97.

Structural and functional characteristics and tissue distribution pattern of rat OCTN1, an organic cation transporter, cloned from placenta. X Wu, R L George, W Huang, H Wang, S J Conway, F H Leibach, V Ganapathy, Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 14661-2X. Wu, R.L. George, W. Huang, H. Wang, S.J. Conway, F.H. Leibach, V. Ganapathy, Structural and functional characteristics and tissue distribution pattern of rat OCTN1, an organic cation transporter, cloned from placenta, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1466 (1-2) (2000) 315-327.

Carnitine/ xenobiotics transporters in the human mammary gland epithelia, MCF12A. B Kwok, A Yamauchi, R Rajesan, L Chan, U Dhillon, W Gao, H Xu, B Wang, S Takahashi, J Semple, I Tamai, J Nezu, A Tsuji, P Harper, S Ito, Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 2903B. Kwok, A. Yamauchi, R. Rajesan, L. Chan, U. Dhillon, W. Gao, H. Xu, B. Wang, S. Takahashi, J. Semple, I. Tamai, J. Nezu, A. Tsuji, P. Harper, S. Ito, Carnitine/ xenobiotics transporters in the human mammary gland epithelia, MCF12A, Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 290 (3) (2006) R793-R802.

Transporter gene expression in lactating and nonlactating human mammary epithelial cells using real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. J Alcorn, X Lu, J A Moscow, P J Mcnamara, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Therapeut. 3032J. Alcorn, X. Lu, J.A. Moscow, P.J. McNamara, Transporter gene expression in lactating and nonlactating human mammary epithelial cells using real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Therapeut. 303 (2) (2002) 487-496.

Ultraperformance liquid chromatographic determination of L-ergothioneine in commercially available classes of cow milk. S Sotgia, E Pisanu, D Cambedda, G Pintus, C Carru, A Zinellu, J. Food Sci. 799S. Sotgia, E. Pisanu, D. Cambedda, G. Pintus, C. Carru, A. Zinellu, Ultra- performance liquid chromatographic determination of L-ergothioneine in commercially available classes of cow milk, J. Food Sci. 79 (9) (2014) C1683-C1687.

Food-derived hydrophilic antioxidant ergothioneine is distributed to the brain and exerts antidepressant effect in mice. N Nakamichi, K Nakayama, T Ishimoto, Y Masuo, T Wakayama, H Sekiguchi, K Sutoh, K Usumi, S Iseki, Y Kato, Brain Behav. 477N. Nakamichi, K. Nakayama, T. Ishimoto, Y. Masuo, T. Wakayama, H. Sekiguchi, K. Sutoh, K. Usumi, S. Iseki, Y. Kato, Food-derived hydrophilic antioxidant ergothioneine is distributed to the brain and exerts antidepressant effect in mice, Brain Behav (2016), e00477.

Ergothioneine-induced neuronal differentiation is mediated through activation of S6K1 and neurotrophin 4/5-TrkB signaling in murine neural stem cells. T Ishimoto, Y Masuo, Y Kato, N Nakamichi, Cell. Signal. 53T. Ishimoto, Y. Masuo, Y. Kato, N. Nakamichi, Ergothioneine-induced neuronal differentiation is mediated through activation of S6K1 and neurotrophin 4/5- TrkB signaling in murine neural stem cells, Cell. Signal. 53 (2019) 269-280.

Oral administration of the food derived hydrophilic antioxidant ergothioneine enhances object recognition memory in mice. N Nakamichi, S Nakao, M Nishiyama, Y Takeda, T Ishimoto, Y Masuo, S Matsumoto, M Suzuki, Y Kato, Curr. Mol. Pharmacol. 142N. Nakamichi, S. Nakao, M. Nishiyama, Y. Takeda, T. Ishimoto, Y. Masuo, S. Matsumoto, M. Suzuki, Y. Kato, Oral administration of the food derived hydrophilic antioxidant ergothioneine enhances object recognition memory in mice, Curr. Mol. Pharmacol. 14 (2) (2021) 220-233.

Reproductive safety evaluation of L-Ergothioneine. R Forster, F Spezia, D Papineau, C Sabadie, I Erdelmeier, M Moutet, J C Yadan, Food Chem. Toxicol. 80R. Forster, F. Spezia, D. Papineau, C. Sabadie, I. Erdelmeier, M. Moutet, J. C. Yadan, Reproductive safety evaluation of L-Ergothioneine, Food Chem. Toxicol. 80 (2015) 85-91.

Statement on the safety of synthetic lergothioneine as a novel food -supplementary dietary exposure and safety assessment for infants and young children, pregnant and breastfeeding women. D Turck, J L Bresson, B Burlingame, T Dean, S Fairweather-Tait, M Heinonen, K I Hirsch-Ernst, I Mangelsdorf, H J Mcardle, A Naska, M Neuhäuser-Berthold, G Nowicka, K Pentieva, Y Sanz, A Siani, A Sjödin, M Stern, D Tomé, M Vinceti, P Willatts, K H Engel, R Marchelli, A Pöting, M Poulsen, J R Schlatter, R Ackerl, H Loveren, EFSA J. 15115060D. Turck, J.L. Bresson, B. Burlingame, T. Dean, S. Fairweather-Tait, M. Heinonen, K.I. Hirsch-Ernst, I. Mangelsdorf, H.J. McArdle, A. Naska, M. Neuhäuser-Berthold, G. Nowicka, K. Pentieva, Y. Sanz, A. Siani, A. Sjödin, M. Stern, D. Tomé, M. Vinceti, P. Willatts, K.H. Engel, R. Marchelli, A. Pöting, M. Poulsen, J. R. Schlatter, R. Ackerl, H. Loveren, Statement on the safety of synthetic l- ergothioneine as a novel food -supplementary dietary exposure and safety assessment for infants and young children, pregnant and breastfeeding women, EFSA J 15 (11) (2017) p. report 5060.

L-ergothioneine level in red blood cells of healthy human males in the Western province of Saudi Arabia. T A Kumosani, Exp. Mol. Med. 331T.A. Kumosani, L-ergothioneine level in red blood cells of healthy human males in the Western province of Saudi Arabia, Exp. Mol. Med. 33 (1) (2001) 20-22.

Ergothioneine stands out from hercynine in the reaction with singlet oxygen: resistance to glutathione and TRIS in the generation of specific products indicates high reactivity, Free Radic. C Stoffels, M Oumari, A Perrou, A Termath, W Schlundt, H.-G Schmalz, M Schäfer, V Wewer, S Metzger, E Schömig, D Gründemann, Biol. Med. 113C. Stoffels, M. Oumari, A. Perrou, A. Termath, W. Schlundt, H.-G. Schmalz, M. Schäfer, V. Wewer, S. Metzger, E. Schömig, D. Gründemann, Ergothioneine stands out from hercynine in the reaction with singlet oxygen: resistance to glutathione and TRIS in the generation of specific products indicates high reactivity, Free Radic. Biol. Med. 113 (2017) 385-394.

Structural basis of ergothioneine biosynthesis. A R Stampfli, W Blankenfeldt, F P Seebeck, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 65A.R. Stampfli, W. Blankenfeldt, F.P. Seebeck, Structural basis of ergothioneine biosynthesis, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 65 (2020) 1-8.

Anaerobic origin of ergothioneine. R Burn, L Misson, M Meury, F P Seebeck, Angew Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 5641R. Burn, L. Misson, M. Meury, F.P. Seebeck, Anaerobic origin of ergothioneine, Angew Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 56 (41) (2017) 12508-12511.

Decreased proliferation and erythroid differentiation of K562 cells by siRNA-induced depression of OCTN1 (SLC22A4) transporter gene. T Nakamura, S Sugiura, D Kobayashi, K Yoshida, H Yabuuchi, S Aizawa, T Maeda, I Tamai, Pharm. Res. (N. Y.). 249T. Nakamura, S. Sugiura, D. Kobayashi, K. Yoshida, H. Yabuuchi, S. Aizawa, T. Maeda, I. Tamai, Decreased proliferation and erythroid differentiation of K562 cells by siRNA-induced depression of OCTN1 (SLC22A4) transporter gene, Pharm. Res. (N. Y.) 24 (9) (2007) 1628-1635.

Blood ergothioneine levels in disease. R S Fraser, J. Lab. Clin. Med. 372R.S. Fraser, Blood ergothioneine levels in disease, J. Lab. Clin. Med. 37 (2) (1951) 199-206.

Anti-oxidative amino acid L-ergothioneine modulates the tumor microenvironment to facilitate adjuvant vaccine immunotherapy. S Yoshida, H Shime, M Matsumoto, M Kasahara, T Seya, Front. Immunol. 10671S. Yoshida, H. Shime, M. Matsumoto, M. Kasahara, T. Seya, Anti-oxidative amino acid L-ergothioneine modulates the tumor microenvironment to facilitate adjuvant vaccine immunotherapy, Front. Immunol. 10 (2019) 671.

Hercynine, ergothioneine and redox state in stallion's seminal plasma. S Sotgia, A Taras, A Zinellu, R Cherchi, A A Mangoni, C Carru, L Bogliolo, Antioxidants. 99855S. Sotgia, A. Taras, A. Zinellu, R. Cherchi, A.A. Mangoni, C. Carru, L. Bogliolo, Hercynine, ergothioneine and redox state in stallion's seminal plasma, Antioxidants 9 (9) (2020) 855.

Characteristics of antioxidant system in dog semen. R Strzezek, M Koziorowska-Gilun, M Kowalowka, J Strzezek, Pol. J. Vet. Sci. 121R. Strzezek, M. Koziorowska-Gilun, M. Kowalowka, J. Strzezek, Characteristics of antioxidant system in dog semen, Pol. J. Vet. Sci. 12 (1) (2009) 55-60.

Paramount levels of ergothioneine transporter SLC22A4 mRNA in boar seminal vesicles and cross-species analysis of ergothioneine and glutathione in seminal plasma. D Nikodemus, D Lazic, M Bach, T Bauer, C Pfeiffer, L Wiltzer, E Lain, E Schomig, D Grundemann, J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 624D. Nikodemus, D. Lazic, M. Bach, T. Bauer, C. Pfeiffer, L. Wiltzer, E. Lain, E. Schomig, D. Grundemann, Paramount levels of ergothioneine transporter SLC22A4 mRNA in boar seminal vesicles and cross-species analysis of ergothioneine and glutathione in seminal plasma, J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 62 (4) (2011) 411-419.

Role of reactive oxygen species in male infertility: an updated review of literature. H Wagner, J W Cheng, E Y Ko, Arab J Urol. 161H. Wagner, J.W. Cheng, E.Y. Ko, Role of reactive oxygen species in male infertility: an updated review of literature, Arab J Urol 16 (1) (2018) 35-43.

Reflections of an aging free radical, Free Radic. B Halliwell, Biol. Med. 161B. Halliwell, Reflections of an aging free radical, Free Radic. Biol. Med. 161 (2020) 234-245.

Cisplatin-induced long-term failure of spermatogenesis in adult C57/Bl/6J mice. P Sawhney, C J Giammona, M L Meistrich, J H Richburg, J. Androl. 261P. Sawhney, C.J. Giammona, M.L. Meistrich, J.H. Richburg, Cisplatin-induced long-term failure of spermatogenesis in adult C57/Bl/6J mice, J. Androl. 26 (1) (2005) 136-145.

L-ergothioneine supplement protect testicular functions in cisplatin-treated Wistar rats. D Ayobami, O Olaniyan, M Salihu, K Illesanmi, J Pharm Biol Sci. 141D. Ayobami, O. Olaniyan, M. Salihu, K. Illesanmi, L-ergothioneine supplement protect testicular functions in cisplatin-treated Wistar rats, J Pharm Biol Sci 14 (1) (2019) 6-13.

Adverse trends in male reproductive health: we may have reached a crucial 'tipping point. A M Andersson, N Jorgensen, K M Main, J Toppari, E Rajpert-De Meyts, H Leffers, A Juul, T K Jensen, N E Skakkebaek, Int. J. Androl. 312A.M. Andersson, N. Jorgensen, K.M. Main, J. Toppari, E. Rajpert-De Meyts, H. Leffers, A. Juul, T.K. Jensen, N.E. Skakkebaek, Adverse trends in male reproductive health: we may have reached a crucial 'tipping point, Int. J. Androl. 31 (2) (2008) 74-80.

Cellular and molecular mechanisms of fibrosis. T A Wynn, J. Pathol. 2142T.A. Wynn, Cellular and molecular mechanisms of fibrosis, J. Pathol. 214 (2) (2008) 199-210.

Lergothioneine modulates oxidative damage in the kidney and liver of rats in vivo: studies upon the profile of polyunsaturated fatty acids. M Deiana, A Rosa, V Casu, R Piga, M Dessi, O I Aruoma, Clin. Nutr. 232M. Deiana, A. Rosa, V. Casu, R. Piga, M. Assunta Dessi, O.I. Aruoma, L- ergothioneine modulates oxidative damage in the kidney and liver of rats in vivo: studies upon the profile of polyunsaturated fatty acids, Clin. Nutr. 23 (2) (2004) 183-193.

Modulation of palmitic acid-induced cell death by ergothioneine: evidence of an antiinflammatory action. I Laurenza, R Colognato, L Migliore, S Prato, L Benzi, Biofactors. 334I. Laurenza, R. Colognato, L. Migliore, S. Del Prato, L. Benzi, Modulation of palmitic acid-induced cell death by ergothioneine: evidence of an anti- inflammatory action, Biofactors 33 (4) (2008) 237-247.

Ergothioneine modulates proinflammatory cytokines and heat shock protein 70 in mesenteric ischemia and reperfusion injury. O Sakrak, M Kerem, A Bedirli, H Pasaoglu, N Akyurek, E Ofluoglu, F A Gultekin, J. Surg. Res. 1441O. Sakrak, M. Kerem, A. Bedirli, H. Pasaoglu, N. Akyurek, E. Ofluoglu, F. A. Gultekin, Ergothioneine modulates proinflammatory cytokines and heat shock protein 70 in mesenteric ischemia and reperfusion injury, J. Surg. Res. 144 (1) (2008) 36-42.

Localization of xenobiotic transporter OCTN1/SLC22A4 in hepatic stellate cells and its protective role in liver fibrosis. Y Tang, Y Masuo, Y Sakai, T Wakayama, T Sugiura, R Harada, A Futatsugi, T Komura, N Nakamichi, H Sekiguchi, K Sutoh, K Usumi, S Iseki, S Kaneko, Y Kato, J. Pharmacol. Sci. 1055Y. Tang, Y. Masuo, Y. Sakai, T. Wakayama, T. Sugiura, R. Harada, A. Futatsugi, T. Komura, N. Nakamichi, H. Sekiguchi, K. Sutoh, K. Usumi, S. Iseki, S. Kaneko, Y. Kato, Localization of xenobiotic transporter OCTN1/SLC22A4 in hepatic stellate cells and its protective role in liver fibrosis, J. Pharmacol. Sci. 105 (5) (2016) 1779-1789.

Impact of ergothioneine on idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis markers in human lung epithelial cells in vitro. C Ehrhardt, A Koay, C Clerkin, M A Selo, FASEB J. 331C. Ehrhardt, A. Koay, C. Clerkin, M.A. Selo, Impact of ergothioneine on idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis markers in human lung epithelial cells in vitro, FASEB J 33 (1) (2019), 127.11.

Effect of ergothioneine on acute lung injury and inflammation in cytokine insufflated rats. J E Repine, N D Elkins, Prev. Med. 54SupplJ.E. Repine, N.D. Elkins, Effect of ergothioneine on acute lung injury and inflammation in cytokine insufflated rats, Prev. Med. 54 (Suppl) (2012) S79-S82.

OCTN1-Mediated ergothioneine uptake protects lung epithelial cells from tobacco smoke-induced damage. C Ehrhardt, S Nickel, M A Selo, C Clerkin, J Salomon, B Talbot, J Walsh, FASEB J. 29S1C. Ehrhardt, S. Nickel, M.A. Selo, C. Clerkin, J. Salomon, B. Talbot, J. Walsh, OCTN1-Mediated ergothioneine uptake protects lung epithelial cells from tobacco smoke-induced damage, FASEB J. 29 (S1) (2015) 970-977.

Protective role of ergothioneine from tobacco smoke-induced oxidative stress in vitro and in vivo. C Ehrhardt, M A Selo, C G Clerkin, B N Talbot, J J Walsh, N Nakamichi, Y Kato, J B Lewis, P R Reynolds, S Nickel, FASEB J. 30S1C. Ehrhardt, M.A. Selo, C.G. Clerkin, B.N. Talbot, J.J. Walsh, N. Nakamichi, Y. Kato, J.B. Lewis, P.R. Reynolds, S. Nickel, Protective role of ergothioneine from tobacco smoke-induced oxidative stress in vitro and in vivo, FASEB J. 30 (S1) (2016), 982.1-982.1.

Pre-eclampsia: pathogenesis, novel diagnostics and therapies. E A Phipps, R Thadhani, T Benzing, S A Karumanchi, Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 155E.A. Phipps, R. Thadhani, T. Benzing, S.A. Karumanchi, Pre-eclampsia: pathogenesis, novel diagnostics and therapies, Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 15 (5) (2019) 275-289.

The potential therapeutic effects of ergothioneine in pre-eclampsia, Free Radic. R N Kerley, C Mccarthy, D B Kell, L C Kenny, Biol. Med. 117R.N. Kerley, C. McCarthy, D.B. Kell, L.C. Kenny, The potential therapeutic effects of ergothioneine in pre-eclampsia, Free Radic. Biol. Med. 117 (2018) 145-157.

Effect of L-Ergothioneine on the metabolic plasma profile of the RUPP rat model of pre-eclampsia. A C Morillon, R D Williamson, P N Baker, D B Kell, L C Kenny, J A English, F P Mccarthy, C Mccarthy, PloS One. 153230977A.C. Morillon, R.D. Williamson, P.N. Baker, D.B. Kell, L.C. Kenny, J.A. English, F. P. McCarthy, C. McCarthy, Effect of L-Ergothioneine on the metabolic plasma profile of the RUPP rat model of pre-eclampsia, PloS One 15 (3) (2020), e0230977.

Ergothioneine pretreatment protects the liver from ischemiareperfusion injury caused by increasing hepatic heat shock protein 70. A Bedirli, O Sakrak, S Muhtaroglu, I Soyuer, I Guler, A Erdogan, E M Sozuer, J. Surg. Res. 1221A. Bedirli, O. Sakrak, S. Muhtaroglu, I. Soyuer, I. Guler, A. Riza Erdogan, E. M. Sozuer, Ergothioneine pretreatment protects the liver from ischemia- reperfusion injury caused by increasing hepatic heat shock protein 70, J. Surg. Res. 122 (1) (2004) 96-102.

Ergothioneine prevents acute lung injury in mesenteric ischemia and reperfusion injury in rats. Ö Sakrak, M Kerem, A Bedirli, H Pasaoglu, M Alper, E Ofluoglu, T U Yılmaz, J. Crit. Care. 232Ö. Sakrak, M. Kerem, A. Bedirli, H. Pasaoglu, M. Alper, E. Ofluoglu, T.U. Yılmaz, Ergothioneine prevents acute lung injury in mesenteric ischemia and reperfusion injury in rats, J. Crit. Care 23 (2) (2008) 268-269.

Congestive heart failure in patients treated with doxorubicin: a retrospective analysis of three trials. S M Swain, F S Whaley, M S Ewer, Cancer. 9711S.M. Swain, F.S. Whaley, M.S. Ewer, Congestive heart failure in patients treated with doxorubicin: a retrospective analysis of three trials, Cancer 97 (11) (2003) 2869-2879.

The anti-oxidant ergothioneine augments the immunomodulatory function of TLR agonists by direct action on macrophages. S Yoshida, H Shime, K Funami, H Takaki, M Matsumoto, M Kasahara, T Seya, PloS One. 121169360S. Yoshida, H. Shime, K. Funami, H. Takaki, M. Matsumoto, M. Kasahara, T. Seya, The anti-oxidant ergothioneine augments the immunomodulatory function of TLR agonists by direct action on macrophages, PloS One 12 (1) (2017), e0169360.

L-Ergothioneine scavenges superoxide and singlet oxygen and suppresses TNF-alpha and MMP-1 expression in UV-irradiated human dermal fibroblasts. K Obayashi, K Kurihara, Y Okano, H Masaki, D B Yarosh, J. Cosmet. Sci. 561K. Obayashi, K. Kurihara, Y. Okano, H. Masaki, D.B. Yarosh, L-Ergothioneine scavenges superoxide and singlet oxygen and suppresses TNF-alpha and MMP-1 expression in UV-irradiated human dermal fibroblasts, J. Cosmet. Sci. 56 (1) (2005) 17-27.

Dermatoprotective properties of ergothioneine through induction of Nrf2/ARE-mediated antioxidant genes in UVA-irradiated Human keratinocytes, Free Radic. Y C Hseu, H W Lo, M Korivi, Y C Tsai, M J Tang, H L Yang, Biol. Med. 86Y.C. Hseu, H.W. Lo, M. Korivi, Y.C. Tsai, M.J. Tang, H.L. Yang, Dermato- protective properties of ergothioneine through induction of Nrf2/ARE-mediated antioxidant genes in UVA-irradiated Human keratinocytes, Free Radic. Biol. Med. 86 (2015) 102-117.

The natural antioxidant Lergothioneine and its receptor/transporter OCTN-1 participate in the skin's response to UVA-induced oxidative damage. N Damaghi, K Dong, K Smiles, D Yarosh, J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 582N. Damaghi, K. Dong, K. Smiles, D. Yarosh, The natural antioxidant L- ergothioneine and its receptor/transporter OCTN-1 participate in the skin's response to UVA-induced oxidative damage, J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 58 (2) (2008). AB111-AB111.

Clinical and biochemical correlates of serum L-ergothioneine concentrations in community-dwelling middle-aged and older adults. S Sotgia, A Zinellu, A A Mangoni, G Pintus, J Attia, C Carru, M Mcevoy, PloS One. 9184918S. Sotgia, A. Zinellu, A.A. Mangoni, G. Pintus, J. Attia, C. Carru, M. McEvoy, Clinical and biochemical correlates of serum L-ergothioneine concentrations in community-dwelling middle-aged and older adults, PloS One 9 (1) (2014), e84918.

Prolonging healthy aging: longevity vitamins and proteins. B N Ames, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 11543B.N. Ames, Prolonging healthy aging: longevity vitamins and proteins, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 115 (43) (2018) 10836-10844.

How does the eye breathe? Evidence for neuroglobin-mediated oxygen supply in the mammalian retina. M Schmidt, A Giessl, T Laufs, T Hankeln, U Wolfrum, T Burmester, J. Biol. Chem. 2783M. Schmidt, A. Giessl, T. Laufs, T. Hankeln, U. Wolfrum, T. Burmester, How does the eye breathe? Evidence for neuroglobin-mediated oxygen supply in the mammalian retina, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (3) (2003) 1932-1935.

Ergothioneine (ert) concentrations and distribution in bovine and porcine eyes. T K Shires, M C Brummel, J S Pulido, L D Stegink, FASEB J. 74732T.K. Shires, M.C. Brummel, J.S. Pulido, L.D. Stegink, Ergothioneine (ert) concentrations and distribution in bovine and porcine eyes, FASEB J 7 (4) (1993) A732.

Ergothioneine distribution in bovine and porcine ocular tissues. T K Shires, M C Brummel, J S Pulido, L D Stegink, Comp. Biochem. Physiol. C Pharmacol. Toxicol. Endocrinol. 1171T.K. Shires, M.C. Brummel, J.S. Pulido, L.D. Stegink, Ergothioneine distribution in bovine and porcine ocular tissues, Comp. Biochem. Physiol. C Pharmacol. Toxicol. Endocrinol. 117 (1) (1997) 117-120.

Ergothioneine content in normal and senile human cataractous lenses. Y Shukla, O P Kulshrestha, K P Khuteta, Indian J. Med. Res. 73Y. Shukla, O.P. Kulshrestha, K.P. Khuteta, Ergothioneine content in normal and senile human cataractous lenses, Indian J. Med. Res. 73 (1981) 472-473.

Study of content of redox substances ergothioneine, glutathione and ascorbic acid in normal and senile cataractous lenses in human eyes. Y S , K O P , K K , Indian J. Ophthalmol. 30Y. S, K.O. P, K.K. P, Study of content of redox substances ergothioneine, glutathione and ascorbic acid in normal and senile cataractous lenses in human eyes, Indian J. Ophthalmol. 30 (1982) 441-443.

Screening and characterization of drugs that protect corneal endothelial cells against unfolded protein response and oxidative stress. E C Kim, T Toyono, C A Berlinicke, D J Zack, U Jurkunas, T Usui, A S Jun, Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 582E.C. Kim, T. Toyono, C.A. Berlinicke, D.J. Zack, U. Jurkunas, T. Usui, A.S. Jun, Screening and characterization of drugs that protect corneal endothelial cells against unfolded protein response and oxidative stress, Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 58 (2) (2017) 892-900.

The biology of ergothioneine, an antioxidant nutraceutical. I Borodina, L C Kenny, C M Mccarthy, K Paramasivan, E Pretorius, T J Roberts, S A Van Der Hoek, D B Kell, Nutr. Res. Rev. I. Borodina, L.C. Kenny, C.M. McCarthy, K. Paramasivan, E. Pretorius, T. J. Roberts, S.A. van der Hoek, D.B. Kell, The biology of ergothioneine, an antioxidant nutraceutical, Nutr. Res. Rev. (2020) 1-28.

Ergothioneine protects against neuronal injury induced by cisplatin both in vitro and in vivo. T.-Y Song, C.-L Chen, J.-W Liao, H.-C Ou, M.-S Tsai, Food Chem. Toxicol. 4812T.-Y. Song, C.-L. Chen, J.-W. Liao, H.-C. Ou, M.-S. Tsai, Ergothioneine protects against neuronal injury induced by cisplatin both in vitro and in vivo, Food Chem. Toxicol. 48 (12) (2010) 3492-3499.

Ergothioneine and melatonin attenuate oxidative stress and protect against learning and memory deficits in C57BL/6J mice treated with D-galactose. T Y Song, H C Lin, C L Chen, J H Wu, J W Liao, M L Hu, Free Radic. Res. 489T.Y. Song, H.C. Lin, C.L. Chen, J.H. Wu, J.W. Liao, M.L. Hu, Ergothioneine and melatonin attenuate oxidative stress and protect against learning and memory deficits in C57BL/6J mice treated with D-galactose, Free Radic. Res. 48 (9) (2014) 1049-1060.

Protective effects and possible mechanisms of ergothioneine and hispidin against methylglyoxal-induced injuries in rat pheochromocytoma cells. T Y Song, N C Yang, C L Chen, T L V Thi, Oxid Med Cell Longev. 4824371T.Y. Song, N.C. Yang, C.L. Chen, T.L.V. Thi, Protective effects and possible mechanisms of ergothioneine and hispidin against methylglyoxal-induced injuries in rat pheochromocytoma cells, Oxid Med Cell Longev 2017 (2017) 4824371.

Effect of ergothioneine on 7-ketocholesterol-induced endothelial injury. S S Koh, S C Ooi, N M Lui, C Qiong, L T Ho, I K Cheah, B Halliwell, D R Herr, W Y Ong, 10.1007/s12017-020-08620-4NeuroMolecular Med. In pressS.S. Koh, S.C. Ooi, N.M. Lui, C. Qiong, L.T. Ho, I.K. Cheah, B. Halliwell, D.R. Herr, W.Y. Ong, Effect of ergothioneine on 7-ketocholesterol-induced endothelial injury, NeuroMolecular Med. (2020), https://doi.org/10.1007/s12017-020- 08620-4. In press.

Inhibition of amyloid-induced toxicity by ergothioneine in a transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans model. I K Cheah, L T Ng, L F Ng, V Y Lam, J Gruber, C Y W Huang, F Q Goh, K H C Lim, B Halliwell, FEBS Lett. 59316I.K. Cheah, L.T. Ng, L.F. Ng, V.Y. Lam, J. Gruber, C.Y.W. Huang, F.Q. Goh, K.H. C. Lim, B. Halliwell, Inhibition of amyloid-induced toxicity by ergothioneine in a transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans model, FEBS Lett. 593 (16) (2019) 2139-2150.

Ergothioneine protects against neuronal injury induced by beta-amyloid in mice. N C Yang, H C Lin, J H Wu, H C Ou, Y C Chai, C Y Tseng, J W Liao, T Y Song, Food Chem. Toxicol. 5011N.C. Yang, H.C. Lin, J.H. Wu, H.C. Ou, Y.C. Chai, C.Y. Tseng, J.W. Liao, T.Y. Song, Ergothioneine protects against neuronal injury induced by beta-amyloid in mice, Food Chem. Toxicol. 50 (11) (2012) 3902-3911.

Functional expression of carnitine/organic cation transporter OCTN1 in mouse brain neurons: possible involvement in neuronal differentiation. N Nakamichi, T Taguchi, H Hosotani, T Wakayama, T Shimizu, T Sugiura, S Iseki, Y Kato, Neurochem. Int. 617N. Nakamichi, T. Taguchi, H. Hosotani, T. Wakayama, T. Shimizu, T. Sugiura, S. Iseki, Y. Kato, Functional expression of carnitine/organic cation transporter OCTN1 in mouse brain neurons: possible involvement in neuronal differentiation, Neurochem. Int. 61 (7) (2012) 1121-1132.

Organic cation transporter-mediated ergothioneine uptake in mouse neural progenitor cells suppresses proliferation and promotes differentiation into neurons. T Ishimoto, N Nakamichi, H Hosotani, Y Masuo, T Sugiura, Y Kato, PloS One. 9289434T. Ishimoto, N. Nakamichi, H. Hosotani, Y. Masuo, T. Sugiura, Y. Kato, Organic cation transporter-mediated ergothioneine uptake in mouse neural progenitor cells suppresses proliferation and promotes differentiation into neurons, PloS One 9 (2) (2014), e89434.

S6K promotes dopaminergic neuronal differentiation through PI3K/Akt/mTOR-Dependent signaling pathways in human neural stem cells. J E Lee, M S Lim, J H Park, C H Park, H C Koh, Mol. Neurobiol. 536J.E. Lee, M.S. Lim, J.H. Park, C.H. Park, H.C. Koh, S6K promotes dopaminergic neuronal differentiation through PI3K/Akt/mTOR-Dependent signaling pathways in human neural stem cells, Mol. Neurobiol. 53 (6) (2016) 3771-3782.

Impact of sleep disturbances on neurodegeneration: insight from studies in animal models. J E Owen, S C Veasey, Neurobiol. Dis. 139104820J.E. Owen, S.C. Veasey, Impact of sleep disturbances on neurodegeneration: insight from studies in animal models, Neurobiol. Dis. 139 (2020) 104820.

Chronic sleep disturbance and neural injury: links to neurodegenerative disease. S M Abbott, A Videnovic, Nat. Sci. Sleep. 8S.M. Abbott, A. Videnovic, Chronic sleep disturbance and neural injury: links to neurodegenerative disease, Nat. Sci. Sleep 8 (2016) 55-61.

Depression and risk of developing dementia. A L Byers, K Yaffe, Nat. Rev. Neurol. 76A.L. Byers, K. Yaffe, Depression and risk of developing dementia, Nat. Rev. Neurol. 7 (6) (2011) 323-331.

Depression-an underrecognized target for prevention of dementia in Alzheimer's disease. F S Dafsari, F Jessen, Transl. Psychiatry. 101160F.S. Dafsari, F. Jessen, Depression-an underrecognized target for prevention of dementia in Alzheimer's disease, Transl. Psychiatry 10 (1) (2020) 160.

Ergothioneine, a metabolite of the gut bacterium Lactobacillus reuteri, protects against stress-induced sleep disturbances. Y Matsuda, N Ozawa, T Shinozaki, K I Wakabayashi, K Suzuki, Y Kawano, I Ohtsu, Y Tatebayashi, Transl. Psychiatry. 101170Y. Matsuda, N. Ozawa, T. Shinozaki, K.I. Wakabayashi, K. Suzuki, Y. Kawano, I. Ohtsu, Y. Tatebayashi, Ergothioneine, a metabolite of the gut bacterium Lactobacillus reuteri, protects against stress-induced sleep disturbances, Transl. Psychiatry 10 (1) (2020) 170.

Ergothioneine treatment protects neurons against N-methyl-D-aspartate excitotoxicity in an in vivo rat retinal model. J A Moncaster, D T Walsh, S M Gentleman, L S Jen, O I Aruoma, Neurosci. Lett. 3281J.A. Moncaster, D.T. Walsh, S.M. Gentleman, L.S. Jen, O.I. Aruoma, Ergothioneine treatment protects neurons against N-methyl-D-aspartate excitotoxicity in an in vivo rat retinal model, Neurosci. Lett. 328 (1) (2002) 55-59.

Y An, V R Varma, S Varma, R Casanova, E Dammer, O Pletnikova, C W Chia, J M Egan, L Ferrucci, J Troncoso, A I Levey, J Lah, N T Seyfried, C Legido-Quigley, R O&apos;brien, M Thambisetty, Evidence for brain glucose dysregulation in Alzheimer's disease. 14Y. An, V.R. Varma, S. Varma, R. Casanova, E. Dammer, O. Pletnikova, C.W. Chia, J.M. Egan, L. Ferrucci, J. Troncoso, A.I. Levey, J. Lah, N.T. Seyfried, C. Legido- Quigley, R. O'Brien, M. Thambisetty, Evidence for brain glucose dysregulation in Alzheimer's disease, Alzheimers Dement 14 (3) (2018) 318-329.

Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease. D A Butterfield, B Halliwell, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 20D.A. Butterfield, B. Halliwell, Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 20 (2019) 148-160.

Uptake and protective effects of ergothioneine in human endothelial cells. R W Li, C Yang, A S Sit, Y W Kwan, S M Lee, M P Hoi, S W Chan, M Hausman, P M Vanhoutte, G P Leung, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Therapeut. 3503R.W. Li, C. Yang, A.S. Sit, Y.W. Kwan, S.M. Lee, M.P. Hoi, S.W. Chan, M. Hausman, P.M. Vanhoutte, G.P. Leung, Uptake and protective effects of ergothioneine in human endothelial cells, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Therapeut. 350 (3) (2014) 691-700.

Molecular links between endothelial dysfunction and neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's disease. E Lyros, C Bakogiannis, Y Liu, K Fassbender, Curr. Alzheimer Res. 111E. Lyros, C. Bakogiannis, Y. Liu, K. Fassbender, Molecular links between endothelial dysfunction and neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's disease, Curr. Alzheimer Res. 11 (1) (2014) 18-26.

The role of neurovascular system in neurodegenerative diseases. A Ahmad, V Patel, J Xiao, M M Khan, Mol. Neurobiol. 5711A. Ahmad, V. Patel, J. Xiao, M.M. Khan, The role of neurovascular system in neurodegenerative diseases, Mol. Neurobiol. 57 (11) (2020) 4373-4393.

Ergothioneine shows protective effect on endothelial cells in oxidative stress. A S M Sit, E Y Ho, R W Li, R Y Man, Y Kwan, P M Vanhoutte, G P Leung, 630.3-630.3FASEB J. 25S1A.S.M. Sit, E.Y. Ho, R.W. Li, R.Y. Man, Y. Kwan, P.M. Vanhoutte, G.P. Leung, Ergothioneine shows protective effect on endothelial cells in oxidative stress, FASEB J. 25 (S1) (2011), 630.3-630.3.

Brain sterol dysregulation in sporadic AD and MCI: relationship to heme oxygenase-1. J R Hascalovici, J Vaya, S Khatib, C A Holcroft, H Zukor, W Song, Z Arvanitakis, D A Bennett, H M Schipper, J. Neurochem. 1104J.R. Hascalovici, J. Vaya, S. Khatib, C.A. Holcroft, H. Zukor, W. Song, Z. Arvanitakis, D.A. Bennett, H.M. Schipper, Brain sterol dysregulation in sporadic AD and MCI: relationship to heme oxygenase-1, J. Neurochem. 110 (4) (2009) 1241-1253.

Oxysterols in the pathogenesis of major chronic diseases. G Poli, F Biasi, G Leonarduzzi, Redox Biol. 1G. Poli, F. Biasi, G. Leonarduzzi, Oxysterols in the pathogenesis of major chronic diseases, Redox Biol 1 (2013) 125-130.

Evidence for altered cholesterol metabolism in Huntington's disease post mortem brain tissue. F Kreilaus, A S Spiro, C A Mclean, B Garner, A M Jenner, Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 426F. Kreilaus, A.S. Spiro, C.A. McLean, B. Garner, A.M. Jenner, Evidence for altered cholesterol metabolism in Huntington's disease post mortem brain tissue, Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 42 (6) (2016) 535-546.

Endothelial dysfunction as a target for prevention of cardiovascular disease. D Versari, E Daghini, A Virdis, L Ghiadoni, S Taddei, Diabetes Care. 322D. Versari, E. Daghini, A. Virdis, L. Ghiadoni, S. Taddei, Endothelial dysfunction as a target for prevention of cardiovascular disease, Diabetes Care 32 (suppl 2) (2009) S314-S321.

Ergothioneine products derived by superoxide oxidation in endothelial cells exposed to high-glucose, Free Radic. L Servillo, N Onofrio, R Casale, D Cautela, A Giovane, D Castaldo, M L Balestrieri, Biol. Med. 108L. Servillo, N. D'Onofrio, R. Casale, D. Cautela, A. Giovane, D. Castaldo, M. L. Balestrieri, Ergothioneine products derived by superoxide oxidation in endothelial cells exposed to high-glucose, Free Radic. Biol. Med. 108 (2017) 8-18.

Ergothioneine represses inflammation and dysfunction in human endothelial cells exposed to oxidized low-density lipoprotein. L Saing, Y C Wei, C J Tseng, Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol. 437720L. Saing, Y.C. Wei, C.J. Tseng, Ergothioneine represses inflammation and dysfunction in human endothelial cells exposed to oxidized low-density lipoprotein, Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol. 43 (7) (2016) 720.

The bioactive agent ergothioneine, a key component of dietary mushrooms, inhibits monocyte binding to endothelial cells characteristic of early cardiovascular disease. K R Martin, J. Med. Food. 136K.R. Martin, The bioactive agent ergothioneine, a key component of dietary mushrooms, inhibits monocyte binding to endothelial cells characteristic of early cardiovascular disease, J. Med. Food 13 (6) (2010) 1340-1346.

Dietary sources and antioxidant effects of ergothioneine. J Ey, E Schomig, D Taubert, J. Agric. Food Chem. 5516J. Ey, E. Schomig, D. Taubert, Dietary sources and antioxidant effects of ergothioneine, J. Agric. Food Chem. 55 (16) (2007) 6466-6474.

Cyanobacteria produce high levels of ergothioneine. C Pfeiffer, T Bauer, B Surek, E Schomig, D Grundemann, Food Chem. 1294C. Pfeiffer, T. Bauer, B. Surek, E. Schomig, D. Grundemann, Cyanobacteria produce high levels of ergothioneine, Food Chem. 129 (4) (2011) 1766-1769.

Mushrooms: a rich source of the antioxidants ergothioneine and glutathione. M D Kalaras, J P Richie, A Calcagnotto, R B Beelman, Food Chem. 233M.D. Kalaras, J.P. Richie, A. Calcagnotto, R.B. Beelman, Mushrooms: a rich source of the antioxidants ergothioneine and glutathione, Food Chem. 233 (2017) 429-433.

Mushroom consumption and incident dementia in elderly Japanese: the Ohsaki cohort 2006 study. S Zhang, Y Tomata, K Sugiyama, Y Sugawara, I Tsuji, J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 657S. Zhang, Y. Tomata, K. Sugiyama, Y. Sugawara, I. Tsuji, Mushroom consumption and incident dementia in elderly Japanese: the Ohsaki cohort 2006 study, J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 65 (7) (2017) 1462-1469.

The association between mushroom consumption and mild cognitive impairment: a community-based cross-sectional study in Singapore. L Feng, I K Cheah, M M Ng, J Li, S M Chan, S L Lim, R Mahendran, E H Kua, B Halliwell, J Alzheimers Dis. 681L. Feng, I.K. Cheah, M.M. Ng, J. Li, S.M. Chan, S.L. Lim, R. Mahendran, E.H. Kua, B. Halliwell, The association between mushroom consumption and mild cognitive impairment: a community-based cross-sectional study in Singapore, J Alzheimers Dis 68 (1) (2019) 197-203.

Mushroom consumption and incident risk of prostate cancer in Japan: a pooled analysis of the Miyagi Cohort Study and the Ohsaki Cohort Study. S Zhang, Y Sugawara, S Chen, R B Beelman, T Tsuduki, Y Tomata, S Matsuyama, I Tsuji, Int. J. Canc. 14610S. Zhang, Y. Sugawara, S. Chen, R.B. Beelman, T. Tsuduki, Y. Tomata, S. Matsuyama, I. Tsuji, Mushroom consumption and incident risk of prostate cancer in Japan: a pooled analysis of the Miyagi Cohort Study and the Ohsaki Cohort Study, Int. J. Canc. 146 (10) (2020) 2712-2720.

Dietary mushroom intake and the risk of breast cancer based on hormone receptor status. A Shin, J Kim, S Y Lim, G Kim, M K Sung, E S Lee, J Ro, Nutr. Canc. 624A. Shin, J. Kim, S.Y. Lim, G. Kim, M.K. Sung, E.S. Lee, J. Ro, Dietary mushroom intake and the risk of breast cancer based on hormone receptor status, Nutr. Canc. 62 (4) (2010) 476-483.

Possible mechanisms of action of mushroom-derived glucans on inflammatory bowel disease and associated cancer. B Schwartz, Y Hadar, Ann. Transl. Med. 2219B. Schwartz, Y. Hadar, Possible mechanisms of action of mushroom-derived glucans on inflammatory bowel disease and associated cancer, Ann. Transl. Med. 2 (2) (2014) 19.

Characterization of the nutritional composition of a biotechnologically produced oyster mushroom and its physiological effects in obese Zucker rats. G Maheshwari, D K Gessner, S Meyer, J Ahlborn, G Wen, R Ringseis, H Zorn, K Eder, Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 64G. Maheshwari, D.K. Gessner, S. Meyer, J. Ahlborn, G. Wen, R. Ringseis, H. Zorn, K. Eder, Characterization of the nutritional composition of a biotechnologically produced oyster mushroom and its physiological effects in obese Zucker rats, Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 64 (2020), 2000591.

A mechanistic review on medicinal mushrooms-derived bioactive compounds: potential mycotherapy candidates for alleviating neurological disorders. S K Yadav, R Ir, R Jeewon, M Doble, K D Hyde, I Kaliappan, R Jeyaraman, R N Reddi, J Krishnan, M Li, S S K Durairajan, Planta Med. 8616S.K. Yadav, R. Ir, R. Jeewon, M. Doble, K.D. Hyde, I. Kaliappan, R. Jeyaraman, R. N. Reddi, J. Krishnan, M. Li, S.S.K. Durairajan, A mechanistic review on medicinal mushrooms-derived bioactive compounds: potential mycotherapy candidates for alleviating neurological disorders, Planta Med. 86 (16) (2020) 1161-1175.

The pharmacological potential of mushrooms. U Lindequist, T H Niedermeyer, W D Julich, Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 23U. Lindequist, T.H. Niedermeyer, W.D. Julich, The pharmacological potential of mushrooms, Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2 (3) (2005) 285-299.

Quantification of polyphenols and ergothioneine in cultivated mushrooms and correlation to total antioxidant capacity. N J Dubost, B Ou, R B Beelman, Food Chem. 1052N.J. Dubost, B. Ou, R.B. Beelman, Quantification of polyphenols and ergothioneine in cultivated mushrooms and correlation to total antioxidant capacity, Food Chem. 105 (2) (2007) 727-735.

The bioavailability of ergothioneine from mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus) and the acute effects on antioxidant capacity and biomarkers of inflammation. A J Weigand-Heller, P M Kris-Etherton, R B Beelman, Prev. Med. 54SupplA.J. Weigand-Heller, P.M. Kris-Etherton, R.B. Beelman, The bioavailability of ergothioneine from mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus) and the acute effects on antioxidant capacity and biomarkers of inflammation, Prev. Med. 54 (Suppl) (2012) S75-S78.

A retrospective study in adults with metabolic syndrome: diabetic risk factor response to daily consumption of Agaricus Bisporus (white button mushrooms). M S Calvo, A Mehrotra, R B Beelman, G Nadkarni, L Wang, W Cai, C G Boon, M D Kalaras, J Uribarri, Plant Foods Hum. Nutr. 713M.S. Calvo, A. Mehrotra, R.B. Beelman, G. Nadkarni, L. Wang, W. Cai, C.G. Boon, M.D. Kalaras, J. Uribarri, A retrospective study in adults with metabolic syndrome: diabetic risk factor response to daily consumption of Agaricus Bisporus (white button mushrooms), Plant Foods Hum. Nutr. 71 (3) (2016) 245-251.

Part 1: the human gut microbiome in health and disease. M J Bull, N T Plummer, Integr. Med. 136M.J. Bull, N.T. Plummer, Part 1: the human gut microbiome in health and disease, Integr. Med. 13 (6) (2014) 17-22.

Role of the gut microbiota in nutrition and health. A M Valdes, J Walter, E Segal, T D Spector, BMJ. 3612179A.M. Valdes, J. Walter, E. Segal, T.D. Spector, Role of the gut microbiota in nutrition and health, BMJ 361 (2018) k2179.

Biosynthesis of ergothioneine from endogenous hercynine in Mycobacterium smegmatis. D S Genghof, O Van Damme, J. Bacteriol. 952D.S. Genghof, O. Van Damme, Biosynthesis of ergothioneine from endogenous hercynine in Mycobacterium smegmatis, J. Bacteriol. 95 (2) (1968) 340-344.

Ergothioneine is a secreted antioxidant in Mycobacterium smegmatis. C Sao Emani, M J Williams, I J Wiid, N F Hiten, A J Viljoen, R D Pietersen, P D Van Helden, B Baker, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 577C. Sao Emani, M.J. Williams, I.J. Wiid, N.F. Hiten, A.J. Viljoen, R.D. Pietersen, P. D. van Helden, B. Baker, Ergothioneine is a secreted antioxidant in Mycobacterium smegmatis, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 57 (7) (2013) 3202-3207.

Regulation of ergothioneine biosynthesis and its effect on Mycobacterium tuberculosis growth and infectivity. M Richard-Greenblatt, H Bach, J Adamson, S Pena-Diaz, W Li, A J Steyn, Y Av-Gay, J. Biol. Chem. 29038M. Richard-Greenblatt, H. Bach, J. Adamson, S. Pena-Diaz, W. Li, A.J. Steyn, Y. Av-Gay, Regulation of ergothioneine biosynthesis and its effect on Mycobacterium tuberculosis growth and infectivity, J. Biol. Chem. 290 (38) (2015) 23064-23076.

The proteobacterial species Burkholderia pseudomallei produces ergothioneine which enhances virulence in mammalian infection. A K Gamage, C Liao, I K Cheah, Y Chen, D R X Lim, J W K Ku, R S L Chee, M Gengenbacher, F P Seebeck, B Halliwell, Y H Gan, FASEB J. 3212A.K. Gamage, C. Liao, I.K. Cheah, Y. Chen, D.R.X. Lim, J.W.K. Ku, R.S.L. Chee, M. Gengenbacher, F.P. Seebeck, B. Halliwell, Y.H. Gan, The proteobacterial species Burkholderia pseudomallei produces ergothioneine which enhances virulence in mammalian infection, FASEB J 32 (12) (2018) 6395-6409.

In vitro reconstitution of Mycobacterial ergothioneine biosynthesis. F P Seebeck, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 13219F.P. Seebeck, In vitro reconstitution of Mycobacterial ergothioneine biosynthesis, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132 (19) (2010) 6632-6633.

Heterologous and high production of ergothioneine in Escherichia coli. R Osawa, T Kamide, Y Satoh, Y Kawano, I Ohtsu, T Dairi, J. Agric. Food Chem. 665R. Osawa, T. Kamide, Y. Satoh, Y. Kawano, I. Ohtsu, T. Dairi, Heterologous and high production of ergothioneine in Escherichia coli, J. Agric. Food Chem. 66 (5) (2018) 1191-1196.

Gram-scale fermentative production of ergothioneine driven by overproduction of cysteine in Escherichia coli. N Tanaka, Y Kawano, Y Satoh, T Dairi, I Ohtsu, Sci. Rep. 911895N. Tanaka, Y. Kawano, Y. Satoh, T. Dairi, I. Ohtsu, Gram-scale fermentative production of ergothioneine driven by overproduction of cysteine in Escherichia coli, Sci. Rep. 9 (1) (2019) 1895.

The gut-brain axis: interactions between enteric microbiota, central and enteric nervous systems. M Carabotti, A Scirocco, M A Maselli, C Severi, Ann. Gastroenterol. 282M. Carabotti, A. Scirocco, M.A. Maselli, C. Severi, The gut-brain axis: interactions between enteric microbiota, central and enteric nervous systems, Ann. Gastroenterol. 28 (2) (2015) 203-209.

Ergothionase from Escherichia coli. J B Wolff, J. Biol. Chem. 237J.B. Wolff, Ergothionase from Escherichia coli, J. Biol. Chem. 237 (1962) 874-881.

Characterization of ergothionase from Burkholderia sp. HME13 and its application to enzymatic quantification of ergothioneine. H Muramatsu, H Matsuo, N Okada, M Ueda, H Yamamoto, S Kato, S Nagata, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 97. 12H. Muramatsu, H. Matsuo, N. Okada, M. Ueda, H. Yamamoto, S. Kato, S. Nagata, Characterization of ergothionase from Burkholderia sp. HME13 and its application to enzymatic quantification of ergothioneine, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 97 (12) (2013) 5389-5400.

Structure and mechanism of ergothionase from Treponema denticola. A Maurer, F Leisinger, D Lim, F P Seebeck, Chemistry. 2544A. Maurer, F. Leisinger, D. Lim, F.P. Seebeck, Structure and mechanism of ergothionase from Treponema denticola, Chemistry 25 (44) (2019) 10298-10303.

Degradation of ergothioneine by Alcaligenes faecalis. D Yanasugondha, M D Appleman, J. Bacteriol. 743D. Yanasugondha, M.D. Appleman, Degradation of ergothioneine by Alcaligenes faecalis, J. Bacteriol. 74 (3) (1957) 381-385.

Degradation of ergothioneine by cell-free extracts of Alcaligenes faecalis. B Kelly, M D Appleman, J. Bacteriol. 81B. Kelly, M.D. Appleman, Degradation of ergothioneine by cell-free extracts of Alcaligenes faecalis, J. Bacteriol. 81 (1961) 715-720.

Safety of synthetic l-ergothioneine (Ergoneine®) as a novel food pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 258/97. D Turck, J L Bresson, B Burlingame, T Dean, S Fairweather-Tait, M Heinonen, K I Hirsch-Ernst, I Mangelsdorf, H J Mcardle, A Naska, M Neuhäuser-Berthold, G Nowicka, K Pentieva, Y Sanz, A Siani, A Sjödin, M Stern, D Tomé, M Vinceti, P Willatts, K H Engel, R Marchelli, A Pöting, M Poulsen, J Schlatter, R Ackerl, H V Loveren, EFSA J. 14114629D. Turck, J.L. Bresson, B. Burlingame, T. Dean, S. Fairweather-Tait, M. Heinonen, K.I. Hirsch-Ernst, I. Mangelsdorf, H.J. McArdle, A. Naska, M. Neuhäuser-Berthold, G. Nowicka, K. Pentieva, Y. Sanz, A. Siani, A. Sjödin, M. Stern, D. Tomé, M. Vinceti, P. Willatts, K.H. Engel, R. Marchelli, A. Pöting, M. Poulsen, J. Schlatter, R. Ackerl, H.v. Loveren, Safety of synthetic l-ergothioneine (Ergoneine®) as a novel food pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 258/97, EFSA J 14 (11) (2016) p. report 4629.

Successful biosynthesis of natural antioxidant ergothioneine in Saccharomyces cerevisiae required only two genes from Grifola frondosa. Y H Yu, H Y Pan, L Q Guo, J F Lin, H L Liao, H Y Li, Microb. Cell Factories. 191164Y.H. Yu, H.Y. Pan, L.Q. Guo, J.F. Lin, H.L. Liao, H.Y. Li, Successful biosynthesis of natural antioxidant ergothioneine in Saccharomyces cerevisiae required only two genes from Grifola frondosa, Microb. Cell Factories 19 (1) (2020) 164.

Engineering the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae for the production of L-(+)-Ergothioneine. S A Van Der Hoek, B Darbani, K E Zugaj, B K Prabhala, M B Biron, M Randelovic, J B Medina, D B Kell, I Borodina, Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 7262S.A. van der Hoek, B. Darbani, K.E. Zugaj, B.K. Prabhala, M.B. Biron, M. Randelovic, J.B. Medina, D.B. Kell, I. Borodina, Engineering the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae for the production of L-(+)-Ergothioneine, Front Bioeng Biotechnol 7 (2019) 262.

Ergothioneine production using Methylobacterium species, yeast, and fungi. Y Fujitani, K M Alamgir, A Tani, J. Biosci. Bioeng. 1266Y. Fujitani, K.M. Alamgir, A. Tani, Ergothioneine production using Methylobacterium species, yeast, and fungi, J. Biosci. Bioeng. 126 (6) (2018) 715-722.

High production of ergothioneine in Escherichia coli using the sulfoxide synthase from Methylobacterium strains. T Kamide, S Takusagawa, N Tanaka, Y Ogasawara, Y Kawano, I Ohtsu, Y Satoh, T Dairi, J. Agric. Food Chem. 6823T. Kamide, S. Takusagawa, N. Tanaka, Y. Ogasawara, Y. Kawano, I. Ohtsu, Y. Satoh, T. Dairi, High production of ergothioneine in Escherichia coli using the sulfoxide synthase from Methylobacterium strains, J. Agric. Food Chem. 68 (23) (2020) 6390-6394.

In vitro production of ergothioneine isotopologues. M A Beliaeva, R Burn, D Lim, F P Seebeck, 10.1002/anie.202011096Angew Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. In pressM.A. Beliaeva, R. Burn, D. Lim, F.P. Seebeck, In vitro production of ergothioneine isotopologues, Angew Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. (2020), https://doi.org/10.1002/ anie.202011096. In press.

Could ergothioneine aid in the treatment of coronavirus patients. I K Cheah, B Halliwell, Antioxidants. 97595I.K. Cheah, B. Halliwell, Could ergothioneine aid in the treatment of coronavirus patients? Antioxidants 9 (7) (2020) 595.

The antioxidant action of ergothioneine. D Akanmu, R Cecchini, O I Aruoma, B Halliwell, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2881D. Akanmu, R. Cecchini, O.I. Aruoma, B. Halliwell, The antioxidant action of ergothioneine, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 288 (1) (1991) 10-16.

Antioxidant action of ergothioneine: assessment of its ability to scavenge peroxynitrite. O I Aruoma, M Whiteman, T G England, B Halliwell, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2312O.I. Aruoma, M. Whiteman, T.G. England, B. Halliwell, Antioxidant action of ergothioneine: assessment of its ability to scavenge peroxynitrite, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 231 (2) (1997) 389-391.

Ergothioneine inhibits oxidative stress-and TNF-alpha-induced NF-kappa B activation and interleukin-8 release in alveolar epithelial cells. I Rahman, P S Gilmour, L A Jimenez, S K Biswas, F Antonicelli, O I Aruoma, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 3024I. Rahman, P.S. Gilmour, L.A. Jimenez, S.K. Biswas, F. Antonicelli, O.I. Aruoma, Ergothioneine inhibits oxidative stress-and TNF-alpha-induced NF-kappa B activation and interleukin-8 release in alveolar epithelial cells, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 302 (4) (2003) 860-864.

Organic cation transporter Octn1-mediated uptake of food-derived antioxidant ergothioneine into infiltrating macrophages during intestinal inflammation in mice. T Shimizu, Y Masuo, S Takahashi, N Nakamichi, Y Kato, Drug Metabol. Pharmacokinet. 303T. Shimizu, Y. Masuo, S. Takahashi, N. Nakamichi, Y. Kato, Organic cation transporter Octn1-mediated uptake of food-derived antioxidant ergothioneine into infiltrating macrophages during intestinal inflammation in mice, Drug Metabol. Pharmacokinet. 30 (3) (2015) 231-239.

Role of ergothioneine in microbial physiology and pathogenesis. B M Cumming, K C Chinta, V P Reddy, A J C Steyn, Antioxidants Redox Signal. 286B.M. Cumming, K.C. Chinta, V.P. Reddy, A.J.C. Steyn, Role of ergothioneine in microbial physiology and pathogenesis, Antioxidants Redox Signal. 28 (6) (2018) 431-444.

K J Sheridan, B E Lechner, G O Keeffe, M A Keller, E R Werner, H Lindner, G W Jones, H Haas, S Doyle, Ergothioneine biosynthesis and functionality in the opportunistic fungal pathogen. 635306K.J. Sheridan, B.E. Lechner, G.O. Keeffe, M.A. Keller, E.R. Werner, H. Lindner, G. W. Jones, H. Haas, S. Doyle, Ergothioneine biosynthesis and functionality in the opportunistic fungal pathogen, Aspergillus fumigatus, Sci. Rep. 6 (2016) 35306.

Aromatic substitution reaction of ergothioneine -a novel mechanism of xenobiotic deactivation. C G Clerkin, M Matzinger, M A Selo, B N Talbot, J J Walsh, C Ehrhardt, FASEB J. 31S1C.G. Clerkin, M. Matzinger, M.A. Selo, B.N. Talbot, J.J. Walsh, C. Ehrhardt, Aromatic substitution reaction of ergothioneine -a novel mechanism of xenobiotic deactivation, FASEB J. 31 (S1) (2017), 821.1.

Effects of ergothioneine from mushrooms (Flammulina velutipes) on melanosis and lipid oxidation of kuruma shrimp (Marsupenaeus japonicus). A B Encarnacion, F Fagutao, I Hirono, H Ushio, T Ohshima, J. Agric. Food Chem. 584A.B. Encarnacion, F. Fagutao, I. Hirono, H. Ushio, T. Ohshima, Effects of ergothioneine from mushrooms (Flammulina velutipes) on melanosis and lipid oxidation of kuruma shrimp (Marsupenaeus japonicus), J. Agric. Food Chem. 58 (4) (2010) 2577-2585.

Antioxidative activity and antidiscoloration efficacy of ergothioneine in mushroom (Flammulina velutipes) extract added to beef and fish meats. H N Bao, H Ushio, T Ohshima, J. Agric. Food Chem. 5621H.N. Bao, H. Ushio, T. Ohshima, Antioxidative activity and antidiscoloration efficacy of ergothioneine in mushroom (Flammulina velutipes) extract added to beef and fish meats, J. Agric. Food Chem. 56 (21) (2008) 10032-10040.

Ergothioneine, a dietary amino acid with a high relevance for the interpretation of label-free surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) spectra of many biological samples. S Fornasaro, E Gurian, S Pagarin, E Genova, G Stocco, G Decorti, V Sergo, A Bonifacio, Spectrochim. Acta Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 246119024S. Fornasaro, E. Gurian, S. Pagarin, E. Genova, G. Stocco, G. Decorti, V. Sergo, A. Bonifacio, Ergothioneine, a dietary amino acid with a high relevance for the interpretation of label-free surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) spectra of many biological samples, Spectrochim. Acta Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 246 (2020) 119024.

Estimation of age of bloodstains by mass-spectrometry: a metabolomic approach. A E Seok, J Lee, Y R Lee, Y J Lee, H J Kim, C Ihm, H J Sung, S H Hyun, H G Kang, Anal. Chem. 9021A.E. Seok, J. Lee, Y.R. Lee, Y.J. Lee, H.J. Kim, C. Ihm, H.J. Sung, S.H. Hyun, H. G. Kang, Estimation of age of bloodstains by mass-spectrometry: a metabolomic approach, Anal. Chem. 90 (21) (2018) 12431-12441.

M Uhlen, L Fagerberg, B M Hallstrom, C Lindskog, P Oksvold, A Mardinoglu, A Sivertsson, C Kampf, E Sjostedt, A Asplund, I Olsson, K Edlund, E Lundberg, S Navani, C A Szigyarto, J Odeberg, D Djureinovic, J O Takanen, S Hober, T Alm, P H Edqvist, H Berling, H Tegel, J Mulder, J Rockberg, P Nilsson, J M Schwenk, M Hamsten, K Von Feilitzen, M Forsberg, L Persson, F Johansson, M Zwahlen, G Heijne, J Nielsen, F Ponten, Proteomics. Tissue-based map of the human proteome. 3471260419M. Uhlen, L. Fagerberg, B.M. Hallstrom, C. Lindskog, P. Oksvold, A. Mardinoglu, A. Sivertsson, C. Kampf, E. Sjostedt, A. Asplund, I. Olsson, K. Edlund, E. Lundberg, S. Navani, C.A. Szigyarto, J. Odeberg, D. Djureinovic, J.O. Takanen, S. Hober, T. Alm, P.H. Edqvist, H. Berling, H. Tegel, J. Mulder, J. Rockberg, P. Nilsson, J. M. Schwenk, M. Hamsten, K. von Feilitzen, M. Forsberg, L. Persson, F. Johansson, M. Zwahlen, G. von Heijne, J. Nielsen, F. Ponten, Proteomics. Tissue-based map of the human proteome, Science 347 (6220) (2015) 1260419.