Breast Abstracts



Medical Center
Affiliation: Tripler Army Medical Center
HonoluluHI

Breast Abstracts
21 PSTM 2019 Abstract Supplement


BACKGROUND:

In 1979, Kerrigan et al described the anatomical locations and potential reconstructive use of the different perforating branches of the intercostal artery. Later, in 1986, Holmstrom et al reported a flap based off the lateral perforating branch of the intercostal artery-the lateral intercostal artery perforator (LICAP) flap-as an option for superolateral breast reconstruction. Since that time, the LICAP flap has been described in cases reports, retrospective reviews, and even a prospective trial. However, a review of the literature has yet to be published. The purpose of this study was to review our institution's experience and perform a review of the literature.


METHODS:

A retrospective review was conducted of a single surgeon's experience at a major university center. Patients who underwent LICAP flaps between the years of 2007 and 2018 were included. Pre-and postoperative photographs were reviewed, patient demographics were analyzed, and complication rates were determined. A review of the literature was performed on PubMed with search terms "lateral intercostal artery perforator flap" and "lateral thoracodorsal flap," selecting for articles describing the use of this flap for partial breast reconstruction.


RESULTS:

Eleven total patients underwent lateral perforator flaps for reconstruction of segmental mastectomy. Average age was 55 years old. Diagnosis at the time of breast conserving surgery included ductal carcinoma in situ and invasive carcinoma and chronic wound subsequent to radiation therapy. Total excision volume ranged from 3 × 4 × 2 cm to 6 × 6 × 5 cm, from the superolateral breast. The majority of reconstructions were performed in a delayed fashion. No seromas, no delayed healing, nor any need for operative revision were reported. From our literature search, 137 total articles were initially identified. Of these, 38 included information on 1,453 patients who underwent 1,528 laterally based perforator flaps for partial breast reconstruction. Patient age ranged from 23 to 83 years old, with an average reported specimen weight of 160 g and flap dimensions of 15.7 × 6.9 cm. Overall complication rate was low with most complications classified as minor and not requiring surgical intervention. Major complication leading to surgical revision was seen in only 2.57% of flaps. Donor site complications were not common, with seroma the most frequent seen in 3.5% of cases. Diabetes mellitus, thyroid disease, pulmonary and cardiovascular disorders, flap length over 17 cm, smoking, high body mass index, and history of radiation were significantly associated with complications. Additionally, several studies reported good to excellent esthetic outcomes using verified surveys such as SF-36 and the BREAST-Q, and independent review by other plastic surgeons.


CONCLUSION:

The LICAP flap presents a robust option for reconstruction of superolateral partial mastectomy defects. It may be performed in a delayed fashion to ensure negative margins at the time of reconstruction and achieves good esthetic outcomes with low risk of complications. Breast implant-associated anaplastic large cell lymphoma (BIA-ALCL), a rare but potentially deadly complication of device-based breast reconstruction, has an incidence estimated to be as high as 1 in every 3,817 cases of textured device implantation and has been implicated in 17 deaths worldwide. Present hypotheses of BIA-ALCL pathogenesis propose that bacterial biofilms present on textured implants may lead to T-cell dysregulation in the setting of chronic inflammation or genetic susceptibility, but this theory remains lacking in experimental evidence partly due to the inadequacy of present in vivo and in vitro models. The purpose of this study is to utilize our high-fidelity ex vivo biomimetic, 3-dimensional breast model to study the effects of implant shells on patient-derived BIA-ALCL cells.


Exploring the Effect of Implant


METHODS:

Healthy patient-derived breast tissue was processed for its individual cellular constituents including adipocytes, organoids, and the stromal vascular fraction (which also includes immunologic cells). These constituents were then suspended within 50 µl of 0.3% type I collagen matrix along with patient-derived BIA-ALCL cells at a density of 200,000 cells/ml before being plated into 6 mm wells. As a control, BIA-ALCL cells were also suspended within type I collagen at the same seeding density and volume but without any breast components. Before plating, wells were lined with either textured, smooth, or no implant shells. These were 1 × 2 cm pieces of implant shell dissected from the whole implant, cleaned of any underlying residual silicone gel, and autoclaved before being placed into the wells with the superficial aspect of the shell facing into the well. Eight wells were plated per implant shell type: 4 biomimetic platform wells and 4 collagen-only controls. All groups started at an equal density of approximately 1,000 cells per 3-dimensional confocal snapshot. Wells were then imaged immediately and every other day using confocal microscopy before being processed using Imaris software to analyze cell proliferation over time.


RESULTS

: BIA-ALCL cell proliferation was significantly more robust in the biomimetic platform relative to the collagen-only groups regardless of implant shell type. BIA-ALCL cells in both the textured and smooth shell biomimetic groups grew nearly 30% faster than those within biomimetic wells lacking implant shell, with statistical differences as early as day 2 following plating. By day 10, mean cell counts in the textured and smooth shell biomimetic groups were 4,021 ± 999 and 4,281 ± 633, respectively, compared with 2,399 ± 355 in the biomimetic group lacking implant shell (P = 0.015). There was no statistical difference in BIA-ALCL cell proliferation between the textured and smooth biomimetic groups or among any of the collagen-alone groups.

CONCLUSIONS: Using our unique tissue-engineered 3-dimensional ex vivo model of BIA-ALCL, we have demonstrated that BIA-ALCL cells thrive within the biomimetic platform when compared with collagen alone and that incorporation of smooth and textured implant shell leads to significantly increased BIA-ALCL cell proliferation when compared with no implant shell. These findings contribute to the implication of breast implant materials in the development of BIA-ALCL, and they demonstrate the promise of our platform for use in further investigation of BIA-ALCL pathogenesis and therapeutics. The abdomen is the most common location from which tissue is harvested for autologous breast reconstruction. 1 The evolution from musculocutaneous flaps to muscle-sparring perforators flaps has decreased donor site complications such as abdominal bulge and hernia; however, complications remain. The development of progressive tension suture placement for donor site closure has the potential to decrease complications and increase the esthetics of the abdomen after breast reconstruction. 2 PURPOSE: To present our institutional experience using progressive tension sutures for a tensionless closure of the donor site to improve outcomes and optimize abdominal donor site esthetics.


How Do We Raise the Bar in Autologous


METHODS:

A retrospective cohort study was conducted over a 2-year period. Sixty-six consecutive patients who underwent abdominally based autologous breast reconstruction were divided into an experimental group (36 patients), in which the donor site was closed using progressive tension sutures, and a control group (31 patients), in which the donor site was closed without the use of this technique. A comparison between both groups was conducted in terms of demographic characteristics, perioperative variables, and donor site-related postoperative complications.


Breast Reconstruction? The Use of Progressive Tension Sutures for Donor Site Closure Presenter: Kristy L. Hamilton, MD Co-Authors: Andres F. Doval, MD; Kieran S. Boochoon, MS; Aldona J. Spiegel, MD Affiliation: Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX BACKGROUND:


Shell on Patient-derived Breast Implantassociated Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma Cells in Ex Vivo Biomimetic Breast Tissue Presenter: Matthew A. Wright, BA Co-Authors: Daniel O. Lara, BS; Danilo Fiore, PhD; Runlei Zhao, MD; Arash Samadi, BS; Karel-Bart Celie, BA; Yoshi PRS Global Open • 2019 Toyoda, BA; Giorgio Inghirami, MD; Kristy A. Brown, PhD; Jason A. Spector, MD, FACS Affiliation: Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NYPURPOSE: