healthcare Barriers and Mitigating Strategies to Healthcare Access in Indigenous Communities of Canada: A Narrative Review


Nam Hoang Nguyen nnguyen1@ualberta.ca 
Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutritional Sciences
University of Alberta
T6G 2E1EdmontonABCanada

Fatheema B Subhan fatheema@ualberta.ca 
School of Public Health
University of Alberta
T6G 1K4EdmontonABCanada

Kienan Williams kienan.williams@ahs.ca 
Population, Public and Indigenous Health Strategic Clinical Network
Alberta Health Services
T2W 1S7CalgaryABCanada

Catherine B Chan 
Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutritional Sciences
University of Alberta
T6G 2E1EdmontonABCanada

Department of Physiology
University of Alberta
T6G 2H7EdmontonABCanada

Diabetes, Obesity and Nutrition Strategic Clinical Network
Alberta Health Services
T2W 1S7EdmontonABCanada

healthcare Barriers and Mitigating Strategies to Healthcare Access in Indigenous Communities of Canada: A Narrative Review
10.3390/healthcare8020112Received: 10 March 2020; Accepted: 22 April 2020; Published: 26 April 2020Review † These authors contributed equally to the work.healthcare accessibilityIndigenous communitiessocial determinants of health
The objective of this review is to document contemporary barriers to accessing healthcare faced by Indigenous people of Canada and approaches taken to mitigate these concerns. A narrative review of the literature was conducted. Barriers to healthcare access and mitigating strategies were aligned into three categories: proximal, intermediate, and distal barriers. Proximal barriers include geography, education attainment, and negative bias among healthcare professionals resulting in a lack of or inadequate immediate care in Indigenous communities. Intermediate barriers comprise of employment and income inequities and health education systems that are not accessible to Indigenous people. Distal barriers include colonialism, racism and social exclusion, resulting in limited involvement of Indigenous people in policy making and planning to address community healthcare needs. Several mitigation strategies initiated across Canada to address the inequitable health concerns include allocation of financial support for infrastructure development in Indigenous communities, increases in Indigenous education and employment, development of culturally sensitive education and medical systems and involvement of Indigenous communities and elders in the policy-making system. Indigenous people in Canada face systemic/policy barriers to equitable healthcare access. Addressing these barriers by strengthening services and building capacity within communities while integrating input from Indigenous communities is essential to improve accessibility.

Introduction

In Canada, universal coverage for healthcare services is a strategy for "improving the lives of all Canada's People and to making this country's population among the healthiest in the world . . . " [1]. The Canada Health Act's primary objective " . . . is to protect, promote, and restore the physical and mental wellbeing of residents of Canada and to facilitate reasonable access to health services without financial or other barriers" [2] while embracing diversity, creating healthy and respectful environments, and reducing health inequities [1]. Notwithstanding this, healthcare delivery often fails to address social and health inequities and may be influenced by ethnicity, culture and physical appearance, leading to health disparities among specific populations [3]. A large gap exists in health status between the general Canadian and Indigenous populations. Only 44% of First Nations (FN) people living on-reserve report very good/excellent health versus~60% of non-Indigenous people [4] and FN people have shorter life expectancy [5], as do Inuit [6]. The prevalence of at least one chronic disease such as diabetes, obesity or arthritis is 60% in Indigenous adults [5]. In Canada, "Indigenous" or "Aboriginal" designate the three peoples who are originally from North America: FN, Inuit, and Métis [7]. Indigenous peoples officially account for 4.9% of the Canadian population [8] but, particularly in certain urban centers, the numbers may be greatly underestimated [9]. Overall, the population has expanded by 42.5% since 2006 and will exceed 2.5 million in the next twenty years [8], which will exacerbate unaddressed health disparities. Acknowledging the significant health gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous populations, the Government of Canada (GoC) has implemented the Non-Insured Health Benefits (NIHB) program for FN and Inuit (but not Métis) people to help cover the costs of medically necessary items and services that are otherwise not insured [10]. Provincial programs for Indigenous people, such as the FN health contracted services agencies in British Columbia (BC) [11] also exist but health disparities, such as poor healthcare services access, remain a serious issue [12]. Research supports that equity-oriented healthcare produces better mental and physical health outcomes and better quality of life [13]. In light of the limited and outdated compilations of Indigenous healthcare access issues, this review presents a discussion of the current barriers and measures taken to reduce these discrepancies. Such a review is vital to highlight ongoing or new obstacles in healthcare access and assist Indigenous and non-Indigenous leaders to create action-oriented strategies and tools to effectively resolve health inequities in Canada.


Materials and Methods

The review questions were: (1) What are the barriers faced by the Indigenous communities in accessing healthcare in Canada? (2) What strategies have been implemented to resolve these barriers and are there any plans to implement any new strategies in the future? The concepts included were: Indigenous population of Canada; barriers to healthcare access, social determinants of health; healthcare programs and policies, interventions.

We searched multiple databases and grey literature using a documented search strategy (Supplemental Table S1). The following databases were searched: PubMed, MEDLINE, EMBASE, iPortal, ProQuest. The grey literature search was conducted using the Google search engine and Google Scholar. Web pages of relevant organizations including First Nations, Métis, and Inuit were explored: University of Alberta Subject guide [14], Health Canada [15], Canadian Institutes of Health Research [16], Statistics Canada [17].

A PICO framework was used. The population inclusion criteria were studies including adult Indigenous populations in Canada (First Nations, Metis, and Inuit) while the exclusion criteria were studies that did not specifically target indigenous populations but included indigenous participants. The interventions or exposures defined as studies in the English language, published between 2010 and May 2018, and describing the barriers to health care access in the Indigenous population in Canada were chosen ( Figure 1). Interventions must have been applied to identify Indigenous people residing in Canada with the aim to improve access to healthcare and/or health outcomes. Types of studies included original research (prospective cohort, observational and qualitative studies), review articles, reports, policy documents and white papers. Statistical reports about the health status of the Indigenous communities were also included. Primary outcomes were common problems in healthcare access for Indigenous people and barriers to equitable healthcare access. Secondary outcomes were current and future strategies that have been or will be implemented to resolve the barriers. While OCAP ® has less applicability to secondary data analysis, the study team sought to be inclusive of Indigenous evaluation frameworks throughout this paper.

The initial search produced 196 articles from database searches and additional references from organization websites. After screening titles and reviewing abstracts, 157 articles were excluded. After a full review of 39 articles, a further 12 articles that did not fit the inclusion criteria were excluded, along with 3 that were older than 2010, leaving 25 articles that were included in the detailed analysis in this paper. In the final revision, 12 articles were added to provide updated information, thus a total of 36 articles were included (Supplementary Table S2). The initial search produced 196 articles from database searches and additional references from organization websites. After screening titles and reviewing abstracts, 157 articles were excluded. After a full review of 39 articles, a further 12 articles that did not fit the inclusion criteria were excluded, along with 3 that were older than 2010, leaving 25 articles that were included in the detailed analysis in this paper. In the final revision, 12 articles were added to provide updated information, thus a total of 36 articles were included (Supplementary Table 2).


Results


Data Extraction and Theming

Data extraction was carried out on the 36 selected articles and findings were categorized according to predetermined and emerging themes using a deductive-inductive approach based on the Structural and Social Determinants of Indigenous People's Health Framework [18]. The main themes in the deductive framework included the following: a) barriers faced by Indigenous people in accessing healthcare in Canada; b) mitigation strategies implemented to resolve these barriers; c) future plans to resolve these barriers to accessible healthcare.

Following the Structural and Social Determinants of Indigenous People's Health Framework, the findings of the review are summarized below according to the following themes: (1) proximal barriers to equitable healthcare access that affect individuals directly; (2) intermediate barriers to equitable healthcare access and (3) distal barriers to equitable healthcare access. Under each of the themes mentioned above, we identified sub-topics and mitigation strategies to resolve these barriers, described in detailed in the following sections.  


Results


Data Extraction and Theming

Data extraction was carried out on the 36 selected articles and findings were categorized according to predetermined and emerging themes using a deductive-inductive approach based on the Structural and Social Determinants of Indigenous People's Health Framework [18]. The main themes in the deductive framework included the following: (a) barriers faced by Indigenous people in accessing healthcare in Canada; (b) mitigation strategies implemented to resolve these barriers; (c) future plans to resolve these barriers to accessible healthcare.

Following the Structural and Social Determinants of Indigenous People's Health Framework, the findings of the review are summarized below according to the following themes: (1) proximal barriers to equitable healthcare access that affect individuals directly; (2) intermediate barriers to equitable healthcare access and (3) distal barriers to equitable healthcare access. Under each of the themes mentioned above, we identified sub-topics and mitigation strategies to resolve these barriers, described in detailed in the following sections.


Proximal Barriers to Equitable Healthcare Access that Affect Individuals Directly

Since these barriers can have a significant impact on many aspects of healthcare access, some of the proximal barriers could also be treated as intermediate barriers and vice versa.


Geography

On remote and isolated FN reserves and other indigenous communities, health centers are mainly run by nurses or community health workers (CHW). Limitations on their scopes of practice, access to training and equipment required to treat residents in their community [19] means that FN people must travel to cities to access advanced treatment facilities and medical specialists, creating a geographical barrier to effective access [19,20] also pertinent to Métis and Inuit [21]. Many Inuit communities lack year-round road access and only a few have hospitals, hence travel by plane is required to reach the nearest hospital [21,22]. Weather is one factor that affects decisions to medically evacuate patients from remote locations and delays may severely affect the outcome of emergencies such as heart attacks [22]. Geography also limits high-speed internet infrastructure and access to online medical resources [23].


Mitigation Strategies

Recent initiatives to improve essential infrastructure include the Ontario provincial government partnering with three remote Northwestern Ontario FN communities to construct year-round road access [24] and the GoC's 5-year, $1.5 billion investment to enhance access to critical medical care and services for Indigenous communities across Canada. The governments of Canada and Ontario collaborated to build new hospitals and ambulatory care facilities in remote Indigenous communities [10]. A plan to provide high-speed internet access to 190 Indigenous communities was developed [23].

Integration of telehealth provides greater access to specialized care and reduces travel and wait times by connecting patients from remote areas to healthcare providers (HCP) via teleconference [25]. Notable examples are the FN Telehealth Expansion Project in BC, telehealth services provided by Alberta Health and the Keewaytinook Okimakanak telemedicine program in northwestern Ontario [22][23][24][25][26][27][28]. Telehealth has successfully delivered many healthcare services to distant Indigenous communities [29], but cannot completely eradicate access barriers and requires ongoing maintenance of the infrastructure.


Education Attainment

Inadequate education often results in poor literacy, decreasing one's ability to navigate the healthcare system [30]. A high proportion of Indigenous people still do not attend educational institutions [5,31], in part due to a lack of cultural sensitivity in education curricula [32]. For indigenous peoples living off-reserve, education attainment along with income and occupational status are the most important predictors of good health [33]. Low education, or low English or French literacy, may engender feelings of fear and intimidation when talking to healthcare providers (HCP) [34], creating a severe barrier because doctors may not refer patients to appropriate treatment if the health problem is not communicated and understood [35]. Due to language barriers and isolation from their communities, Indigenous people may refrain from traveling for health services [34].


Mitigation Strategies

Increasing access to education and improving the quality of curricula are essential to Indigenous students obtaining higher credentials. Collaborations between Indigenous communities, Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada (INAC), the Assembly of FN and other organizations aim to improve education for FN children. An example is the Manitoba FN School System, the first program in Canada led by FN communities to ensure that elementary and secondary education programs are culturally relevant and high quality [36]. In 2016 the GoC funded $30 million to the Martin Family Initiative to improve elementary school educational outcomes in 20 schools in Ontario [37,38]. Financial support programs assisting Indigenous students to access education include the Indigenous Services Canada programs to Treaty and Status FN post-secondary students; "Indspire", a national Indigenous registered charity organization, offers numerous scholarships and bursaries to Indigenous students pursuing post-secondary education, apprenticeships, skilled trades or technology programs [39]. See also the mitigation strategies section in Section 3.3.2 Health Education Systems for strategies specifically targeting healthcare training.

To facilitate communications between patients and HCP, Indigenous interpreters trained in medical terminology [35], such as the Aboriginal Patient Navigator (APN) program, are an important bridge. APNs assist patients in navigating the healthcare system and understanding medical advice and is available in various cities in BC, Newfoundland and Labrador, and Ontario [40][41][42].


Negative Bias

Colonization and historical intergenerational traumas (e.g., residential schools, Sixties Scoop) have plagued the survivors and later generations with physical and mental trauma, which can generate self-destructive behaviors such as alcoholism and violence [43]. These behaviors are often portrayed inaccurately in the media, leading to negative stereotypes of Indigenous people. For instance, some HCPs assume that all Indigenous people are addicts or alcoholic and that they are pretending to be sick in order to abuse medicine [4,44]. Therefore, physicians may limit interaction with these patients, offering them less chance to explain themselves [44] and possibly denying them specialist referrals [4]. Healthcare education systems offer limited cultural competency and sensitivity training, undermining non-indigenous HCPs' ability to engage in meaningful conversations without offending their patients [3]. Many HCPs do not acknowledge the impact of colonization on the Indigenous community and disregard the social determinants of health (SDOH) as explanations for illness [4]. Such attitudes result in disrespectful, culturally inappropriate health services [4,34], which deter Indigenous people from seeking healthcare.


Mitigation Strategies

The creation of multidisciplinary teams including Indigenous people can enhance cultural sensitivity in clinical practice, such as mental wellness teams developed nationally. Teams of elders, social workers, nurses, psychologists and other experts develop and provide culturally appropriate and accessible mental health services for Indigenous communities [45]. The FN and Inuit Health Branch, the Assembly of FN and Indigenous mental wellness experts collaborated to create the FN Mental Wellness Continuum, which advises on policy and program changes that organizations can make to improve outcomes [45]. The Mental Health and Addiction Elders Advisory (MHAEA) in Alberta is a program created based on this continuum and is based on Indigenous knowledge, informed and guided by elders from Alberta FN communities [45]. A basic principle of Indigenous knowledge is recognizing the unique regional complexities of Indigenous communities [46]. Common elements of Indigenous knowledge include undertaking a wholistic health approach to wellness when reviewing experiences for critical analysis [47]. More strategies to avoid negative stereotypes of Indigenous patients are covered in the mitigation strategies section of Section 3.4.2 Racism and Social Exclusion.


Insufficient Numbers or Retention of Qualified HCP

Despite the high prevalence of diseases and mortality, many indigenous communities lack sufficiently qualified HCP, thus patients may not get appropriate and timely diagnoses of more complex conditions [22]. A recent survey of 84 indigenous communities across Canada found that 58% of healthcare services were led by a nurse-in-charge versus 32% by physicians and 14% by nurse practitioners [48]. At Inuit community health centers, community health nurses are the backbone of the health system, providing most of the care through an expanded scope of practice [49]. In emergencies, lacking other resources, nurses often perform duties outside of their program-mandated scope of practice, such as prescribing medications or performing diagnostic imaging. Nurses must prioritize providing acute care, resulting in reduced emphasis on education and preventive services [50]. However, staff turnover rates are high, with incumbent disruptions in accessibility and excessive workload for those remaining [51]. In some communities, there are no full-time HCPs, meaning CHWs are the first responders. CHWs are lay residents of the communities and do not receive advanced clinical training; their intended role is to help in bridging cultural barriers between HCP and residents [52]. CHWs can be important for public health initiatives such as pediatric oral care [53] or chronic disease interventions [48], but privacy concerns of some community residents may also be a barrier [22].


Mitigation Strategies

Incentives such as scholarships, loan repayment programs, increased salary, and professional support programs can reduce staff turnover and increase recruitment into rural communities [54]. In 2013, the Government of BC and the BC Medical Association established "A GP for Me", providing physicians committing to a 3-year contract in designated rural communities, including seven reserves, with financial incentives [55]. More than 3000 doctors participated, providing > 178,000 people with a family doctor [56]. The program laid a foundation for providing team-based care to meet patient needs and ongoing incentives for physicians for face-to-face interactions with patients and other specified activities [57].

Inefficient scheduling may exacerbate low staffing issues [22]. Thus, optimizing the scheduling process is necessary to maximize the presence of HCP, for example by balancing drop-in clinic times for urgent care with scheduled visits [58] and utilizing telehealth for follow-up with specialists [29].

To ensure the efficiency and effectiveness of healthcare services for Indigenous communities, it is essential to evaluate interventions [34]. The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) recently launched the Pathways to Health Equity for Aboriginal People initiative that funds projects to design and promote programs and policies that support the well-being of Indigenous people [59].


Intermediate Barriers to Equitable Healthcare Access


Employment and Income

The Canadian Community Well-Being Index takes into account community education, labor force participation, income and housing conditions. Although the overall Index rating of indigenous communities has increased over the last three decades, the gap between indigenous and non-indigenous communities has remained high [60]. In 2015, the unemployment rates of Indigenous versus general Canadian populations were 12.4% and 6.8%, respectively [61]. There is a significant wage gap with the median total income of FN individuals at $21,875 CAD compared with $34,604 CAD for non-Indigenous individuals [62]. This is lower than the low-income cut-off [63], below which families have no surplus to afford additional insurance or health services that are not covered by the NIHB or provincial or territorial governments [30]. This is a particular issue for diseases like diabetes that require supplies only partially covered by insurance [19]. Having a low income contributes to individuals not pursuing education and training [21,22] and also poses a barrier to travel for treatment off-reserve [64]. Although supplementary insurance coverage is provided to designated low-income residents and seniors, not all qualify for these benefits [65]. For instance, many Indigenous seniors cannot afford long-term care housing [64] and of the >600 FN across Canada, only 53 long-term care facilities are managed by FN, despite the growing demand. Restrictive wait-list policies may pose an additional barrier to seniors accessing off-reserve facilities [66].


Mitigation Strategies

In 2017-2018, INAC provided $4.6 billion over five years in support of affordable housing, travel expenses, education, gaining work experience and exploring different career options. INAC also invested $25 million over 5 years to develop a Métis Nation economic development strategy [67]. In the 2018 budget, the GoC proposed a 5-year, $2 billion investment for a new Indigenous skills and employment training program with an emphasis on higher paying jobs [10]. Provincial governments also support initiatives such as the Aboriginal Training to Employment Program in Alberta [68]. Various organizations have developed guides to help employers create inclusive and culturally sensitive workplaces [69,70], which in turn is expected to increase job satisfaction and retention of indigenous employees.


Health Education Systems

Post-secondary education in healthcare professions enables better employment and income for individuals and access to healthcare services for Indigenous populations. Significant socio-economic barriers and a history of discrimination and residential schools have resulted in poor educational attainment among Indigenous people. Furthermore, most current education curricula are not culturally competent; western medicine is preferred over traditional medicine (TM) and a lack of focus on traditional, holistic healthcare in the curriculum may discourage Indigenous students from pursuing healthcare careers [3,71].


Mitigation Strategies

Collaboration of Indigenous communities with universities is creating more equitable access to post-secondary education. Universities Canada, representing 95 universities, committed to enhancing education opportunities for Indigenous students and fostering reconciliation [72]. Currently, 70% of Canadian universities have partnerships with Indigenous communities; several are taking steps to include Indigenous representation in their governance and increase academic programs with an Indigenous focus [73]. Developing health education programs that put a greater emphasis on a holistic view of human health can motivate Indigenous youth to pursue health careers [74]. An excellent example is the University College of the North (UCN), Manitoba. To attract Indigenous students to its health sciences program, UCN offers cultural services, such as a counselling and elders' programs, and provides a learning environment that allows students to honor and share their cultural beliefs and practices and promote cross-cultural awareness [75]. The UCN program includes courses focused on understanding the experiences of Indigenous communities in the past and present. All faculty and staff complete an Indigenous awareness course to promote culturally competence and sensitivity [75].


Distal Barriers to Equitable Healthcare Access

Distal barriers have the most profound influence on the healthcare access of Indigenous populations because these create intermediate and proximal barriers. Distal barriers can be the most difficult to change, yet, if transformed can significantly reduce health inequities and have the greatest health impacts [76].


Colonialism

Inequities towards Indigenous people in the Canadian healthcare system stem from the colonial foundations of Canada [71]. Colonialism created the political and economic inequalities that led to the abovementioned intermediate and proximal barriers to healthcare. One consequence of colonialism was the reserve system, which dispossessed many Indigenous peoples of their traditional lands and forced them to relocate to reserves in remote locations often lacking in critical infrastructure. Therefore, there are many challenges to establishing businesses or advanced healthcare facilities on reserves [77]. Colonialism blocked Indigenous people from engaging in policy making, which resulted in many decisions that continue to marginalize and exclude them and hinder their participation in decisions related to their healthcare priorities and needs [78], such as the under-development of necessary healthcare services on reserve areas, lack of culturally appropriate health services, underfunding and inappropriate health policies. For instance, many Indigenous people believe that TM is the most effective treatment for them, yet access is limited within healthcare settings oriented to western medicine [79]. However, incorporation of TM with western medicine is usually discouraged, and some physicians who would like to do so emphasize that incorporating alternative healing practices into the western medical system is challenging because the healthcare system is tightly controlled [4].


Mitigation Strategies

The reconciliation of colonialism's impact requires collaboration between federal and provincial health systems and Indigenous communities to allow Indigenous representation on Regional Health Authorities and a permanent bilateral mechanism between governments and Indigenous people [25,34,35,64,80] and promotion of programs reflecting the community priorities [45]. A model of reconciliation and collaboration is the Toronto Indigenous Health Advisory Circle (TIHAC), a community-led advisory group in Ontario representing Indigenous people that advises on healthcare policy development [81]. The role of TIHAC is to guide identification, funding and evaluation of culturally based health services and influence public health policy that affects Indigenous health outcomes and addresses SDOH [81]. The TIHAC developed the Toronto Indigenous Health Strategy (TIHS) following the Indigenous medicine wheel and elders' advice, and includes a wide range of strategies to improve healthcare accessibility. For instance: integrating more Indigenous navigators into the system, ensuring healthcare services are welcoming and inclusive of Indigenous people, providing education regarding Indigenous ceremonies/teachings, supporting health services that integrate TM with mainstream health programs and developing community-based healing/counseling teams of HCP [81].

Another example of Indigenous representation in a regulatory body is the formation of CIHR's Indigenous People Health Institute Advisory Board, with seats reserved for delegates from the Assembly of FN, Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami and the Métis National Council [59]. CIHR holds meetings with senior leaders from Indigenous organizations across Canada to align research with community priorities [82] and including Indigenous communities in the policy discourse and policy-making process.

The federal government committed to transforming the health system into a model of selfdetermination, where services are developed, delivered and controlled by and for FN, including investment of $74.9 million to support a permanent bilateral mechanism to identify the communities' priorities [10]. For example, the FN Health Authority (FNHA) in BC has a governance structure that includes representation from FN Health Council and FN Health Directors Association. FNHA has a provincial mandate to deliver programs and services previously provided by Health Canada. Through a tripartite governance framework between BC FN, the Province of BC and FNIHB, FNHA seeks to innovate and reform healthcare delivery by collaborating, coordinating and integrating health services and programs to address service gaps and achieve better health outcomes [83].


Racism and Social Exclusion

Colonialism created social stratification, which led to inequitable distribution of resources, power, freedom and control among the Indigenous population, precipitating racism and social exclusion, impacting culturally sensitive access to the health system. Systemic racism (SR) and epistemic racism (ER) exist in healthcare [71]. SR refers to the "imposition and perpetuation of inequities through governance" [71]. For instance, NIHB referral forms require physicians to provide a patient's personal information, regardless of their consent. If no information is received, the referral is denied. ER refers to "imposition of one world view over another" [71]; as discussed, the precedence of western medicine causes difficulties in accessing Indigenous TM, yet a convergence of traditional knowledge and western scientific methods has established the efficacy of traditional medicines in several instances [84]. Racism can also lead to unequitable resource allocation. For example, the sweat lodge is a traditional structure utilized by Indigenous people during certain ceremonies that is among the most commonly practiced cultural intervention and shown to provide benefit in conditions such as addictions [85]. Policies may favor allocating hospital funds to upgrade western medical technology instead of building sweat lodges [71].

Racism and social exclusion can also be observed in the practices of HCPs, including a lack of respect and inappropriate treatment [34]. Furthermore, inadequate health services offered on-reserve may prompt Indigenous people to relocate to cities, which can be terrifying as they often feel isolated and demoralized away from their home communities. These circumstances may prevent them from accessing or interacting with HCP [34].


Mitigation Strategies

Distal barriers necessitate that organizations review and revise their hiring policies and processes, performance evaluation, recognition and compensation to support the commitment to equitable health [25,67]. Practices include developing and delivering culturally sensitive healthcare services by: hiring Indigenous HCPs, or non-Indigenous staff who are motivated to work in Indigenous communities [25,58], developing anti-racism policies, and providing cross-cultural training [86]. Since 2016, Ontario requires mandatory cultural competency training for all public service employees including HCPs [87]; similarly, all existing and new Alberta Health Services staff are required to undergo Indigenous cultural competency training [88].

Another initiative that trains HCP and provides tools to eliminate healthcare inequities at the front line was developed by the interdisciplinary EQUIP team that includes researchers and knowledge users (HCPs and leaders in Indigenous health). It developed a series of tools and educational modules to help HCPs support equity-oriented practices and offer patient-centered care. The program examines SDOH and ways that clinics can support marginalized people. The tools support HCPs' ability to speak to people without erroneous assumptions or unintentional negative bias [13].

Several services are offered across Canada to alleviate barriers to accessing high quality and culturally safe healthcare, such as the Aboriginal Patient Liaison programs and an Aboriginal Health Improvement Committee in northern British Columbia [89]. Indigenous Services Canada also supports national programs to improve Indigenous population health, such as the Aboriginal Diabetes Initiative and Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Program [90].

To prevent social exclusion, identification of opportunities to incorporate TM within hospital settings are necessary [30,35]. In rural northern Ontario, an Indigenous health framework and traditional healers are incorporated into the system, which has increased service accessibility and improved patient care [30].


Discussion

Indigenous people in Canada still face barriers to equitable healthcare access and more work is needed to eradicate this discrimination. Using the Social Determinants of Indigenous People's Health Framework [1], we identified nine prominent barriers that contribute to difficulties in healthcare access in Indigenous communities. These barriers fall into three main categories: proximal, intermediate and distal. More specifically, proximal barriers include geography, education attainment, negative bias, and insufficient numbers of healthcare providers who may also have lower training qualifications than warranted by their responsibilities. Intermediate barriers consist of employment and income, and the lack of culturally relevant education system for healthcare professionals. Lastly, distal barriers include colonialism, and racism and social exclusion. All these barriers contribute to an intertwined and vicious cycle of difficulties in healthcare access in Indigenous communities.

The results from our review reiterate that the inequities towards Indigenous people in the Canadian healthcare system stem from the colonial foundations of Canada. Colonialism created the political and economic inequalities that led to the abovementioned intermediate and proximal barriers to healthcare. Similarly, two other review articles examining healthcare access issues in the Indigenous communities of Canada have stressed that the present healthcare disparities and inequitable health services are rooted in the past and present effects of colonialism [91,92]. The authors stated that the explanation for the health disparities extend beyond biomedical factors; rather, the evidence obtained from historical, social and political contexts explains the root causes of poor health and healthcare disparities in Indigenous communities [92].

We have presented the negative effects of colonialism that lead to social stratification, inequitable distribution of resources, power, freedom and control among the Indigenous peoples, precipitating racism and social exclusion, and disengagement of Indigenous people in policy making processes. Further negative bias and stereotypes and limited or no cultural sensitivity training for non-Indigenous healthcare staff has led to inadequate culturally sensitive services available to the Indigenous people.

Using a postcolonial perspective, Horill et al. argued that racialized ideologies in the present-day healthcare system hold Indigenous people responsible for their own problems and poor health status [92]. Previous negative experience with the healthcare system was identified as a barrier to further interactions with the system, i.e., not seeking or delayed seeking of healthcare. These negative experiences also discourage trust in healthcare providers [92,93].

Our results identify that another implication of the colonial impact on healthcare acceptability is the importance of western medicine over traditional practices. Culturally safe and appropriate healthcare is an inter-related concept and involves the following key elements: healthcare services free of bias and discrimination; traditional and holistic healthcare needs of indigenous people; and active collaboration with Indigenous people as health providers [91]. We noted that the current education system lacks integration of holistic healthcare and traditional practices in the curricula, thus discouraging Indigenous students from pursing healthcare careers. This also limits the knowledge of traditional practices among the non-Indigenous students who will be future healthcare providers. Also, Indigenous people may not have trust in healthcare provided by government agencies due to the colonial history [92]. Hence, there is a need to include cultural and traditional practices in addition to or complementary to clinical healthcare [91]. Good communication between Indigenous people and their healthcare providers is key to regaining the acceptability of health services; this can be achieved by providing cultural safety training to healthcare staff as an integral part of healthcare institutions' policy and programming [91]. Further trauma-informed compassionate care and working with Indigenous community members as active collaborative agents would help in the planning and implementation of patient-centered care [91].

More immediate factors such as geography, limited resources, limited healthcare staff, economic inequities and jurisdictional disputes on provision of care have been reported by us and others [91,92] as existing debilitating factors that limit healthcare availability to Indigenous people in Canada. Although these challenges impact the accessibility across all geographic locations, rural, remote and northern communities are the most severely affected by these factors [91].

Moving forward to ensure equitable healthcare services to Indigenous people, healthcare access should not be viewed as an individual or their community's responsibility but instead considered as a social responsibility [92]. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission's Call to Action #19 urges "the federal government, in consultation with Aboriginal peoples, to establish measurable goals to identify and close the gaps in health outcomes between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal communities" [94]. The following mitigation strategies have been identified by other researchers to resolve these disparities: creating socially accepting and safe spaces, creating cultural safe education, research and healthcare practices [92,93], policy changes involving different levels of government to end jurisdictional disputes and provision of equitable funding [91,92], encouraging Indigenous people to develop healthcare policies and practices that are meaningful to them, and developing strategies for the recruitment and retention of healthcare staff to work in rural, remote and northern communities [91].

The mitigation strategies we have identified in this review resonate with the abovementioned suggestions and encompass changes in the provision of financial aid for infrastructure development and rural medical job retention, increases in Indigenous education and employment, development of culturally sensitive education and medical systems and, perhaps most importantly, involvement of Indigenous communities and elders in the policymaking system. Strengthening existing programs and creating similar initiatives in other domains of the SDOH, such as food security and adequate housing, are required to end inequitable healthcare access. Many programs are underway at federal, provincial and regional levels to increase the representation of Indigenous people in various governing bodies and committees. Effective health equity strategies need more work to spread beyond the health system to fully address SDOH. Moreover, development and implementation plans are necessary to increase communication about successful services to the public to raise awareness and public engagement.

There are several strengths and limitations to this review. This report directly considers evidence about healthcare access issues faced by FN, Inuit and Métis populations in Canada. By structuring the barriers into proximal, intermediate and distal components, this review demonstrates the complexity of barriers to healthcare access and emphasizes the importance of a holistic understanding of problems experienced by Indigenous communities in Canada. Another strength is that, where possible, we have used sources of information provided by the Indigenous people of Canada, for example the First Nations Information Governance Centre, which created OCAP ® and the First Nations Data Centre. We have also surveyed grey literature, which has provided insights into many programs and initiatives that are attempting to mitigate barriers to healthcare, but which may not have been evaluated using a traditional academic lens. This may also be viewed as a limitation of the work, in that the efficacy of these interventions is unclear and where evaluation has been done, scientific validity may be lacking. We acknowledge that the use of non-peer-reviewed sources such as organization or government reports, policy documents and white papers is a limitation; however, these materials are sometimes the only source of information regarding specific programs, for example, and thus have been included. As a narrative review, the purpose was to address the research questions as a summary overview of the main barriers and mitigating strategies with examples but is not an exhaustive catalogue.

This review provides up-to-date information on barriers and specific mitigation strategies that have been implemented by compiling and analyzing a wide range of relevant and recent journal articles, government and other published documents. This will facilitate the uptake and application of the review's findings in future research and policy development. This review has some limitations that need to be considered. Due to the scarcity of relevant and specific information, a wide range of articles, including different methodologies and participant samples and populations, were used. Hence, a narrative review approach was used to synthesize the information. There is little information on the evaluation and success of the mitigation strategies described. Further research on the efficacy of various mitigation strategies is necessary for the determination of best practices.


Conclusions and Recommendations

Indigenous people face significant barriers to healthcare access in present day Canada. Addressing a few barriers ad hoc will not resolve the health inequities or improve overall health status of the Indigenous population. Therefore, the initiation and establishment of multi-sectoral, cross-government reforms involving a variety of strategies are necessary. Healthcare providers and policy makers need to be aware of the various challenges faced by Indigenous people, the context leading to these impairments and the cyclic and compounding effects of various biomedical, social, cultural, financial and political factors affecting the health of indigenous people. Cultural training and involvement of collaborative active Indigenous partners at all stages of planning and implementation stages of mitigation strategies and policy changes are essential to bring relevant, meaningful and sustainable changes. Lastly, in order to ensure reconciliation, every step necessary should be taken to close the gaps and inequities in health outcomes between Indigenous and non-indigenous people in Canada.  

Figure 1 .
1PRISMA flow diagram of articles included in the review.

Figure 1 .
1PRISMA flow diagram of articles included in the review.

Author
Contributions: Conceptualization, F.B.S., N.H.N.; methodology: F.B.S., N.H.N.; formal analysis, N.H.N., F.B.S.; investigation, F.B.S., N.H.N.; writing-original draft preparation, N.H.N., F.B.S.; writing-review and editing, F.B.S., K.W., C.B.C.; supervision, C.B.C.; project administration, F.B.S.; funding acquisition, C.B.C. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. K.W. is the associate scientific director of the Public, Population and Indigenous Health Strategic Clinical Network of Alberta Health Services. He was nominated by the PPIH SCN to participate in the writing of this review and has made substantial contributions to the analytical writing and revisions to the article. He is a First Nations member of Sandy Lake First Nation. He provided final approval and agrees to ongoing accountability for the accuracy and interpretation of the information presented. Funding: N.H.N. was supported funding from the University of Alberta. F.B.S. was supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from Canadian Institutes of Health Research and Alberta Health Services.


Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at http://www.mdpi.com/2227-9032/8/2/112/s1, Supplementary Table S1: Search words used in search engines and databases, Supplementary Table S2: Articles included in the review.
Acknowledgments:The authors are grateful to Helen M Musulan for critical review of the manuscript.Conflicts of Interest:The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
About Mission, Values, Activities. Health CanadaHealth Canada. About Mission, Values, Activities. Available online: https://www.canada.ca/en/health- canada/corporate/about-health-canada/activities-responsibilities/mission-values-activities.html (accessed on 18 October 2019).

. Canada Government Of, Canada Health Act. Available online. 10Government of Canada. Canada Health Act. Available online: https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/c-6/ fulltext.html (accessed on 10 July 2019).

Assessing health care access and use among Indigenous peoples in Alberta: A systematic review. J. Health Care Poor Underserved. F Nader, F Kolahdooz, S Sharma, 10.1353/hpu.2017.011428PubMedNader, F.; Kolahdooz, F.; Sharma, S. Assessing health care access and use among Indigenous peoples in Alberta: A systematic review. J. Health Care Poor Underserved 2017, 28, 1286-1303. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Insiders' insight: Discrimination against Indigenous peoples through the eyes of health care professionals. L Wylie, S Mcconkey, 10.1007/s40615-018-0495-9J. Racial Ethn. Health Disparities. 6PubMedWylie, L.; McConkey, S. Insiders' insight: Discrimination against Indigenous peoples through the eyes of health care professionals. J. Racial Ethn. Health Disparities 2018, 6, 37-45. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Our Stories, Our Future: The National Report of the First Nations Regional Early Childhood, Education and Employment Survey. 29First Nations Information Governance Centre. Our DataFirst Nations Information Governance Centre. Our Data, Our Stories, Our Future: The National Report of the First Nations Regional Early Childhood, Education and Employment Survey. Available online: https://fnigc. ca/sites/default/files/docs/fnigc_fnreees_national_report_2016_en_final.pdf (accessed on 29 March 2020).

Projections of the Aboriginal Populations, Canada, Provinces and Territories 91-547-X. Statistics CanadaStatistics Canada. Projections of the Aboriginal Populations, Canada, Provinces and Territories 91-547-X. Available online: https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/en/catalogue/91--547-X (accessed on 27 March 2020).

Indigenous Peoples and Communities. Canada Government Of, Government of Canada. Indigenous Peoples and Communities. Available online: https://www.rcaanc-cirnac. gc.ca/eng/1100100013785/1529102490303 (accessed on 9 October 2019).

First Nations People, Métis and Inuit in Canada: Diverse and Growing Populations. 16Statistics CanadaStatistics Canada. First Nations People, Métis and Inuit in Canada: Diverse and Growing Populations. Available online: https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/89--659-x/89--659-x2018001-eng.htm (accessed on 16 July 2019).

Our Health Counts Toronto: Using respondent-driven sampling to unmask census undercounts of an urban indigenous population in Toronto, Canada. M A Rotondi, P O&apos;campo, K O&apos;brien, M Firestone, S H Wolfe, C Bourgeois, J K Smylie, 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-018936BMJ Open. 7PubMedRotondi, M.A.; O'Campo, P.; O'Brien, K.; Firestone, M.; Wolfe, S.H.; Bourgeois, C.; Smylie, J.K. Our Health Counts Toronto: Using respondent-driven sampling to unmask census undercounts of an urban indigenous population in Toronto, Canada. BMJ Open 2017, 7, e018936. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

. Canada Government Of, Budget. Government of Canada. Budget Plan 2018: Chapter 3-Reconciliation. Available online: https://www. budget.gc.ca/2018/docs/plan/chap-03-en.html (accessed on 9 October 2019).

Provincial Health Services Authority. Indigenous Health Supports PHSA Programs and Services in a Collective Approach to Indigenous Health. 16Provincial Health Services Authority. Indigenous Health Supports PHSA Programs and Services in a Collective Approach to Indigenous Health. Available online: http://www.phsa.ca/our-services/programs- services/indigenous-health (accessed on 16 July 2019).

Canada's universal health-care system: Achieving its potential. D Martin, A P Miller, A Quesnel-Vallee, N R Caron, B Vissandjee, G P Marchildon, 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30181-8Lancet. 391Martin, D.; Miller, A.P.; Quesnel-Vallee, A.; Caron, N.R.; Vissandjee, B.; Marchildon, G.P. Canada's universal health-care system: Achieving its potential. Lancet 2018, 391, 1718-1735. [CrossRef]

How equity-oriented health care affects health: Key mechanisms and implications for primary health care practice and policy. M Ford-Gilboe, C N Wathen, C Varcoe, C Herbert, B E Jackson, J G Lavoie, B B Pauly, N A Perrin, V Smye, B Wallace, 10.1111/1468-0009.12349Milbank Q. 96Ford-Gilboe, M.; Wathen, C.N.; Varcoe, C.; Herbert, C.; Jackson, B.E.; Lavoie, J.G.; Pauly, B.B.; Perrin, N.A.; Smye, V.; Wallace, B.; et al. How equity-oriented health care affects health: Key mechanisms and implications for primary health care practice and policy. Milbank Q. 2018, 96, 635-671. [CrossRef]

Subject Guides. University of AlbertaUniversity of Alberta. Subject Guides. Available online: https://guides.library.ualberta.ca/?b=p (accessed on 1 April 2020).

. Canada. Health Government, Canada, Government of Canada. Health Canada. Available online: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada.html (accessed on 1 April 2020).

Canadian Institutes of Health Research. Canada Government Of, Government of Canada. Canadian Institutes of Health Research. Available online: https://cihr-irsc.gc.ca (accessed on 1 April 2020).

. Statistics Canada. Available online. Statistics Canada. Available online: https://www.statcan.gc.ca (accessed on 1 April 2020).

Health Inequalities and Social Determinants of Aboriginal Peoples' Health; National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health. C L Reading, F Wien, Prince35George, BC, CanadaReading, C.L.; Wien, F. Health Inequalities and Social Determinants of Aboriginal Peoples' Health; National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health: Prince George, BC, Canada, 2009; p. 35.

Exploring structural barriers to diabetes self-management in Alberta First Nations communities. S Kulhawy-Wibe, K M King-Shier, C Barnabe, B J Manns, B R Hemmelgarn, D J Campbell, 10.1186/s13098-018-0385-7Diabetol. Metab. Synd. 10Kulhawy-Wibe, S.; King-Shier, K.M.; Barnabe, C.; Manns, B.J.; Hemmelgarn, B.R.; Campbell, D.J.T. Exploring structural barriers to diabetes self-management in Alberta First Nations communities. Diabetol. Metab. Synd. 2018, 10, 87. [CrossRef]

Autonomy, equality, and access to sexual and reproductive health care. E Nelson, 10.29173/alr771Alta. Law Rev. 54Nelson, E. Autonomy, equality, and access to sexual and reproductive health care. Alta. Law Rev. 2017, 54, 707-726. [CrossRef]

Social Determinants of Inuit Health in Canada: A Discussion Paper. Kanatami Inuit Tapiriit, Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami. Social Determinants of Inuit Health in Canada: A Discussion Paper. Available online: https://www.itk.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/ITK_Social_Determinants_Report.pdf (accessed on 18 July 2018).

Primary health care accessibility challenges in remote indigenous communities in Canada's North. T M Oosterveer, T K Young, 10.3402/ijch.v74.29576Int. J. Circumpolar Health. 74Oosterveer, T.M.; Young, T.K. Primary health care accessibility challenges in remote indigenous communities in Canada's North. Int. J. Circumpolar Health 2015, 74, 29576. [CrossRef]

Innovation Science and Economic Development Canada. High-Speed Access for All: Canada's Connectivity Strategy. Innovation Science and Economic Development Canada. High-Speed Access for All: Canada's Connectivity Strategy. Available online: https://www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/139.nsf/eng/h_00002.html (accessed on 5 April 2019).

Ontario Pledges 'Support' for Year-Round Road Access to 3 Remote First Nations. H Kitching, J Porter, 31Kitching, H.; Porter, J. Ontario Pledges 'Support' for Year-Round Road Access to 3 Remote First Nations. Available online: https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/thunder-bay/kathleen-wynne-thunder-bay-1.4255390 (accessed on 31 July 2018).

Aboriginal Health Strategic Plan. Island Health. Aboriginal Health Strategic Plan 2017-2021. Available online: https://www.islandhealth.ca/ sites/default/files/2018--09/aboriginal-health-strategic-plan-optimized.pdf (accessed on 9 April 2019).

. Alberta Health Services. Alberta Telehealth. Available online. Alberta Health Services. Alberta Telehealth. Available online: https://www.albertahealthservices.ca/maz/ telehealth.aspx (accessed on 4 April 2019).

. Keewaytinook Okimakanak, Ko E-Health Telemedicine, Keewaytinook Okimakanak. KO e-Health Telemedicine. Available online: https://telemedicine.knet.ca/ overview (accessed on 27 August 2018).

Health Canada; The Public Health Agency of Canada. Evaluation of the eHealth Infostructure ProgramHealth Canada; The Public Health Agency of Canada. Evaluation of the eHealth Infostructure Program 2011-2012 to 2015-2016. Available online: http://publications.gc.ca/site/archivee-archived.html?url=http: //publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2018/aspc-phac/HP5--124--2017-eng.pdf (accessed on 4 April 2019).

Integrated care with Indigenous populations: A systematic review of the literature. M Lewis, L L Myhra, 10.5820/aian.2403.2017.88Am. Indian Alsk. Nativ. Ment. Health Res. 24Lewis, M.; Myhra, L.L. Integrated care with Indigenous populations: A systematic review of the literature. Am. Indian Alsk. Nativ. Ment. Health Res. 2017, 24, 88-110. [CrossRef]

Education in Canada: Key Results From the 2016 Census. Statistics CanadaStatistics Canada. Education in Canada: Key Results From the 2016 Census. Available online: https: //www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-quotidien/171129/dq171129a-eng.htm (accessed on 3 April 2019).

Assembly of First Nations. Cultural Competency Report. Available online. Assembly of First Nations. Cultural Competency Report. Available online: https://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/ education/8.1.pdf (accessed on 27 March 2020).

Socioeconomic inequalities in health among Indigenous peoples living off-reserve in Canada: Trends and determinants. M Hajizadeh, M Hu, A Bombay, Y Asada, 10.1016/j.healthpol.2018.06.011Health Policy. 122Hajizadeh, M.; Hu, M.; Bombay, A.; Asada, Y. Socioeconomic inequalities in health among Indigenous peoples living off-reserve in Canada: Trends and determinants. Health Policy 2018, 122, 854-865. [CrossRef]

Understanding inequalities in access to health care services for Aboriginal People: A call for nursing action. B L Cameron, M P C Plazas, A S Salas, L B Bearskin, K Hungler, 10.1097/ANS.0000000000000039Adv. Nurs. Sci. 37PubMedCameron, B.L.; Plazas, M.P.C.; Salas, A.S.; Bearskin, L.B.; Hungler, K. Understanding inequalities in access to health care services for Aboriginal People: A call for nursing action. Adv. Nurs. Sci. 2014, 37, E1-E16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Strengthening the Circle: Partnering for Improved Health for Aboriginal People. Aboriginal Health Strategy. Saskatchewan Health Authority, 10Saskatchewan Health Authority. Strengthening the Circle: Partnering for Improved Health for Aboriginal People. Aboriginal Health Strategy 2010-2015. Available online: https://www.saskatoonhealthregion.ca/locations_services/Services/fnmh/service/Documents/About- Us%20FNMHS/Aboriginal-Health-Stragety-full.pdf (accessed on 10 April 2019).

Manitoba First Nations Education Resource Centre Inc. The Manitoba First Nations School System. 10Manitoba First Nations Education Resource Centre Inc. The Manitoba First Nations School System. Available online: https://mfnerc.org/services/mfnss/ (accessed on 10 April 2019).

News release: Government Partners with Martin Family Initiative to Support Innovative Teaching Focused on Early Literacy in First Nations Schools. Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs CanadaIndigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada. News release: Government Partners with Martin Family Initiative to Support Innovative Teaching Focused on Early Literacy in First Nations Schools. Available online: https://www.canada.ca/en/indigenous-northernaffairs/news/2017/03/government_ partnerswithmartinfamilyinitiativetosupportinnovative.html (accessed on 9 October 2019).

Who We Are. Martin Family Initiative, 10Martin Family Initiative. Who We Are. Available online: https://www.themfi.ca/about-mfi (accessed on 10 April 2019).

Indigenous Education is Canada's Future Growth. Indspire, 10Indspire. Indigenous Education is Canada's Future Growth. Available online: https://indspire.ca/about/ (accessed on 10 April 2019).

Program Provides Support and Helps Aboriginal Patients Navigate Healthcare System in Niagara. Niagara Health FoundationNiagara Health Foundation. Program Provides Support and Helps Aboriginal Patients Navigate Healthcare System in Niagara. Available online: https://www.niagarahealth.on.ca/site/news/2016/09/27/program- provides-support-and-helps-aboriginal-patients-navigate-healthcare-system-in-niagara (accessed on 4 April 2019).

Interior Health Authority. Aboriginal Health: Improving the Health of Aboriginal people. Interior Health Authority. Aboriginal Health: Improving the Health of Aboriginal people. Available online: https://www.interiorhealth.ca/YourHealth/AboriginalHealth/Pages/default.aspx (accessed on 8 April 2019).

Residential schools and the effects on Indigenous health and well-being in Canada-A scoping review. P Wilk, A Maltby, M Cooke, 10.1186/s40985-017-0055-6Public Health Rev. 38PubMedWilk, P.; Maltby, A.; Cooke, M. Residential schools and the effects on Indigenous health and well-being in Canada-A scoping review. Public Health Rev. 2017, 38, 8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Underclassism' and access to healthcare in urban centres. S Y Tang, A J Browne, B Mussell, V L Smye, P Rodney, 10.1111/1467-9566.12236Sociol. Health Illn. 37PubMedTang, S.Y.; Browne, A.J.; Mussell, B.; Smye, V.L.; Rodney, P. 'Underclassism' and access to healthcare in urban centres. Sociol. Health Illn. 2015, 37, 698-714. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

First Nations mental wellness: Mobilizing change through partnership and collaboration. B M Restoule, C Hopkins, J Robinson, P K Wiebe, 10.7870/cjcmh-2015-014Can. J. Community Ment. Health. 34Restoule, B.M.; Hopkins, C.; Robinson, J.; Wiebe, P.K. First Nations mental wellness: Mobilizing change through partnership and collaboration. Can. J. Community Ment. Health 2015, 34, 89-109. [CrossRef]

At the Interface: Indigenous Health Practitioners and Evidence-Based Practice; National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health. B J Rogers, K Swift, K Van Der Woerd, M Auger, R Halseth, D Atkinson, S Vitalis, S M Wood, A Bedard, PrinceGeorge, BC, CanadaRogers, B.J.; Swift, K.; van der Woerd, K.; Auger, M.; Halseth, R.; Atkinson, D.; Vitalis, S.; Wood, S.M.; Bedard, A. At the Interface: Indigenous Health Practitioners and Evidence-Based Practice; National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health: Prince George, BC, Canada, 2019; pp. 1-34.

Integrative science and two-eyed seeing: Enriching the discussion framework for healthy communities. C Bartlett, M O Marshall, A Marshall, M Iwama, Ecosystems, Society and Health: Pathways Through Diversity. Bartlett, C.; Marshall, M.O.; Marshall, A.; Iwama, M. Integrative science and two-eyed seeing: Enriching the discussion framework for healthy communities. In Ecosystems, Society and Health: Pathways Through Diversity, Convergence and Integration;

. L K Hallstrom, N Guehlstorf, M Parkes, McGill-Queen's University PressMontreal, QC, Canada; Kingston, ON, CanadaHallstrom, L.K., Guehlstorf, N., Parkes, M., Eds.; McGill-Queen's University Press: Montreal, QC, Canada; Kingston, ON, Canada, 2015; pp. 280-326.

. FORGE AHEAD Program Team. FORGE AHEAD Program Team;

National survey of Indigenous primary healthcare capacity and delivery models in Canada: The TransFORmation of IndiGEnous PrimAry HEAlthcare delivery (FORGE AHEAD) community profile survey. J W Tompkins, S Mequanint, D E Barre, M Fournie, M E Green, A J Hanley, M N Hayward, M Zwarenstein, S B Harris, BMC Health Serv. Res. 18828Tompkins, J.W.; Mequanint, S.; Barre, D.E.; Fournie, M.; Green, M.E.; Hanley, A.J.; Hayward, M.N.; Zwarenstein, M.; Harris, S.B. National survey of Indigenous primary healthcare capacity and delivery models in Canada: The TransFORmation of IndiGEnous PrimAry HEAlthcare delivery (FORGE AHEAD) community profile survey. BMC Health Serv. Res. 2018, 18, 828.

Non-clinical determinants of Medevacs in Nunavut: Perspectives from northern health service providers and decision-makers. L Mcdonnell, J G Lavoie, G Healy, S Wong, S Goulet, W Clark, 10.1080/22423982.2019.1571384Int. J. Circumpolar Health. 78McDonnell, L.; Lavoie, J.G.; Healy, G.; Wong, S.; Goulet, S.; Clark, W. Non-clinical determinants of Medevacs in Nunavut: Perspectives from northern health service providers and decision-makers. Int. J. Circumpolar Health 2019, 78, 1571384. [CrossRef]

First Nation and Inuit Health-Program Compendium. Canada Government Of, 28Government of Canada. First Nation and Inuit Health-Program Compendium 2011/2012. Available online: http://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2012/sc-hc/H34--178--2011-eng.pdf (accessed on 28 October 2019).

Working well: A systematic scoping review of the Indigenous primary healthcare workforce development literature. J Mccalman, S Campbell, C Jongen, E Langham, K Pearson, R Fagan, A Martin-Sardesai, R Bainbridge, 10.1186/s12913-019-4580-5BMC Health Serv. Res. 19767McCalman, J.; Campbell, S.; Jongen, C.; Langham, E.; Pearson, K.; Fagan, R.; Martin-Sardesai, A.; Bainbridge, R. Working well: A systematic scoping review of the Indigenous primary healthcare workforce development literature. BMC Health Serv. Res. 2019, 19, 767. [CrossRef]

Community health workers: Social justice and policy advocates for community health and well-being. L M Perez, J A Martinez, 10.2105/AJPH.2006.100842Am. J. Public Health. 98Perez, L.M.; Martinez, J.A. Community health workers: Social justice and policy advocates for community health and well-being. Am. J. Public Health 2008, 98, 11-14. [CrossRef]

Utilization of community health workers in Canada's children's oral health initiative for indigenous communities. K R Mathu-Muju, X Kong, C Brancato, J Mcleod, H M Bush, 10.1111/cdoe.12352Commun. Dent. Oral Epidemiol. 46Mathu-Muju, K.R.; Kong, X.; Brancato, C.; McLeod, J.; Bush, H.M. Utilization of community health workers in Canada's children's oral health initiative for indigenous communities. Commun. Dent. Oral Epidemiol. 2017, 46, 185-193. [CrossRef]

Incentives for improving human resource outcomes in health care: Overview of reviews. R Misfeldt, J Linder, J Lait, S Hepp, G Armitage, K Jackson, E Suter, 10.1177/1355819613505746J. Health Serv. Res. Policy. 19Misfeldt, R.; Linder, J.; Lait, J.; Hepp, S.; Armitage, G.; Jackson, K.; Suter, E. Incentives for improving human resource outcomes in health care: Overview of reviews. J. Health Serv. Res. Policy 2013, 19, 52-61. [CrossRef]

New Incentive to Recruit Doctors in Rural Communities. B Doctors, Doctors of B.C. New Incentive to Recruit Doctors in Rural Communities. Available online: https://www. doctorsofbc.ca/press-releases/new-incentive-recruit-doctors-rural-communities (accessed on 5 April 2019).

A GP for me. General Practice Services Committee. General Practice Services Committee. A GP for me. Available online: http://www.gpscbc.ca/what-we-do/ innovations/a-gp-for-me (accessed on 4 April 2019).

GPSC Fees Supporting Team Based Care. General Practice Services Committee. 12General Practice Services Committee. GPSC Fees Supporting Team Based Care. Available online: http: //www.gpscbc.ca/what-we-do/innovations/a-gp-for-me (accessed on 12 October 2019).

Enhancing health care equity with Indigenous populations: Evidence-based strategies from an ethnographic study. A J Browne, C Varcoe, J Lavoie, V Smye, S T Wong, M Krause, D Tu, O Godwin, K Khan, A Fridkin, 10.1186/s12913-016-1707-9BMC Health Serv. Res. 16PubMedBrowne, A.J.; Varcoe, C.; Lavoie, J.; Smye, V.; Wong, S.T.; Krause, M.; Tu, D.; Godwin, O.; Khan, K.; Fridkin, A. Enhancing health care equity with Indigenous populations: Evidence-based strategies from an ethnographic study. BMC Health Serv. Res. 2016, 16, 544. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Canadian Institutes of Health Research. Pathways to Health Equity for Aboriginal Peoples. Canadian Institutes of Health Research. Pathways to Health Equity for Aboriginal Peoples. Available online: http://www.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/e/43630.html (accessed on 7 April 2019).

Canada Indigenous Services, Report on Trends in First Nations Communities. Indigenous Services Canada. Report on Trends in First Nations Communities, 1981 to 2016. Available online: https://www.sac-isc.gc.ca/DAM/DAM-ISC-SAC/DAM-STSCRD/STAGING/texte-text/report-trends- FN-Comm-1981--2016_1578933771435_eng.pdf (accessed on 27 March 2020).

Social Determinants of Health: Employment as a Social Determinant of First Nations, Inuit and Métis Health. National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal HealthNational Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health. Social Determinants of Health: Employment as a Social Determinant of First Nations, Inuit and Métis Health. Available online: https://www.ccnsa-nccah.ca/ docs/determinants/FS-Employment-SDOH-2017-EN.pdf (accessed on 5 July 2019).

Census -Aboriginal peoples. Statistics Canada. Data Tables. Statistics Canada. Data Tables, 2016 Census -Aboriginal peoples. Available online: https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-recensement/2016/dp-pd/dt-td/Lp-eng.cfm?LANG=E&APATH= 3&DETAIL=0&DIM=0&FL=A&FREE=0&GC=0&GID=0&GK=0&GRP=1&PID=0&PRID=10&PTYPE= 109445&S=0&SHOWALL=0&SUB=0&Temporal=2017&THEME=122&VID=0&VNAMEE=&VNAMEF= (accessed on 6 July 2019).

After Tax (LICO-AT-1992 base) for Economic Families and Persons Not in Economic Families. Statistics Canada. Low-Income Cut-Offs. 16Statistics Canada. Low-Income Cut-Offs, After Tax (LICO-AT-1992 base) for Economic Families and Persons Not in Economic Families. 2015. Available online: https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-recensement/2016/ ref/dict/tab/t4_3-eng.cfm (accessed on 16 July 2019).

Health care and Aboriginal seniors in urban Canada: Helping a neglected class. B B Beatty, L Berdahl, 10.18584/iipj.2011.2.1.10Int. Indig. Policy J. Beatty, B.B.; Berdahl, L. Health care and Aboriginal seniors in urban Canada: Helping a neglected class. Int. Indig. Policy J. 2011, 2, 10. [CrossRef]

Canada's Health Care System. Canada Government Of, Government of Canada. Canada's Health Care System. Available online: https://www.canada.ca/en/health- canada/services/health-care-system/reports-publications/health-care-system/canada.html#a4 (accessed on 18 October 2019).

The Challenges of Delivering Continuing Care in First Nation Communities: Report of the Standing Committee on Indigenous and Northern Affairs. Commons House Of, Canada, House of Commons Canada. The Challenges of Delivering Continuing Care in First Nation Communities: Report of the Standing Committee on Indigenous and Northern Affairs. Available online: https://www. ourcommons.ca/Content/Committee/421/INAN/Reports/RP10260656/inanrp17/inanrp17-e.pdf (accessed on 18 October 2019).

Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada. Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada-201718 Departmental Plan. Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada. Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada-201718 Departmental Plan. Available online: https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1483561566667/1483561606216 (accessed on 5 April 2019).

Aboriginal Training to Employment Program. Alberta Works, 29Alberta Works. Aboriginal Training to Employment Program. Available online: http://www.humanservices. alberta.ca/AWonline/ETS/4376.html (accessed on 29 March 2020).

Local Employment Planning Council in Partnership with Indigenous Works. Developing Indigenous Inclusion Policies. 29Local Employment Planning Council in Partnership with Indigenous Works. Developing Indigenous Inclusion Policies. Available online: https://nswpb.ca/application/files/1515/4092/0716/IW_-_The_Inclusion_ Policy_Development_Guideonline.pdf (accessed on 29 March 2020).

Culture and Wellness in the Workplace. Developing Your Own Culture and Wellness Plan. BC Association of Aboriginal Friendship Centres. 29BC Association of Aboriginal Friendship Centres. Culture and Wellness in the Workplace. Developing Your Own Culture and Wellness Plan. Available online: http://anpbc.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/anpBC_ Culture-Wellness-Guidebook.pdf (accessed on 29 March 2020).

The cultural erosion of Indigenous people in health care. R Mathews, 10.1503/cmaj.160167Can. Med. Assoc. J. 189PubMedMathews, R. The cultural erosion of Indigenous people in health care. Can. Med. Assoc. J. 2017, 189, E78-E79. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Universities Canada. 10About usUniversities Canada. About us. Available online: https://www.univcan.ca/about-us/ (accessed on 10 October 2019).

The Insights and Experiences of Indigenous Students Should Shape Public Policy for Advancing Reconciliation Through Higher Education. P Davidson, R Jamieson, 25Davidson, P.; Jamieson, R. The Insights and Experiences of Indigenous Students Should Shape Public Policy for Advancing Reconciliation Through Higher Education. Available online: https://policyoptions.irpp.org/ magazines/november-2018/advancing-reconciliation-through-post-secondary-education/ (accessed on 25 July 2019).

What matters in Indigenous education: Implementing a vision committed to holism, diversity and engagement. In Measuring What Matters. J Toulouse, Toronto, ON, CanadaToulouse, J. What matters in Indigenous education: Implementing a vision committed to holism, diversity and engagement. In Measuring What Matters; People for Education: Toronto, ON, Canada, 2016.

Cultural competency and safety in nursing education: A case study. V Zeran, North. Rev. 43Zeran, V. Cultural competency and safety in nursing education: A case study. North. Rev. 2016, 43, 105-115.

Social determinants of health and the future well-being of Aboriginal children in Canada. M L Greenwood, S N De Leeuw, 17Greenwood, M.L.; de Leeuw, S.N. Social determinants of health and the future well-being of Aboriginal children in Canada. Pediatr. Child. Health 2012, 17, 381-384.

The National Indigenous Economic Development Board. 30The Indigenous Economic Progress ReportThe National Indigenous Economic Development Board. The Indigenous Economic Progress Report 2019. Available online: http://www.naedb-cndea.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/NIEDB-2019-Indigenous- Economic-Progress-Report.pdf (accessed on 30 March 2020).

Addressing health inequities through Indigenous involvement in health-policy discourse. A J Fridkin, Can. J. Nurs. Res. 44Fridkin, A.J. Addressing health inequities through Indigenous involvement in health-policy discourse. Can. J. Nurs. Res. 2012, 44, 108-122.

Report on Needs for Aboriginal Wellness at Stanton Territorial Hospital Authority. Institute for Circumpolar Health ResearchInstitute for Circumpolar Health Research. Report on Needs for Aboriginal Wellness at Stanton Territorial Hospital Authority. Available online: http://www.hss.gov.nt.ca/sites/hss/files/resources/report-needs- aboriginalwellness-stanton-territorial-hospital.pdf (accessed on 30 March 2020).

Policy silences: Why Canada needs a national first nations, inuit and metis health policy. J G Lavoie, 10.3402/ijch.v72i0.22690Int. J. Circumpolar Health. 72Lavoie, J.G. Policy silences: Why Canada needs a national first nations, inuit and metis health policy. Int. J. Circumpolar Health 2013, 72, 22690. [CrossRef]

Toronto's First Indigenous Health Strategy. Toronto Indigenous Health Advisory CircleToronto Indigenous Health Advisory Circle. Toronto's First Indigenous Health Strategy 2016-2021. Available online: https://www.toronto.ca/community-people/health-wellness-care/health-programs-advice/toronto- indigenous-health-strategy/ (accessed on 8 April 2019).

Action plan: Building a Healthier Future for First Nations, Inuit and Metis Peoples. Canadian Institutes of Health ResearchCanadian Institutes of Health Research. Action plan: Building a Healthier Future for First Nations, Inuit and Metis Peoples. Available online: https://cihr-irsc.gc.ca/e/50372.html (accessed on 5 April 2019).

Transforming first nations' health governance in British Columbia. J O&apos;neil, J Gallgher, L Wylie, B Bingham, J Lavoie, D Alcock, H Johnson, 10.1108/IJHG-08-2016-0042Int. J. Health Gov. 21O'Neil, J.; Gallgher, J.; Wylie, L.; Bingham, B.; Lavoie, J.; Alcock, D.; Johnson, H. Transforming first nations' health governance in British Columbia. Int. J. Health Gov. 2016, 21, 229-244. [CrossRef]

Comprehensive evidence-based assessment and prioritization of potential antidiabetic medicinal plants: A case study from Canadian eastern James Bay Cree traditional medicine. P S Haddad, L Musallam, L C Martineau, C Harris, L Lavoie, J T Arnason, B Foster, S T Bennett, T Johns, A Cuerrier, 10.1155/2012/893426Evid. Based Complement. Altern. Med. 893426Haddad, P.S.; Musallam, L.; Martineau, L.C.; Harris, C.; Lavoie, L.; Arnason, J.T.; Foster, B.; Bennett, S.T.; Johns, T.; Cuerrier, A.; et al. Comprehensive evidence-based assessment and prioritization of potential antidiabetic medicinal plants: A case study from Canadian eastern James Bay Cree traditional medicine. Evid. Based Complement. Altern. Med. 2012, 2012, 893426. [CrossRef]

Cultural interventions to treat addictions in Indigenous populations: Findings from a scoping study. M Rowan, N Poole, B Shea, J P Gone, D Mykota, M Farag, C Hopkins, L Hall, C Mushquash, C Dell, 10.1186/1747-597X-9-34Subst. Abus. Treat. Prev. Policy. 9Rowan, M.; Poole, N.; Shea, B.; Gone, J.P.; Mykota, D.; Farag, M.; Hopkins, C.; Hall, L.; Mushquash, C.; Dell, C. Cultural interventions to treat addictions in Indigenous populations: Findings from a scoping study. Subst. Abus. Treat. Prev. Policy 2014, 9, 34. [CrossRef]

A cross-sectional analysis of the relationship between diabetes and health access barriers in an urban first nations population in Canada. M Beckett, M A Firestone, C D Mcknight, J Mylie, M A Rotondi, 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-018272BMJ. 8PubMedBeckett, M.; Firestone, M.A.; McKnight, C.D.; Mylie, J.; Rotondi, M.A. A cross-sectional analysis of the relationship between diabetes and health access barriers in an urban first nations population in Canada. BMJ Open 2018, 8, e018272. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Office of the Premier. Ontario Public Servants to Receive Indigenous Cultural Sensitivity Training. 10Office of the Premier. Ontario Public Servants to Receive Indigenous Cultural Sensitivity Training. Available online: https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/indigenous-cultural-sensitivity-1.3452545 (accessed on 10 April 2019).

. Alberta Health Services. Indigenous Health. Available online. Alberta Health Services. Indigenous Health. Available online: https://www.albertahealthservices.ca/info/ Page11949.aspx (accessed on 5 April 2019).

Indigenous Health Northern Health. Aboriginal Patient Liaison Program. Indigenous Health Northern Health. Aboriginal Patient Liaison Program. Available online: https://www. indigenoushealthnh.ca (accessed on 8 April 2019).

. Indigenous Services Canada. Indigenous Health. Available online. Indigenous Services Canada. Indigenous Health. Available online: https://www.sac-isc.gc.ca/eng/ 1569861171996/1569861324236 (accessed on 9 April 2019).

Social Determinants of Health: Access to Health Services as a Social Determinant of First Nations, Inuit and Metis health. 11National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal HealthNational Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health. Social Determinants of Health: Access to Health Services as a Social Determinant of First Nations, Inuit and Metis health. Available online: https://www. nccih.ca/docs/determinants/FS-AccessHealthServicesSDOH-2019-EN.pdf (accessed on 11 April 2020).

Understanding access to healthcare among Indigenous peoples: A comparative analysis of biomedical and postcolonial perspectives. T Horrill, D E Mcmillan, A S H Schultz, G Thompson, 10.1111/nin.12237Nurs. Inq. PubMedHorrill, T.; McMillan, D.E.; Schultz, A.S.H.; Thompson, G. Understanding access to healthcare among Indigenous peoples: A comparative analysis of biomedical and postcolonial perspectives. Nurs. Inq. 2018, 25, e12237. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Indigenous access barriers to health care services in London, Ontario. The engaging for change improving health services for indigenous peoples qualitative study. S Mcconkey, 10.5206/uwomj.v86i2.1407Univ. West. Ont. Med. J. 86McConkey, S. Indigenous access barriers to health care services in London, Ontario. The engaging for change improving health services for indigenous peoples qualitative study. Univ. West. Ont. Med. J. 2017, 86, 6-9. [CrossRef]

Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. Calls to Action. 11Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. Calls to Action. Available online: http://trc.ca/assets/pdf/ Calls_to_Action_English2.pdf (accessed on 11 April 2020).

This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. © 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI. Basel, Switzerland© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).