Perceptions of healthcare providers and mothers on management and care of severely wasted children: a qualitative study in Karnataka, India
2023

Madhu Mitha Manivannan 
Manjulika Vaz 
Division of Health and Humanities
St John's Research Institute
St John's Medical College
St. John's National Academy of Health Sciences
BangaloreKarnatakaIndia

Sumathi Swaminathan 

centre of University of Mysore
BangaloreKarnatakaIndia

Perceptions of healthcare providers and mothers on management and care of severely wasted children: a qualitative study in Karnataka, India

BMJ Open
1367592202310.1136/bmjopen-2022-0675921 Open access


INTRODUCTION

Malnutrition remains a global public health problem impairing growth and development of around 47 million children under 5 years of age, two-thirds of whom are from Asia. 1 It is associated with critical consequences such as faltered growth, susceptibility to diarrhoea, other infectious diseases, poor cognitive development 2 3 and in severe cases, leading to mortality. [4][5][6] Wasting, particularly, severe acute malnutrition (SAM), remains a national concern in India with a reported prevalence of 7.5%, one of the highest in the world. 7 8 At the present rate of reduction, the WHO's target to reduce and maintain childhood wasting to less than 5% by 2025 9 (an almost 40% reduction) and the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals Target 2.2 to end all forms of malnutrition by year 2030 10 may be unattainable. There is a pressing need to understand and tackle the problem through evidence-based locally relevant research. [11][12][13] Severely wasted children aged 6-59 months are primarily diagnosed based on one of the following criteria: weight-for-height/length Z-score <−3 SD of the median WHO growth standard or mid-upper arm circumference


STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF THIS STUDY

⇒ Through an in-depth qualitative format, stakeholders' and beneficiaries' perspectives on the management of severe wasting, including challenges faced by care-seekers and caregivers, were identified. ⇒ The divergence in the continuum of care at each level of home, community and healthcare facility was explored. ⇒ Use of a framework analysis enabled an inductive and deductive reasoning approach aiding the comparison within and between participant data to elicit nuanced explanations. ⇒ In-depth insights are from perspectives and lived experiences in a selected geographical region and therefore, may not be generalisable at the national level or to other sociocultural settings. ⇒ There is a possibility of loss of nuanced information during the translation and transcribing process.


Open access

<115 mm or using clinical signs of bilateral pitting oedema or visible wasting. 14 Among them, those with complications, that is, with classic clinical features of intercurrent infections, diarrhoea and severe dehydration with no appetite, are treated via admissions to health facilities. In India, such children are admitted to the nutritional rehabilitation centres (NRCs) (ie, specialist referral centres) set up by the National Health Mission within districts in each state where children are initially provided with Formula 75 during stabilisation, Formula 100 during rehabilitation (as per the WHO protocol) followed by transition to local foods at the time of discharge. Children with no complications (clinically well and active with good appetite) are managed in the community, specifically through Anganwadis under the Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) where supplementary nutrition (800 kcal of energy and 20-25 g of protein/day) is provided. 15 Despite these interventions, there has been no significant reduction in SAM.

Internationally, children with uncomplicated SAM are managed as outpatients in the community using readyto-use therapeutic foods (RUTFs) or locally prepared foods. 16 However, in India, apart from small-scale regional studies under the community-based management of acute malnutrition (CMAM) programme, 17 18 provision of RUTFs has neither been implemented nor accepted well in the treatment of SAM. 19 Involvement of both healthcare providers (HCPs) and mothers or caregivers is vital in the treatment and management of children with SAM. In India, HCPs, largely medical personnel in the primary healthcare centres (PHCs) (referral units for a population of 30 000 in the plains and 20 000 in tribal and hilly areas) 20 and/ or district hospitals, and frontline workers (FLWs) in the community are responsible for management of children with SAM (online supplemental figure 1).

In general, health and nutrition education for mothers and caregivers is considered essential as sociocultural beliefs and ignorance impede improvement in health status of children. 21 Higher maternal literacy level has been linked with improved child health and nutritional status (p=0.011). 22 Caregivers of severely malnourished children in Zambia were unable to correlate malnutrition with poor feeding practices, believed that higher expenses were related to treatment and access to healthcare and quoted unavailability of free feeding schemes as barriers to care-seeking behaviour. 21 In non-Indian settings, management and treatment practices for SAM 23 24 and challenges faced by caregivers in accessing healthcare services have been explored. 25 26 However, only two studies in India evaluated the acceptability and performance of the CMAM programme by examining views of service providers and mothers on knowledge, attitude and practices related to management practices and care-seeking behaviour. 17 18 Factors disrupting the continuum of care can result in ineffective management and perpetuation of SAM. We, therefore, aimed to gain ground-level insights from both HCPs and mothers into perceived reasons for severe wasting, management practices experienced, barriers to caregiving and care-seeking behaviour, and to expose gaps that need to be addressed.


METHODS

In-depth, semistructured interviews were used to collect data. The Consolidated criteria for Reporting Qualitative research guidelines were followed. 27 


Study setting

The study was conducted in two districts, Raichur and Bengaluru of Karnataka state, India, largely because prior to the study, the prevalence rates of severe wasting reported in National Family Health Survey 4 were 18.1% and 11.7% in Raichur and Bengaluru, respectively. 28 29 In Raichur, both slum settlements and villages were purposely selected after examining data from the Department of Women and Child Development (WCD), Karnataka. In a similar manner, urban slums and periurban areas were selected in Bengaluru, as a higher prevalence of malnutrition was expected in comparison with non-slum settlements. 30 The Multidimensional Poverty Index, a cumulative score which records deprivation of health, education and living standards, was high in Raichur district at 0.146 and low in Bengaluru at 0.009. 31 Furthermore, disparity in earning capacity and occupational mobility between these districts results in increased rural-to-urban migration.


Study participants

HCPs involved in management of SAM were recruited through snowball sampling and included Anganwadi workers (AWWs), accredited social health activists (ASHAs, the interface between the community and the government health services), auxiliary nurse midwives (ANMs) (all clubbed as female FLWs) and medical personnel from public hospitals (medical officers, nutrition counsellors, junior health assistant (JHA)). They were contacted to confirm the time and location for in-person interviews. All those contacted gave their voluntary consent and there were no refusals or dropouts.

Mothers of severely wasted children were recruited through purposive sampling. Face-to-face interviews were conducted after ascertaining availability of mothers who were either working or were homemakers. FLWs established rapport with mothers, and helped to recruit them and schedule interviews. Data saturation determined the final sample size.


Data collection

In-depth, in-person interviews were conducted between June 2018 and March 2019 in English or in one of the local languages/dialects (Kannada, Tamil, Telegu or Urdu) spoken in the two districts. Follow-up telephonic interviews were held to seek clarification and address gaps. The semistructured interview guide was developed Open access by the first author, a doctoral scholar in nutrition. The guide was based on previous literature available and included probes on perceived causes for developing SAM, identification and management of a severely wasted child, barriers to caregiving/care-seeking and their perceptions on narrowing gaps between provision of healthcare and benefits to beneficiaries. All interviewers were women trained by a qualitative research consultant over 1 week. No investigator had any prior relation with the participants. Prior to the interview, the corresponding author assessed the content validity of the interview guides. Guides were pilot tested on two participants from each location to check participants' comprehension of questions. The first author moderated most interviews, except where she lacked language proficiency. HCP interviews were conducted in a separate room at the health facilities or community centres. Except for one mother who sought the help of the child's father, all mothers were interviewed alone in their homes. On average, interviews lasted 41±20 min (range 20-120 min). Field notes and observations, and non-verbal cues (gestures, body language) were documented. Additionally, sociodemographic data and the child's food preferences were collected from mothers. With prior consent of participants, interviews were audio-recorded, translated into English and transcribed verbatim. Nuances of language translation were clarified with the respondents at the time of the interview itself. To verify accuracy and completeness of the translation, all recordings were repeatedly listened to and revisions made.


Patient and public involvement

The focus was on interviewing HCPs and mothers. Patients and/or the public were not involved in the study design, conduct, reporting or dissemination of this research, However, as interviews progressed, the guide was refined based on the respondent's feedback. This was in line with the evolving process of qualitative data collection.


Data analysis

The framework analysis method with iterative steps was adapted to analyse interview transcripts. 32 Data familiarisation and immersion were attained by repetitive reading of the transcripts by all authors and subsequent development of a thematic framework to identify potential themes and subthemes. Using the software package NVivo V.12.0, a codebook was created by two independent data coders (first and second authors) and rechecked by them to ensure intercoder reliability. This process addressed the possible biases of the primary investigator as the second author brought in a social science, ethnographic and grassroots perspective. Codes were preliminarily generated within each of the participant's data. Transcript coding into a priori themes was performed followed by a sequential method to integrate emerging themes. Routine author discussions were held to refine categories and themes. Charting was completed by iteratively arranging summarised data in accordance with the thematic content listed for each participant category. A three-theme framework with subthemes was finalised. The final step of mapping and interpretation explored inductive and deductive patterns through comparison within and between participant data and elicited nuanced explanations. In the results, illustrative quotes are tagged with a unique ID denoting location (U-urban, R-rural) and respondent category (M-mother, AWW, ASHA, ANM, JHA, NRC medical officer, NRC nutrition counsellor). 


Open access


RESULTS

Of the 47 participants interviewed, 27 were HCPs (6 medical staff, 21 FLWs) and 20 were mothers of severely wasted children. The average age of the HCPs was 32.3±2.1 years with work experience ranging from 1 to 18 years. Educational level of FLWs ranged from completion of 10 years of schooling until graduate education (9/21-<12 years of education; 11/21-undergraduate degree (including nursing); 1/21-graduate degree). Information on the caste of either the HCPs or mothers was, however, not available. Table 1 presents mothers' household sociodemographic characteristics and anthropometry of their severely wasted children. The interviews are described based on the three-theme framework (perceived reasons for perpetuation of severe wasting, constraints on management of severe wasting and barriers and challenges of caregiving and care-seeking behaviour) arrived at from a priori and inductive coding (figure 1).


Perceived reasons for perpetuation of severe wasting

It is all poverty. All are poor people. If they are going to be with the child full day giving good food, then the entire family must stay hungry without going for work. (R-ANM1) Deep-rooted poverty was the constant and consistent refrain expressed across all participant categories as to why severe wasting continued to be prevalent despite various interventions. This was linked directly to erratic employment, food insecurity and poor living conditions. The subthemes with supporting data are summarised in table 2.


Economic and sociocultural factors

Cycles of debt, dependence on food handouts, resorting to single meals per day for the child and sharing of the designated food for the child among the whole family were constant features reported. Reasons for delaying visits to the medical centre included familial financial pressures and the need to earn at least the minimum wage compelled both parents to work. Sociocultural factors (local taboos, gender bias towards the child) and environmental factors (open defecation, poor water quality) were also stated.


Maternal factors

Early marriage, maternal malnutrition, home birth as opposed to institutional, short birth spacing, repeated pregnancies mainly due to the desire for a male child, psychological distress and marital violence were among the several factors affecting the health of both mother and child, resulting in SAM.


Feeding habits

Perceptions of low breast milk supply, beliefs of nutritional inadequacy of breast milk, entrenched behaviours of delayed complementary feeding, extended breast feeding beyond 2 years and resorting to cheaper and unhealthy foods such as packaged fried snacks, biscuits and other sugary foods (priced between 2.00 and 10.00 Indian rupees (US$0.024-US$0.122)) due to the unaffordability of fruits and vegetables emerged as key contributory reasons for SAM.


Constraints on management of severe wasting

Interdependencies of various players in the system to manage and treat SAM were evident indicating that a Open access continuum of care is essential. Care commences at home and then in the community with the provision of nutritional therapy. If a child fails to thrive, the child is clinically managed primarily through PHCs followed by the NRC or district hospital. At each stage, difficulties faced by participants delayed the treatment process, at times escalating to the relapse of SAM (tables 3 and 4).

At home, mothers recognised early signs of severe wasting based on physical appearance and activity of the child. Malnutrition was commonly termed 'apousthika' in the local language. A child's weakness was associated with thinness and largely attributed to family genetics. Mothers stated home remedies such as massages or cultural practices, as suggested by family elders, well-wishers and traditional/faith healers, can improve their child's health.

FLWs reached out to caregivers and their families and counselled on broader health and hygiene practices. Besides counselling, children were screened for SAM at 'The slum children will not have enough spacing and in the house itself the mothers will deliver… They will not even know the correct and clean way to cut the umbilical cord. We tell them the hospital will provide special treatment, still, they do not admit themselves in the hospital…' U-AWW4 'There could be the mother getting pregnant very soon after [the previous]. So, she will not be able to give attention or breast feed the child, so that could be the reason.' R-NRC nutrition counsellor 


Open access

the Anganwadi or healthcare centres. Faulty screening and misreporting of SAM were frequent and were attributed to inadequate training and non-availability or defective anthropometric tools.

At the community, supplementary nutrition in the form of take-home ration (THR) for children <3 years of age and a hot cooked meal (HCM) for children ≥3 years of age, through the ICDS, is provided. There was '…children will have a bloated stomach, very thin hands and legs…Bones will be visible, and it will be like old people's skin.' R-ASHA3

'…the child will be irritated. They will not eat and will have visible wasting. Sometimes they will have feature for major rickets…' R-NRC medical officer Activity level and heredity 'He [severely wasted child] will always feel tired and sleepy. He will not even go play. I know one thing clearly, that he is not sick.' R-M5 'Even I was thin when I was young. So, I think it comes in the family.' R-M3

'They [severely wasted children] won't mingle with anybody. They will be tired, and you will get to know they are SAM. They won't be active like other children.' U-AWW1

Remedies for cure 'When giving a bath, in laws told me to splash hot water and massage with oil… by doing this they told the legs will get strength.' U-M2 'The teacher wanted me to go to the hospital, get a certificate for less weight to get egg. But I did not go as I was busy with work.' U-M9 'The egg given to the child will be green and rotten when we boil…we don't want the egg.' R-M3

'We provide egg as a ration to SAM children only if they [mothers of severely wasted children] get a letter from the PHC doctor stating egg is needed to be given. I, myself told one of the SAM child's mothers to get a letter from the doctor, but she does not listen.' U-AWW4

Intake of THR 'With the milk powder, one glass I will drink and the other glass I will give half to my older daughter and the other half to my younger daughter (SAM child).' R-M4 'When I start to feed him, he will start vomiting it (nutrimix). So I do not feed him…' R-M7

'The egg which is given to the child, is shared by the entire family. One egg is shared between five members and the child [severely wasted] gets less than ¼th portion.' U-AWW3 '…mothers complain child falls sick after eating Nutrimix and they throw it to the animals or as waste.' R-AWW2

Pilferage and poor food quality '…the helper opens the Anganwadi, will take unused ration put into a bag and it will be given to her husband.' U-M6 'If the children go early, they get milk if late, no milk, they give very diluted milk and only two ladles.' R-M9 'They [Anganwadi workers] give us oil but we use it for lamps. When we use for cooking, our health used to get affected.' U-M8

'… we boil the water and then add a rough measure of milk powder required for a glass of water… It is usually done by the helper, so I am not aware of it. When the appearance of milk comes, we will give it to the children…' R-AWW3 'There is a small gap in the kitchen through which these rats come, so we have cleaned it and even put concrete to close it. But today, they [rats] have chewed the door and they have come in.' U-AWW3

ASHA, accredited social health activist; AWW, Anganwadi worker; M, mother; MUAC, mid-upper arm circumference; NRC, nutritional rehabilitation centre; PHC, primary healthcare centre; R, rural; SAM, severe acute malnutrition; THR, take-home ration; U, urban. won't listen to me.' U-AWW3 'The mother will be having another child, or they are not ready to stay for a long duration… Another thing is that money, Rs.175 is very less amount. When they go for daily wages, they will get around Rs.300-400 per day. They feel that just Rs.175 is of no use for them.' R-NRC nutrition counsellor 'Most of the mothers if they come here, they will stay for a long time, since everything is provided to them. Minimum they stay for at least 7 days and the maximum it goes up to 15-20 days. Some mothers feel that their child is being treated well and they too do not want to go to daily wage work. So, till their child is being treated healthy they will make sure they stay for that period or even further and then they will go.' R- Open access variability in the provision of meal portions between districts. Few mothers were unaware of the extra quantity provided as additional nutritional supplementation for severely malnourished, while others voiced that insignificant quantities of extra portions were served. AWWs also reported differences in portions doled out. As per the AWWs, in the HCM, eggs were provided 3-4 days/week and 5 days/week in urban and rural areas, respectively. For children availing THR, eggs were selectively included only on submission of necessary approval letters from the medical officers at the district hospital. Very often, due to high work burden and distance, mothers failed to collect the letter. Also, concerns were raised on the quality of supplementary nutrition provided including the nutrimix powder (a cereal-pulse combination) and milk. At PHC (community's first point of contact with a medical doctor), those with deterioration in health and poor appetite were referred by FLWs as part of their regular duty to monitor the health status of those severely wasted in the community. However, mothers very often refused a regular check-up in the PHC or admission to a district hospital. Few opted for private healthcare facilities citing ease of access, quicker recovery without the need for admission which translated into less wage loss due to less time spent in hospital.


Open access

At NRC, not all mothers benefited from the interventions as economic and household responsibilities influenced the child's length of stay. Mothers opted for early discharge after basic treatment stating inadequate daily wage compensation, delays in receipt of compensation, inconvenience of payment through bank transfers rather than cash in hand, compelling family responsibilities and long distances to the health facility. Few mothers were unaware of wage compensation and cited their lack of knowledge/education as reasons. According to HCPs, urban mothers tend to stay longer to avail additional medical therapy. Motivations for a longer hospital stay included earlier loss of an offspring or provision of free treatment with wages and food.

Barriers and challenges of caregiving and care-seeking behaviour A major challenge quoted was poor communication between mothers and HCPs. Mothers faced social stigma from the community and HCPs on their child being severely malnourished affecting access to healthcare. HCPs faced several challenges in the management, treatment and monitoring of severely wasted children specifically, extended work hours, inadequate training, shortage of raw materials and insufficient remuneration resulting in communication gaps and ineffective outcomes.


Differences in priorities and understanding

Both mothers and HCPs expressed frustrations on repeated attempts to improve care of the severely malnourished child. For mothers, it was the choice between missing a day's wage and attending to the child without the money needed to care for the child. HCPs, however, related severe wasting to the mother's lack of knowledge, ignorance, indifference, apathy or negligence. It appears to be the vicious cycle of poverty, struggles between needs and priorities and certain mindsets that forced mothers to seek quick fix interventions for their ill child, rather than address the underlying perpetuating problems that counselling interventions direct them towards. 


Open access

Teacher calls me for health camps, but I do not go. It will be usually at 11 or 12'o'clock and in Raichur it is very hot. This health camp is not near… I cannot carry my daughter and go… I need to take care of even the travel expense. With that [money] I can buy some food for the house and my daughter can rest at home. (R-M1)

The teacher tells me to fill up forms and buy things. I do not know how to do it. Because of this I do not go to the anganwadi… (U-M6) 70% of the mothers do not care what we say… they will not obey us. They think with syrup the child will automatically become normal. Despite giving the syrups, when mothers do not give good food to them, whatever little help the syrup did, will be a waste. (R-PHC medical officer)


Trust issues

In both locations, mothers complained about poor hygiene and lack of growth monitoring tools at the Anganwadi. Urban mothers expressed a certain level of scepticism as they questioned the quality and quantity of food provided and preferred regular monitoring by higher authorities. Despite repeated health advice and nutritional counselling by HCPs, mothers reported receiving no proper medical information on or support services when their child's health deteriorated.

Perceptions of stigma and shaming Mothers perceived that their child's visual appearance and weakness were ridiculed and targeted by other children. FLWs, too, constantly labelled mothers as 'without knowledge', 'lazy', 'irresponsible' and 'careless', leading to defensive behaviour on the part of the mothers.

We used to send her to the Anganwadi, but other kids started pulling her hair and making fun of her saying her eyes are like this, she is always salivating …all that…. (R-M1) Knowledgeable people take good care of children by giving food on time to kids. People without knowledge are reasons why we get children with SAM. (U-ASHA1)

Loss to follow-up due to distance or migration Family responsibilities (care of other children, household tasks, earning daily wages, mothers' lack of time and feasibility of travel) resulted in poor compliance with treatment regimens. FLWs stated migration of families and relocation of homes as common reasons for loss to follow-up of these children, resulting in relapse.

There is around 50% of relapse. Some people are migrants. They go to work in Bengaluru or some other places. If they go, we do not have any contact. (R-NRC medical officer)

We give a lot of pressure to them [in following up the severely wasted child], then they change the slum area and go to another slum area. Even if we track them and speak to them, they fight saying 'It is my child, I will do anything with them, what is your problem?' (U-AWW4)

Overburdened and under-resourced HCPs FLWs, especially AWWs, were burdened with multiple responsibilities of preschool education, growth monitoring, surveys, provision of rations to beneficiaries and monthly meetings organised by supervisors. Supplementary work such as election/poll duties and record maintenance were additional burdens. Dissatisfaction with work, low remuneration coupled with delayed receipt of monthly honorarium, poor family support and underappreciation of their services by the community were cited as demotivators.


DISCUSSION

This study enabled an understanding of mothers' and HCPs' views on perpetuation of severe wasting and differences and challenges of the management practices by both the health system and the community. Similar views on poverty and illiteracy emerged from mothers and HCPs. However, treatment of the child was affected due to distinctly different care practices and challenges faced among and between mothers and HCPs.

Poverty within households emerged as the underlying systemic factor across all themes that interfered with sustained uptake of any intervention to address severe wasting. With poverty driving hunger, investments to improve social sector infrastructure and food security and to transform food systems are required. Policies and safety net programmes such as facility-based care for SAM, the ICDS and National Food Security Act exist, but lacunae need to be plugged with efficient intersectoral convergence. Several countries have successfully treated SAM with the help of RUTF. The Government of India, however, has not encouraged its use considering cost and acceptability. Apart from this, the Ministry of WCD's circular claimed that 'use of RUTF may replace nutritional best practices and family foods'. 33 To ensure a continuum of care and to reduce prevalence, energy-dense food distributed through a community-based programme for a short period of time is essential to bridge the gap.

Not only nutrition, but other nutrition-sensitive factors such as repeated morbidity, poor immunisation rates and environmental factors of open defecation and access to clean water are associated with SAM. The improved sanitation rates in Raichur and Bengaluru districts, our two study sites, are yet to reach the target of 100% and require attention particularly with current reported rates at 53% and 90%, respectively. 34 35 Maternal malnutrition, including multiple pregnancies and poor antenatal practices, and child dietary habits are other contributory risk factors highlighted for SAM from these lived experiences. Our results reinforce earlier findings 36 37 but provide Open access cultural nuances and the fact that the ground reality still exists.

Intersectionality of gender, class and caste does play a role in poverty and inequality. Blame and contempt often derived from caste biases are more covert and hence implied and not overtly articulated by our respondents. Denial of access to healthcare, education and other basic amenities is possibly contributed by caste-class discrimination and marginalisation. Social stigma, gender disparity and poor sanitary and environmental conditions can probably be addressed through village dramas and short films as a community engagement strategy.

Early identification of severe wasting at home through visual and behavioural signs of thinness, lethargy and irritability holds promise, but confusion of 'thinness' as a hereditary factor appears to normalise the condition of wasting. Inaccuracy of anthropometric measurements in the identification of SAM and faulty reporting can further distort data used in policy and programme decisions and can lead to inefficient resource allocation. Revised protocols with standardised measurement techniques and improved training of FLWs must be taken as an urgent priority in accurate reporting of SAM. 38 It is known that overstretched and underpaid FLWs result in demotivation and difficulties in sustaining attention to families with severely malnourished children. [39][40][41] Capacity building, supportive supervision and community and stakeholder recognition might motivate HCPs. Effective communication and relationship-building efforts are imperative to bridge knowledge and trust gaps to negate trust deficits between HCPs and mothers. Caste and class prejudices, too, must be considered in these efforts. An impersonal information transfer and didactic system of nutritional and health education without two-way engagement and stakeholder involvement may have led to misunderstandings between mothers and HCPs.

With illiteracy and caste-class discrimination of beneficiaries and failure of universal delivery of health services within the public health system, the effective operation of a SAM programme can be obstructive. Our study reiterates that access to health services was disrupted especially due to rural-urban and between-settlements migration, a hurdle that needs to be resolved through economic and social upliftment.

There is a need to optimise and monitor the uptake and coverage of the ICDS programme with improvement in the quality and quantity of supplementary nutrition. Lack of synchronisation between public health programmes monitored by the various departments indicates deepseated challenges in the identification and treatment process for SAM. 42 43 Strategies such as strengthening community-based care and referral systems and use of mobile technologies to track children can be rewarding. Improved and intensified training among HCPs coupled with involvement of caregivers and community in childcare skills and practices and removal of associated stigma would ensure a continuum of care. Exploration of the use of local governing functionaries such as community or panchayat leaders, village councils, health extension workers or well-informed elders of families as positive influencers and support to both the FLWs and mothers could help in transparency and accountability of services.

Non-usage of NRC benefits was attributed not only to financial difficulties and food insecurity within families, but also to poor attendance. Despite the hospital and wage support facilities for complicated cases, inadequacy or delay in wage compensation of parents, discharge against advice and relapse negate desired benefits.

A single-pronged malnutrition alleviation strategy fails due to the complexity of the problems on the ground, as made apparent through respondents' lived experiences. A multipronged intervention through a socioecological health model can add value to address the circumstances at specific system levels and those at the intersection of these systems (figure 2). 44 For example, a 'community-household integrating strategy' by educating and motivating family members, engaging the neighbourhood community through participatory learning and action meetings, 45 and home visits can provide more autonomy as well as more proximate support and may be beneficial in the long run. Documentation and promotion of success stories in tackling SAM may motivate FLWs in discharging their duties. Peer-to-peer motivational talks and events to celebrate successful recovery and non-relapse 46 can in turn inspire young mothers' acceptance of interventional programmes. Public and community support for improvement in water, sanitation and hygiene, banning the sale of commercial foods around community centres, enforced utilisation of work site creches through labour laws requires intersectoral policy coordination beyond a nutrition intervention by the WCD and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. A commitment to prioritise interventions through elected leaders can be helpful. This coordinated concerted policy building towards amelioration of SAM can potentially address the factors that fall between the cracks in programme implementation.

The main strength of our study is that we examined, in an in-depth qualitative format, stakeholders' and beneficiaries' perspectives in the context of SAM and its related public health programmes unlike previous research in India. The insights gained can guide future research on targeted interventions. Through our study, we have delineated the complexity of SAM and its management as an interdependent phenomenon.

In-depth insights are from perspectives and lived experiences in a selected geographical region and therefore, may not be generalisable at a national level or to other sociocultural settings. It is possible that during translation, some nuances may have been lost. Going back to field sites to share the findings of the study was not possible due to government restrictions on travel and participant contact due to the COVID-19 pandemic.


Open access


CONCLUSION

Overall, there is a need to ensure a continuum of care for severely malnourished children. The underlying reasons perpetuating SAM were derived from the lived experiences of respondents. They point to emphatic early detection and sustained treatment. Families with wasted children are plagued with economic and household constraints including erratic employment, migration for livelihoods, food insecurity and poor living conditions. Management and care gaps can be plugged by strengthening and improving communication and trust between the HCPs and the caregivers and their families, ensuring a continuum of care. Further research is required to develop local context-specific solutions to alleviate malnutrition.

Figure 1
1Three-theme framework. Theme 1: perceived reasons for perpetuation of severe wasting; theme 2: constraints on management of severe wasting; theme 3: barriers and challenges of caregiving and care-seeking behaviour.

Figure 2
2Socioecological health model (1-interpersonal, 2-intrapersonal, 3-institutional, 4-community, 5-policymaking). ANM, auxiliary nurse midwife; ASHA, accredited social health activist.

Table 1
1Demographic characteristics of households with severely wasted childrenCharacteristic 
Urban (n=11) 
Rural (n=9) 

Age of mother, mean±SD 
26.0±3.4 
27.8±4.8 

Mothers' education level, n (%) 

Illiterate 
1 (9.1) 
3 (33.3) 

Up to 10 years of schooling 
7 (63.6) 
5 (55.6) 

Beyond 10 years of schooling 
3 (27.3) 
1 (11.1) 

Mothers' occupation, n (%)* 

Not working 
9 (81.8) 
5 (55.6) 

Agriculture/unskilled 
1 (9.1) 
3 (33.3) 

Semiskilled 
1 (9.1) 
1 (11.1) 

Fathers' occupation, n (%)* 

Agriculture/unskilled 
3 (27.3) 
5 (55.6) 

Semiskilled/skilled 
6 (54.5) 
4 (44.4) 

Professional 
2 (18.2) 
-

Religion, n (%) 

Hinduism 
8 (72.7) 
6 (66.7) 

Christianity 
2 (18.2) 
-

Islam 
1 (9.1) 
3 (33.3) 

Number of children under 5 in the 
household, mean±SD 

2.6±1.3 
2.0±1.0 

Age group of severely wasted children, n (%) 

6-24 months 
2 (18.2) 
1 (11.1) 

25-59 months 
9 (81.8) 
8 (88.9) 

Birth order of the severely wasted child, n (%) 

Only child 
1 (9.1) 
3 (33.3) 

Youngest child 
6 (54.5) 
1 (11.1) 

Middle child 
2 (18.2) 
-

Oldest child 
2 (18.2) 
5 (55.6) 

Anthropometry of severely wasted children, mean±SD 

Height (cm) 
82.6±10.9 
83.8±7.8 

Weight (kg) 
8.2±1.9 
8.4±1.5 

Weight-for-height Z-score (SD), 
median (IQR) 

−3.6 (−4.5, -3.1) −3.6 (−4.1, 
-3.3) 

Type of toilet facility, n (%) 

Open space 
0 
2 (22.2) 

Pit latrine 
11 (100.0) 
7 (77.8) 

*Occupation (mother/father)-unskilled: daily wage work, construction 
worker, watchman, waste collector; semiskilled: shop owner, presser; 
skilled: driver, painter, garage worker, social activist; professional: 
engineer, lawyer. 


Table 2
2Perceived reasons for the perpetuation of severe wasting From a single man's salary, we are not able to get foods…Half of our earnings go in loans and the rest, we use it for our expenses. And when my child suddenly falls ill, I spend money on autos for travel to PHC.' R-M8 'Parents who are working will always go to work early to get extra money. They leave the child in someone's house, then the child will become SAM as there is no one to take good care of the child…' U-ASHA1 'It is poverty. Parents go outside to work and come back only in the evening… Grandmothers who are not able to work will be there. So how can they feed the child? They will not feed.' R-NRC medical officerSubthemes 
Categories 

Illustrative quotes 

Mothers of children with SAM 
Frontline health workers 
Medical staff 

Economic and 
sociocultural 
factors 

Financial 
considerations 

'Superstitious 
beliefs and social 
taboos 

'…I give a lot of food for my child, and 
she eats, but why is she still thin? I think 
I have done something wrong in my past 
life, and its come through my child.' 
R-M1 

'Before coming to us, they [parents 
of children with SAM] thought it was 
god's curse and used to tie blessed 
threads on the child.' U-JHA 

'They [parents of children with SAM] don't 
consider severe wasting as a disease. They 
misinterpret it with something religious. 
They try all herbal remedies.' R-NRC 
nutrition counsellor 

Gender disparity 
'…for boy children they [parents of 
children with SAM] give more importance 
than the girl child as they might take care 
of them when they grow old.' U-M5 

'Most of the time, it is the girl children 
who are malnourished here.' R-
AWW5 

'I see more girls than boys who are 
admitted here. The parents feel by giving 
good nutrition to the boy as he grows old, 
he will come with the parent and work in 
field, but the girl gets married at a very 
early age here.' R-NRC medical officer 

Maternal factors Child 
marriages and 
consanguineous 
marriages 

'I was married off when I was 16 years 
old. I got pregnant and was still young 
and weak. I did not know I had to visit 
the hospital at the time of pregnancy. I 
did not take care of myself. That's why 
my child was born very weak and thin.' 
U-M11 
'I feel my child is weak because I got 
married within the same family.' R-M1 

'…mothers of children with SAM 
get married early, they get pregnant 
immediately and do not know how 
to take care of the baby. So that 
baby again becomes malnourished.' 
R-AWW1 

Maternal 
malnutrition 

'I feel it is my pregnancy and not eating 
well could be a big reason. If someone 
had given me nutritional advice, I would 
have been aware and made sure I ate 
well …' R-M3 

'If the mother does not eat well at 
pregnancy, the baby will also be 
weak like the mother.' R-AWW4 

Antenatal care and 
birth spacing 

'…the first time, I delivered a baby 
girl, my family was not happy with it. 
So that is when I had to get pregnant 
continuously, but my bad luck all my 
deliveries were all girls.' R-M3 
'Within a year of the first delivery, I got 
pregnant again, so I feel I was too weak 
and that is why even my son is weak.' 
U-M6 



Table 3
3Constraints on management of severe wasting: home level and community levelSubthemes 
with categories Categories 

Illustrative quotes 

Mothers of children with SAM 
Frontline health workers 
Medical staff 

Home level 
Visible signs 
'She [severely wasted child] will be very 
weak and her eyes will be sunken and red. 
Sometimes she used to get fever.' R-M1 



Table 4
4Constraints on management of severe wasting: institutional levelSubthemes 

Categories 
Illustrative quotes 
Mothers of children with SAM 

Frontline health workers 

Medical staff 

Primary 
healthcare 

centre (PHC) 

Preference for 

private healthcare 
'Since it is a private hospital, they do cost but give good 
care and show no carelessness…also it is close to our 
house, we can go at times of emergency.' U-M5 
'…we wanted to get our daughter treated early so we 
went to private hospital. In the district hospital, they will 
keep me and my daughter for a week or more. I know 
their treatment will be good, but I did not want to lose my 
workdays and wages.' R-M6 

'If I tell them [parents of 
severely wasted] to take the 

child to the doctor, they will 
not. So, I myself will bring 
the child and the parents to 
the PHC for a checkup.' U-
ASHA3 

Nutritional 
rehabilitation 

centre (NRC) 

Appetite test 

'Usually, an appetite test should be done, but we do not follow. 

We start directly with F75…we feel that if patient is really SAM, 
he has no way of taking proper food.' R-NRC medical officer 
'Product will be like a barfi or at times as powder made from 
ground nuts, milk powder, sugar and coconut oil. Water can 

be added and given as balls or barfi. Child should consume 
70-80% to pass the appetite test.' U-NRC medical officer1 

'We give a thick porridge which is made from a multigrain mix 
for the appetite test. Child should consume 50-60% to pass the 
test.' U-NRC medical officer2 

Duration of 

stay and wage 
compensation 
'NRC staff took our bank account number. But it's 
six months and we received no money. I did not go to work 
for 8 days and lost my labourer job. I do not know when I 
will get it. If we get that money, we could buy all the food 
they advised in the hospital. But out of my labourer work, I 
cannot buy fruits or vegetables for my child.' R-M2 
'…we were there for four days and then I asked them to 
send us soon as I have two more children at home…they 
did not give me any money. Do they pay us? I did not 
know, no one told me. I know the treatment is free but did 
not know they will give us money. If I knew, I would have 
taken my child again for treatment.' U-M7 

'I have heard they give good 
medicines and food for the 

child regularly throughout 
the 15 days which makes the 
child get back to normal… 
and send the child back 
healthy.' R-AWW4 

'I have told them [parents 
of severely wasted children] 
they [NRC staff] will give food 
and the treatment is free and 
they will also give money of 
Rs.250/day. But these people 


Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge the support of the Department of Health and Family Welfare and the Department of Women and Child Development in facilitating the research and the participants for enabling our research. We also acknowledge the support provided by Ms Sandra Travasso, a qualitative research consultant, and Ms Shaheena.Competing interests None declared.Patient and public involvement Patients and/or the public were not involved in the design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research. Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.Data availability statement All data relevant to the study are included in the article or uploaded as supplemental information. All relevant de-identified excerpts are shared within the manuscript. We are unable to publicly share the full transcripts due to the sensitive nature of the information collected. All data relevant to the study are included in the manuscript or uploaded as supplementary information.Supplemental material This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been peer-reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.ORCID iDSumathi Swaminathan http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4006-1049
World Health Organization. Levels and trends in child malnutrition: UNICEF/WHO/The World Bank group joint malnutrition estimates: key findings of the 2020 edition. GenevaWorld Health Organization. Levels and trends in child malnutrition: UNICEF/WHO/The World Bank group joint malnutrition estimates: key findings of the 2020 edition. Geneva, 2020.

Transforming nutrition in India: POSHAN Abhiyaan. A progress report. Niti Aayog, New Delhi Government of IndiaNITI Aayog. Transforming nutrition in India: POSHAN Abhiyaan. A progress report. New Delhi Government of India; 2019. Available: https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2020-02/POSHAN_ Abhiyaan_first_progress_report_6_Feb_2019.pdf [Accessed 25 May 2021].

National policies and strategic plans to tackle undernutrition in India: a review. S Vir, K C Sreenath, V Bose, New Delhi International Food Policy Research InstitutePOSHAN reportVir S, Sreenath KC, Bose V, et al. National policies and strategic plans to tackle undernutrition in India: a review. POSHAN report No.2. New Delhi International Food Policy Research Institute; 2014.

Subnational mapping of Under-5 and neonatal mortality trends in India: the global burden of disease study 2000-17. 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30471-2India State-Level Disease Burden Inititative Child Mortality Collaborators. 395India State-Level Disease Burden Inititative Child Mortality Collaborators. Subnational mapping of Under-5 and neonatal mortality trends in India: the global burden of disease study 2000-17. Lancet 2020;395:1640-58.

Maternal and child undernutrition and overweight in low-income and middle-income countries. R E Black, C G Victora, S P Walker, 10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60937-XLancet. 382Black RE, Victora CG, Walker SP, et al. Maternal and child undernutrition and overweight in low-income and middle-income countries. Lancet 2013;382:427-51.

Maternal and child undernutrition: consequences for adult health and human capital. C G Victora, L Adair, C Fall, 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61692-4Lancet. 371Victora CG, Adair L, Fall C, et al. Maternal and child undernutrition: consequences for adult health and human capital. Lancet 2008;371:340-57.

International Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS) and ICF. National family health survey (NFHS-4) 2015-16. India. Mumbai IIPSInternational Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS) and ICF. National family health survey (NFHS-4) 2015-16: India. Mumbai IIPS; 2017.

Tracking progress on child and maternal nutrition: a survival and development priority. New YorkUNICEFUNICEF. Tracking progress on child and maternal nutrition: a survival and development priority. New York, 2009.

Global nutrition targets 2025: policy brief series. Geneva World Health Organization. 5Global nutrition targets 2025: policy brief series. Geneva World Health Organization; 2014. Available: https://www.who.int/ publications/i/item/WHO-NMH-NHD-14.2 [Accessed 05 Jan 2021].

Transforming our world: the 2030 agenda for sustainable development. New YorkUnited Nations general assemblyUnited Nations. Transforming our world: the 2030 agenda for sustainable development. New York: United Nations general assembly, 2015.

Community-based management of acute malnutrition to reduce wasting in urban informal settlements of Mumbai, India: a mixed-methods evaluation. N Shah More, A Waingankar, S Ramani, 10.9745/GHSP-D-17-00182Glob Health Sci Pract. 6Shah More N, Waingankar A, Ramani S, et al. Community-based management of acute malnutrition to reduce wasting in urban informal settlements of Mumbai, India: a mixed-methods evaluation. Glob Health Sci Pract 2018;6:103-27.

Severe wasting among Indian infants <6 months: findings from the National family health survey 4. T S Choudhary, A Srivastava, R Chowdhury, 10.1111/mcn.12866Matern Child Nutr. 1512866Choudhary TS, Srivastava A, Chowdhury R, et al. Severe wasting among Indian infants <6 months: findings from the National family health survey 4. Matern Child Nutr 2019;15:e12866.

Factors associated with wasting among children under five years old in South Asia: implications for action. K L Harding, V M Aguayo, P Webb, 10.1371/journal.pone.0198749PLoS One. 13198749Harding KL, Aguayo VM, Webb P. Factors associated with wasting among children under five years old in South Asia: implications for action. PLoS One 2018;13:e0198749.

World Health Organization. WHO guidelines: updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in infants and children. World Health Organization. WHO guidelines: updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in infants and children; 2013.

Integrated child development services scheme. Karnataka Government of IndiaDepartment of Women and Child Development. Integrated child development services scheme. Karnataka Government of India;

Community-based management of severe acute malnutrition: a joint statement by the World Health Organization, the world food programme, the United Nations system standing committee on nutrition and the United Nations children's Fund. Geneva World Health Organization. Community-based management of severe acute malnutrition: a joint statement by the World Health Organization, the world food programme, the United Nations system standing committee on nutrition and the United Nations children's Fund. Geneva World Health Organization; 2007.

Malnutrition in Chakradharpur, Jharkhand: an anthropological study of perceptions and care practices from India. I Chaand, M Horo, M Nair, 10.1186/s40795-019-0299-2BMC Nutr. 535Chaand I, Horo M, Nair M, et al. Malnutrition in Chakradharpur, Jharkhand: an anthropological study of perceptions and care practices from India. BMC Nutr 2019;5:35.

Health-seeking behaviour and community perceptions of childhood undernutrition and a community management of acute malnutrition (CMAM) programme in rural Bihar, India: a qualitative study. D Burtscher, S Burza, 10.1017/S1368980015000440Public Health Nutr. 18Burtscher D, Burza S. Health-seeking behaviour and community perceptions of childhood undernutrition and a community management of acute malnutrition (CMAM) programme in rural Bihar, India: a qualitative study. Public Health Nutr 2015;18:3234-43.

Management of SAM children in India: current strategies. U Kapil, Indian J Community Health. 27Kapil U. Management of SAM children in India: current strategies. Indian J Community Health 2015;27(Supp S1).

Directorate General of Health Services, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. New Delhi Government of IndiaIndian public health standards (IPHS) guidelines for primary health centersDirectorate General of Health Services, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Indian public health standards (IPHS) guidelines for primary health centers. New Delhi Government of India; 2012.

Perceptions of mothers and Caregivers regarding the detection and treatment of severely malnourished children in Kanchele, Kalomo district, Zambia. H Khunga, K J Okop, T Puoane, 10.25159/2520-5293/27AJNM. 16Khunga H, Okop KJ, Puoane T. Perceptions of mothers and Caregivers regarding the detection and treatment of severely malnourished children in Kanchele, Kalomo district, Zambia. AJNM 2014;16:98-111.

The role of parents' literacy in malnutrition of children under the age of five years in a semi-urban community of Pakistan: a case-control study. U K Khattak, S P Iqbal, H Ghazanfar, 10.7759/cureus.1316Cureus. 91316Khattak UK, Iqbal SP, Ghazanfar H. The role of parents' literacy in malnutrition of children under the age of five years in a semi-urban community of Pakistan: a case-control study. Cureus 2017;9:e1316.

Evaluation of the treatment guidelines, practices and outcomes of complicated severe acute malnutrition in children aged 0-59 months in sub-Saharan Africa: a study protocol for the SAMAC study. J A Carboo, M Lombard, C Conradie, 10.11604/pamj.2020.36.241.19584Pan Afr Med J. 36241Carboo JA, Lombard M, Conradie C, et al. Evaluation of the treatment guidelines, practices and outcomes of complicated severe acute malnutrition in children aged 0-59 months in sub-Saharan Africa: a study protocol for the SAMAC study. Pan Afr Med J 2020;36:241.

A qualitative study on malnutrition in children from the perspectives of health workers in Tumpat, Kelantan. W L Cheah, Wan Manan, W M Zabidi-Hussin, Z M , Malays J Nutr. 13Cheah WL, Wan Manan WM, Zabidi-Hussin ZM, et al. A qualitative study on malnutrition in children from the perspectives of health workers in Tumpat, Kelantan. Malays J Nutr 2007;13:19-28.

Management of severe acute malnutrition in children under 5 years through the lens of health care workers in two rural South African hospitals. M Muzigaba, B Van Wyk, T Puoane, 10.4102/phcfm.v10i1.1547Afr J Prim Health Care Fam Med. 10Muzigaba M, Van Wyk B, Puoane T. Management of severe acute malnutrition in children under 5 years through the lens of health care workers in two rural South African hospitals. Afr J Prim Health Care Fam Med 2018;10:e1-8.

Barriers to access for severe acute malnutrition treatment services in Pakistan and Ethiopia: a comparative qualitative analysis. C Puett, S Guerrero, 10.1017/S1368980014002444Public Health Nutr. 18Puett C, Guerrero S. Barriers to access for severe acute malnutrition treatment services in Pakistan and Ethiopia: a comparative qualitative analysis. Public Health Nutr 2015;18:1873-82.

Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ): a 32-item checklist for interviews and focus groups. A Tong, P Sainsbury, J Craig, 10.1093/intqhc/mzm042Int J Qual Health Care. 19Tong A, Sainsbury P, Craig J. Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ): a 32-item checklist for interviews and focus groups. Int J Qual Health Care 2007;19:349-57.

International Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS) and ICF. National family health survey -4: district fact sheet. Bangalore, Karnataka, Mumbai, India IIPSInternational Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS) and ICF. National family health survey -4: district fact sheet. Bangalore, Karnataka, Mumbai, India IIPS; 2016.

International Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS) and ICF. National family health survey -4: district fact sheet. Raichur, Karnataka, Mumbai, India IIPSInternational Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS) and ICF. National family health survey -4: district fact sheet. Raichur, Karnataka, Mumbai, India IIPS; 2016.

Prevalence and determinants of undernutrition among under-five children residing in urban slums and rural area. S Murarkar, J Gothankar, P Doke, 10.1186/s12889-020-09642-0BMC Public Health. 201559: a community-based crosssectional studyMurarkar S, Gothankar J, Doke P, et al. Prevalence and determinants of undernutrition among under-five children residing in urban slums and rural area, Maharashtra, India: a community-based cross- sectional study. BMC Public Health 2020;20:1559.

National multidimensional poverty index baseline report: based on the National family health survey-4. New Delhi: Government of India. Niti Aayog, NITI Aayog. National multidimensional poverty index baseline report: based on the National family health survey-4. New Delhi: Government of India, 2021.

Qualitative data analysis for applied policy research. J Ritchie, L Spencer, Analyzing qualitative data. London: Routledge. Ritchie J, Spencer L. Qualitative data analysis for applied policy research. In: Analyzing qualitative data. London: Routledge, 1994: 173-94.

Use of ready-to-use therapeutic food (RUTF) for management of children with severe acute malnutrition (SAM). New Delhi Government of IndiaMinistry of Women and Child Development. Use of ready-to-use therapeutic food (RUTF) for management of children with severe acute malnutrition (SAM). New Delhi Government of India; 2017. Available: https://wcd.nic.in/sites/default/files/RUTF.PDF [Accessed 11 Apr 2023].

Hunger and malnutrition in the 21st century. P Webb, G A Stordalen, S Singh, 10.1136/bmj.k2238BMJ. 2238Webb P, Stordalen GA, Singh S, et al. Hunger and malnutrition in the 21st century. BMJ 2018:k2238.

International Institute for Population Studies (IIPS) and ICF. National family health survey -4: key findings from Karnataka. Mumbai, India IIPSInternational Institute for Population Studies (IIPS) and ICF. National family health survey -4: key findings from Karnataka. Mumbai, India IIPS; 2016.

Maternal profiles and social determinants of severe acute malnutrition among children under-five years of age: a case-control study in Nepal. A Hossain, B Niroula, S Duwal, 10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e03849Heliyon. 63849Hossain A, Niroula B, Duwal S, et al. Maternal profiles and social determinants of severe acute malnutrition among children under-five years of age: a case-control study in Nepal. Heliyon 2020;6:e03849.

Path to severe acute malnutrition in children below 2 years of age: findings of qualitative research in Uttar Pradesh, North India. S Awasthi, T Verma, T Sanghvi, 10.1016/j.cegh.2018.11.001Clin Epidemiology Glob Health. 7Awasthi S, Verma T, Sanghvi T, et al. Path to severe acute malnutrition in children below 2 years of age: findings of qualitative research in Uttar Pradesh, North India. Clin Epidemiology Glob Health 2019;7:246-52.

Misconceived measures for malnutrition POSHAN Abhiyaan's new monthly height measurements. V Prasad, Econ Polit Wkly. 56Prasad V. Misconceived measures for malnutrition POSHAN Abhiyaan's new monthly height measurements. Econ Polit Wkly 2021;56:14-21.

A study on assessment of ASHA's work profile in the context of. S Shet, K Sumit, S Phadnis, 10.1016/j.cegh.2017.08.004Clin Epidemiology Glob Health. 6Shet S, Sumit K, Phadnis S. A study on assessment of ASHA's work profile in the context of Udupi Taluk, Karnataka, India. Clin Epidemiology Glob Health 2018;6:143-7.

Factors governing the performance of auxiliary nurse Midwives in India: a study in Pune district. T Pyone, S Karvande, S Gopalakrishnan, 10.1371/journal.pone.0226831PLoS One. 14226831Pyone T, Karvande S, Gopalakrishnan S, et al. Factors governing the performance of auxiliary nurse Midwives in India: a study in Pune district. PLoS One 2019;14:e0226831.

Factors influencing the performance of community health workers: a qualitative study of Anganwadi workers from Bihar. A John, N Nisbett, I Barnett, 10.1371/journal.pone.0242460PLoS One. 15242460John A, Nisbett N, Barnett I, et al. Factors influencing the performance of community health workers: a qualitative study of Anganwadi workers from Bihar, India. PLoS One 2020;15:e0242460.

Falling between two Stools: operational inconsistencies between ICDS and NRHM in the management of severe malnutrition. V Prasad, D Sinha, S Sridhar, 10.1007/s13312-012-0053-1Indian Pediatr. 49Prasad V, Sinha D, Sridhar S. Falling between two Stools: operational inconsistencies between ICDS and NRHM in the management of severe malnutrition. Indian Pediatr 2012;49:181-5.

Nutrition rehabilitation of children with severe acute malnutrition: revisiting studies undertaken by the National Institute of nutrition. B Kulkarni, R S Mamidi, 10.4103/ijmr.IJMR_1905_18Indian J Med Res. 150Kulkarni B, Mamidi RS. Nutrition rehabilitation of children with severe acute malnutrition: revisiting studies undertaken by the National Institute of nutrition. Indian J Med Res 2019;150:139-52.

Social ecological approaches to individuals and their contexts: twenty years of health education & behavior health promotion interventions. S D Golden, Jal Earp, 10.1177/1090198111418634Health Educ Behav. 39Golden SD, Earp JAL. Social ecological approaches to individuals and their contexts: twenty years of health education & behavior health promotion interventions. Health Educ Behav 2012;39:364-72.

Effects of participatory learning and action with women's groups, counselling through home visits and Crèches on Undernutrition among children under three years in Eastern India: a quasi-experimental study. R K Gope, P Tripathy, V Prasad, 10.1186/s12889-019-7274-3BMC Public Health. 19962Gope RK, Tripathy P, Prasad V, et al. Effects of participatory learning and action with women's groups, counselling through home visits and Crèches on Undernutrition among children under three years in Eastern India: a quasi-experimental study. BMC Public Health 2019;19:962.

Effectiveness of NGOgovernment partnership to prevent and treat child wasting in urban India. S Chanani, A Waingankar, N Shah More, 10.1111/mcn.12706Matern Child Nutr. 1512706Chanani S, Waingankar A, Shah More N, et al. Effectiveness of NGO- government partnership to prevent and treat child wasting in urban India. Matern Child Nutr 2019;15:e12706.