A systematic review on odontogenic cysts and tumours


Harkanwal P Singh 
Departments of Oral Pathology and Microbiology
Dasmesh Institute of Research and Dental Sciences
Faridkot

Gagandeep K Chahal 
National Dental College Derra Bassi
Prosthodontics, Mohali, Punjab

DrGeeta Sharma 
Oral Pathology
Patna Dental College and Hospital
PatnaBiharIndia

Piyush Gandhi 
Departments of Oral Pathology and Microbiology
Dasmesh Institute of Research and Dental Sciences
Faridkot


Oral Pathology
Patna Dental College and Hospital
Bihar -800 002PatnaIndia

A systematic review on odontogenic cysts and tumours
A9D44C66E596D683A6D9A7BD23BF625C10.4103/jomfp.jomfp_460_23Submitted: 23-Oct-2023, Revised: 07-Nov-2023, Accepted: 09-Nov-2023, Published: 11-Jul-2024Neoplasmneoplastic cell transformationOKC
Several research works have documented the prevalence of odontogenic cysts and tumours, concentrating on the more severe conditions, such as ameloblastoma and keratocystic odontogenic tumours (KCOT).Odontogenic lesions can be distinguished between cysts (a diseased cavity lined with epithelium) and tumours (a solid tissue mass, not always malignant).On radiographic imaging, intrabony lesions of the jaws are most frequently found accidentally.A prolonged inflammatory process in the bone of the surrounding root apex and a proliferating epithelial Background: There are still certain gaps in the research that need to be filled despite the fact that numerous studies have looked into the transformation of odontogenic cysts into neoplastic lesions.To identify pertinent research that had been published and to synthesise the available data and provide an overview of the current body of knowledge, this review also sought to do so.Materials and Methods: Adopting the Preferred Reporting Items of Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines, a search strategy was implemented across several online databases to search for relevant articles as per the defined selection criterion.Results: After the search strategy was complete, 31 studies were chosen.Men tended to have more cancer than women.Swelling and discomfort were the primary pathology-related complaints.Although two cases were not detailed, radiologically, well-defined and poorly defined borders were reported in 18 and 11 participants, respectively.Squamous cell carcinoma with good differentiation (n = 12) was the most common cancer kind.More than 74% of patients were still living 6 months to 10 years following follow-up, four (12.90%) experienced recurrences and/or metastases and two (6.45%) experienced a disease-related mortality between 2 months and a year.Conclusion: Prompt surgical follow-ups and cautious excision of odontogenic cysts are essential to avoiding neoplastic change and recurrence.Future research is required to look at possible reasons why odontogenic cysts can convert neoplastically.

remnant of Malassez cause a radicular cyst.Fluid expanding the dental follicle peri-coronally during development is the cause of dentigerous cysts. [1,2]e dental lamina and other odontogenic epithelial sources are where KCOT develops.With a more aggressive growth pattern than other odontogenic pathoses, this lesion has a greater recurrence rate.Ameloblastomas can develop from any odontogenic epithelium, including the dental lamina (during pre-odontogenesis), epithelial rests of Malassez and Serres (during post-eruption), reduced enamel epithelium (during post-odontogenesis) and possibly the basal layer of the overlying epithelium (during embryogenesis and pre-odontogenesis, the primitive source of dental lamina). [3]Therefore, it seems sense that ameloblastomas can appear differently on radiographs.An odontogenic myxoma is an intraosseous tumour composed of myxomatous fibrous extracellular matrix derived from remains of mesenchymal tissue. [4]The origin of adenomatoid odontogenic tumours is the dental lamina in the gubernacular cord of growing permanent teeth.Ameloblastic fibromas share with ameloblastomas a common origin in the enamel organ or dental lamina; however, the specimen does not contain any dental hard tissue. [5,6][9] The present systematic review was conducted to provide data for those odontogenic cysts transformed into neoplastic lesions.This is significant for all healthcare professional in providing a global incidence for their patients.


MATERIALS AND METHOD

Following the Preferred Reporting Items of Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement and the Cochrane Collaboration's guidelines for systematic reviews, we planned and conducted our systematic review.A thorough computerised search of the published data was performed from the registry's inception until July 2023, covering research in PubMed (MEDLINE) and Scopus.The search terms "KOT," "OKC," "KERATOCYSTIC ODONTOGENIC TUMOR," OR "ODONTOGENIC KERATOCYST," and "malignant transformation" or "cancer" were used in both PubMed (MEDLINE) and Scopus.Furthermore, a manual search and screening were conducted to find further studies in the references given in the retrieved reports and relevant reviews.


Selection process

Articles that described an OKC with malignant transformation inside the cyst lining and included patient-related data were included.Articles were disqualified if they lacked a targeted outcome, had an English writing style or lacked a relevant diagnosis.Two investigators conducted the data extraction process independently, and disagreements were settled through conversation.


Study selection

From the first search, the writers found 836 papers, and they went over the abstracts.Thirty-one items were determined to meet the requirements for inclusion [Figure 1].

The demographic data (age, gender), clinical data (presenting symptoms, history of diagnosed OKC), radiologic assessment, histological investigation, treatment and patient status were the features gathered from the studies to perform the quantitative analysis.


RESULTS

The quality of the studies was assessed using the Cochrane Collaboration approach for assessing the risk of bias in randomised controlled trials (RCTs).The accuracy of the data analysis for this systematic review was ensured using the Newcastle-Ottawa Quality Assessment Form for cohort studies, the Cochrane Collaboration's tool for assessing the risk of bias, the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme, the Grading of Recommendations Assessment Development and Evaluation (GRADE) system for grading evidence and the Oxford Systematic Review Appraisal Sheet.

The results of the research have been given in a narrative overview.Three case series [10][11][12] and 28 case reports [13][14][15][16][17][10][11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18] were reported out of 31 pertinent publications. Figure 1 dispays the flow chart of the chosen articles together with the primary justifications for their exclusion.Table 1 displays the primary attributes of the included studies.Cases in this study were compiled into case series, which were subsequently contrasted with other discovered series.It is noteworthy that nine KCOT cases were included in the research conducted by Chantravekin et al. [10] and that sixteen KCOT cases, three verrucous carcinoma cases and one spindle cell carcinoma case were included in the study published by Bodner et al. [11] Due to the lack of specific and extensive data in this research, none of them could be excluded from any of the categories listed in Table 1.Of the 31 instances that were recovered, men were more likely to have cancer.There was a 52.4-year-old man.Swelling and discomfort were the primary pathology-related


Variables

Present study (n=31) Chantravekin et al. [10] (n=56) Bodner et al. [11]   complaints.The maxilla (n = 6) was the least damaged region, whereas the mandible (n = 25) was the most.Although two cases were not detailed, radiologically, well-defined and poorly defined borders were reported in 18 and 11 participants, respectively.Squamous cell carcinoma with good differentiation (n = 12) was the most common cancer kind.More than 50% of the patients needed a neck lymphadenectomy, and a substantial percentage of them received treatment with a surgical excision of the lesion.Over 74% of patients remained alive during a time frame of 6 months to 10 years following follow-up; four patients (12.90%) experienced recurrences and/or metastases within a time frame of 1 to 5 years, and two patients (6.45%) lost their lives to the disease within a time frame of 2 months to 1 year.Regretfully, there was no mention of the status of the two patients.A table containing the information has been displayed [Table 1].


DISCUSSION

Odontogenic cysts arise from inflammation or development of the tooth-forming apparatus' epithelium. [62]The epithelial lining of odontogenic cysts originates from reduced enamel epithelium, remnants of Serres and Malassez epithelial cells and the epithelial cell remnants of Serres.Malassez's epithelial cell rest comes from Serres' surviving deteriorated dental lamina, which initiated tooth development during the sixth week of embryonic development.Reduced enamel epithelium covers the developing tooth crown. [63,64]The breakdown of the epithelial root sheath of a twig also contributes to the formation of dental roots.These remnants will all become embedded in the gingiva and bone.The epithelium that becomes lodged in the bone and gingiva can develop into malignant tumours and odontogenic cysts.7][68] The neoplastic tumours that emerged from the odontogenic cysts were most likely caused by the epithelial remains of the cysts.Prolonged inflammation, continuous intracystic pressure and partial clearing of the cystic epithelium can cause odontogenic cysts to progress into neoplasms.Jain et al. [14] state that the formation of a sinus tract and pus discharge are two instances of odontogenic cyst long-lasting, persistent inflammation symptoms that are assumed to be cancerous.Chronic inflammation may be the source of gene instability in cells due to the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS).ROS are produced by cells, and when they mix with nitric oxide, they can create reactive nitrogen ions as a bridge.Superoxide, hydrogen peroxide and hydroxyl ions are examples of ROS.It is possible for these reactive nitrogen intermediates to initiate the carcinogenesis process by damaging proteins, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and cell membranes.Furthermore, through inducing cell death, cytokine production, keratinisation of the cystic epithelium and aberrations in DNA, proteins and cell membranes, chronic inflammation encourages the transformation of healthy cells into malignant cells.An investigation by Borrás-Ferreres et al., [66] however, demonstrated a neoplastic conversion from a follicular cyst without ongoing inflammation, suggesting the possibility of other physiopathological pathways linked to oncogenes.

The exact cause of these modifications is still unknown.Some indicators that odontogenic cysts have advanced to neoplasms include swelling, pain and the presence of the sinus tract.Cystectomy, with or without tooth extraction, may also cause delayed recovery.Usually, radiographically, the early stages of malignant changes are invisible.Unilocular radiolucency, uneven, poorly defined scalloped edges and deteriorated osseous cortical bone, all of which indicate an invasive behaviour, will, however, set them apart.This study on 31 odontogenic cysts revealed that two cases developed into mucoepidermoid carcinoma and seventeen cases into squamous cell carcinoma.The origin of those neoplastic tissues were OKCs, residual cysts, radicular cysts, follicular cysts, calcifying odontogenic cysts and some other unidentified odontogenic cysts.

It was challenging to determine the origin of the cystic lesions because some odontogenic cysts were undetected because the transition was detected later than expected.

It should be highlighted that regardless of the patients' age, the transformation was somewhat greater in men.Odontogenic cysts can also develop into neoplasms in younger people; a case report byIsshiki-Murakami et al. included an 18-year-old patient as an example. [69]en a region grows quickly, it is important to take into consideration the malignant transformation of an odontogenic cyst, even though it may not be easily identified radiographically in the early stages. [49]][51]52] Comparable percentages of corticated and weakly defined edges were discovered in this investigation, however.

Regretfully, the radiologic pattern was not specified in the remaining case series [10][11][12] that were included.Despite being a vital diagnostic tool, orthopantomography can be limited in its ability to diagnose some lesions due to image superposition or incomplete data regarding soft tissues.

Malignant lesions that are tiny and asymptomatic might occasionally be misinterpreted.Following a cystectomy, whether or not teeth are extracted, a delayed healing period may be a sign of cancer. [49,50]Nonetheless, there have been reports of certain malignant situations where the soft tissues have fully healed.Consequently, the entire material needs to be histologically analysed. [13,20,45,50]The prognosis is adversely affected by a delayed diagnosis. [42,51]According to the symptoms connected with the total number of instances, swelling, pain and the existence of a sinus tract were the most common associated symptoms.Based on the study's findings, it appears that most patients are still alive 10 years afterwards.In a similar vein, the case series written up by Chantravekin et al. [10] and Bodner et al. [11] showed greater rates of patient survival at 2 years-85.3%and 62%, respectively.However, we discovered five occurrences of metastasis and recurrence, which these studies did not disclose.

Treatment guidelines for odontogenic cysts that prevent cancer development were nonexistent. [70][73] In the instance of dentigerous cysts, the impacted tooth in question should also be excised immediately to prevent the residual cystic epithelium from becoming neoplasms.6] In terms of the implications for research, larger population clinical studies are needed to significantly improve our knowledge of malignant changes brought on by odontogenic cysts.


CONCLUSION

For general practitioners and dentists, this systematic review emphasises the importance of a thorough clinical examination and medical history.Particularly in patients with a known malignant illness, signs of pain and paraesthesia in the face combined with radiographic evidence of radiolucency point to a possible preoperative diagnosis of a metastatic tumour.


Financial support and sponsorship

Nil.

Figure 1 :
1
Figure 1: PRISMA flowchart of included studies


Table 1 : Characteristics of the included studies
1
Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology | Volume 28 | Issue 2 | April-June 2024
Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology | Volume 28 | Issue 2 | April-June 2024
https://journals.lww.com/JPAT/Conflicts of interestThere are no conflicts of interest.
Benign tumours of orofacial region at Benghazi, Libya: A study of 405 cases. R El-Gehani, M Orafi, M Elarbi, K Subhashraj, J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 372009

Parameters in panoramic radiography for differentiation of radiolucent lesions. R Raitz, Assunção Júnior, J N Correa, L Fenyo-Pereira, M , J Appl Oral Sci. 172009

Cysts and cystic lesions of the mandible: Clinical and radiologic-histopathologic review. R J Scholl, H M Kellett, D P Neumann, A G Lurie, Radiographics. 191999

Pericoronal radiolucency in the posterior mandible. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. M R Darling, B M Wehrli, C Ciavarro, T D Daley, 2008105

Keratocystic odontogenic tumor (odontogenic keratocyst): Preliminary retrospective review of epidemiologic, clinical, and radiologic features of 261 lesions from university of Turin. P Boffano, E Ruga, C Gallesio, J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 682010

Conservative treatment protocol of odontogenic keratocyst: A preliminary study. P E Maurette, Jorge J De Moraes, M , J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 642006

Management and recurrence of keratocystic odontogenic tumor: A systematic review. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol. N R Johnson, M D Batstone, N W Savage, 2013116

The aggressive nature of the odontogenic keratocyst: Is it a benign cystic neoplasm? Part 1. Clinical and early experimental evidence of aggressive behaviour. M Shear, Oral Oncol. 382002

Management of odontogenic keratocysts of the jaws: A ten-year experience with 120 consecutive lesions. P Pitak-Arnnop, A Chaine, N Oprean, K Dhanuthai, J C Bertrand, C Bertolus, J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 382010

Primary intraosseous squamous cell carcinoma derived from odontogenic cyst: Case report & review of 56 cases. Y Chantravekin, S Rungsiyanont, P Tang, M Tungpisityotin, S Swasdison, Asian J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 202008

Primary intraosseous squamous cell carcinoma arising in an odontogenic cyst: A clinicopathologic analysis of 116 reported cases. L Bodner, E Manor, M Shear, I Van Der Waal, J Oral Pathol Med. 402011

Primary intraosseous carcinoma arising from an odontogenic cyst: A case report and review of the Japanese cases. T Saito, H Okada, Y Akimoto, H Yamamoto, J Oral Sci. 442002

Primary intraosseous carcinoma of the jaws arising from an odontogenic cyst--A case report. M Scheer, A M Koch, U Drebber, A C Kübler, J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 322004

Primary intraosseous squamous cell carcinoma arising in odontogenic cysts: An insight in pathogenesis. M Jain, S Mittal, D K Gupta, J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 712013

Squamous cell carcinoma arising in a residual odontogenic cyst: Case report. B D Swinson, W Jerjes, G J Thomas, J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 632005

Primary intraosseous malignancy originating in an odontogenic cyst in a young child. M Charles, T Barr, I Leong, B Y Ngan, V Forte, G K Sándor, J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 662008

Primary intraosseous odontogenic carcinoma arising in an odontogenic cyst or de novo: A clinicopathologic study of six new cases. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. R Chaisuparat, D Coletti, A Kolokythas, R A Ord, N G Nikitakis, 2006101

Squamous cell carcinoma arising in association with an orthokeratinized odontogenic keratocyst. H Yoshida, K Onizawa, H Yusa, J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 541996Reportof a case

P53-positive squamous cell carcinoma originating from an odontogenic cyst. A R Mcdonald, M A Pogrel, J Carson, J Regezi, J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 541996

Squamous cell carcinoma arising in a dentigerous cyst. T Yasuoka, K Yonemoto, Y Kato, N Tatematsu, J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 582000

Squamous-cell carcinoma arising from an odontog enic cyst--the importance of computed tomography in the diagnosis of malignancy. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. M G Cavalcanti, V C Veltrini, A Ruprecht, S D Vincent, R A Robinson, 2005100

Squamous-cell carcinoma arising in a lateral periodontal cyst. R D Baker, D Onofrio, E D Corio, R L Crawford, B E Terry, B C , Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. 471979

Squamous cell carcinoma arising in an odontogenic cyst. N Bradley, D M Thomas, K Antoniades, Y Anavi, Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 171988

P53 expression and mutation analysis of odontogenic cysts with and without dysplasia. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol. D P Cox, 2012113

Squamous cell carcinoma arising in recurrent odontogenic keratocyst: Case report and literature review. D J Dabbs, R J Schweitzer, L E Schweitzer, F Mantz, Head Neck. 161994

Mucoepidermoid carcinoma in a young adult: Recognition, diagnosis, and treatment and responsibility. J B Epstein, L Hollender, S R Pruzan, Gen Dent. 522004

DNA-ploidy studies in a keratocyst undergoing subsequent malignant transformation. A S High, P Quirke, W J Hume, J Oral Pathol. 161987

Squamous cell carcinoma arising in a dentigerous cyst. L M Johnson, J P Sapp, D N Mcintire, J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 521994

Squamous cell carcinoma arising in a dentigerous cyst. R Lapin, A V Garfinkel, A F Catania, A A Kane, J Oral Surg. 311973

Squamous-cell carcinoma in a residual mandibular cyst. C Martinelli, R M Melhado, E A Callestini, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. 441977

Primary intraosseous squamous cell carcinoma arising in a mandibular keratocyst. A J Minić, Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 211992

Squamous cell carcinoma arising in the lining of an odontogenic cyst. S Nithiananda, Br J Oral Surg. 211983

Squamous cell carcinoma in an orthokeratinised odontogenic keratocyst. C H Siar, K H Ng, Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 161987

Squamous cell carcinoma arising in the lining of odontogenic cysts. I Van Der Waal, R Rauhamaa, W A Van Der Kwast, G B Snow, Int J Oral Surg. 141985Reportof 5 cases

Predominantly cystic central mucoepidermoid carcinoma developing from a previously diagnosed dentigerous cyst: Case report and review of the literature. B R Spoorthi, R S Rao, P B Rajashekaraiah, S Patil, S S Venktesaiah, P Purushothama, Clin Pract. 3e192013

Malignant transformation of an odontogenic cyst in a period of 10 years. J P Araújo, L P Kowalski, M L Rodrigues, O P De Almeida, Lopes Pinto, C A Alves, F A , Case Rep Dent. 7629692014. 2014

Squamous cell carcinoma arising in a residual cyst: A case report. M Muglali, A P Sumer, J Contemp Dent Pract. 92008

Malignant transformation in the course of a dentigerous cyst: A problem for a clinician and a pathologist. A Zapała-Pośpiech, G Wyszyńska-Pawelec, D Adamek, R Tomaszewska, M Zaleska, J Zapała, Pol J Pathol. 642013

Squamous cell carcinoma arising in the epithelial lining of a dentigerous cyst. S B Roofe, E M Boyd, Jr, G D Houston, W A Edgin, South Med J. 921999

A case of central carcinoma of the mandible arising from a recurrent odontogenic keratocyst: Delineation of surgical margins and reconstruction with bilateral rectus abdominis myocutaneous free flaps. Y Ota, K Karakida, D Watanabe, M Miyasaka, K Tsukinoki, Tokai J Exp Clin Med. 231998

Squamous carcinoma arising in a dental cyst. K Lavery, J E Blomquist, M D Awty, P J Stevens, Br Dent J. 1621987

Squamous cell carcinoma developing in an odontogenic keratocyst. R G Areen, K D Mcclatchey, H L Baker, Arch Otolaryngol. 1071981Reportof a case

Primary intraosseous squamous cell carcinoma of the jaw: Two new cases and review of the literature. T Nomura, H Monobe, N Tamaruya, S Kishishita, K Saito, R Miyamoto, Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2702013

Carcinoma intraóseo primario del maxilar superior originado en un quiste folicular: Presentación de un caso y revisión de la literatura. J Rius, J M Bosch, A Uribarri, L Berini, C Gay-Escoda, Rev Act Odontoestomatol Esp. 551995

Primary intraosseous carcinoma arising in a mandibular cyst. J Murillo-Cortes, A Etayo-Perez, C Sebastian-Lopez, R Martino-Gorbea, J M Rodriguez-Cortel, Med Oral. 72002

Aggressive growth and neoplastic potential of dentigerous cysts with particular reference to central mucoepidermoid carcinoma. P Aggarwal, S Saxena, Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 492011

Malignant transformation of an odontogenic keratocyst: Report of a case. W L Foley, B C Terry, J R Jacoway, J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 491991

Carcinoma arising in a dentigerous cyst: A case report and review of the literature. W G Maxymiw, R E Wood, J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 491991

Carcinoma arising in a dentigerous cyst with neck metastasis. A M Manganaro, S E Cross, J M Startzell, Head Neck. 191997

Carcinoma primario intraósea de mandíbula con origen en un quiste odontogénico. M Torrades-Ferrer, C Gay-Escoda, Rev Act Odontoestomatol Esp. 521992

Squamous cell carcinoma arising in a dentigerous cyst in a 16-month-old girl. S H Gulbranson, J D Wolfrey, J M Raines, B P Mcnally, Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1272002

Squamous cell carcinoma arising in a residual cyst. A case report. K G Van Der Wal, J G De Visscher, H F Eggink, Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 221993

Primary intraosseous carcinoma and odontogenic cyst. Three new cases and review of the literature. S Aboul-Hosn Centenero, A Marí-Roig, P Piulachs-Clapera, I Juárez-Escalona, A Monner-Diéguez, A Díaz-Carandell, Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal. 112006

Central mucoepidermoid carcinoma of the mandible: Tumorigenesis within a keratocyst. F C Holsinger, J M Owens, A K Raymond, J N Myers, Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1282002

Squamous cell carcinoma arising in dentigerous cysts. S Colbert, P A Brennan, J Theaker, B Evans, J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 402012

Pericoronal radiolucency in the posterior mandible. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. M R Darling, B M Wehrli, C Ciavarro, T D Daley, 2008105

World Health Organization classification of tumours, pathology & genetics: head & neck tumors. J J Sciubba, L R Eversole, P J Slootweg, L Barnes, J Eveson, P Reichart, D Sidransky, 2005. 2023 Jun 12IARC PressLyonOdontogenic/ameloblastic carcinomas

Ameloblastic carcinoma: An analysis of 6 cases with review of the literature. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. H J Yoon, S P Hong, J I Lee, S S Lee, S D Hong, 2009108

Mandibular unilocular radiolucency with ill-defined borders. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. J L Tapia, A Aguirre, M Garvey, M Zeid, 200497

Primary intraosseous carcinoma of mandible associated with elevation of serum carcinoembryonic antigen level. Y Hayashido, Y Yoshioka, T Shintani, T Hamana, K Koizumi, Y Ishida, Oral Oncol. 412005

Primary intraosseous carcinoma of the mandible with probable origin in an odontogenic cyst. C A Waldron, T A Mustoe, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. 671989

. Rajendra Santosh AB. Odontogenic Cysts. Dent Clin North Am. 642020

10 -Odontogenic cysts & tumors. V Woo, A C Chi, B W Neville, Bishop JABT-GDSP of the H & N. 3 rd ed. D R Gnepp, OxfordElsevier2021. 2023 Aug 12

Pitfalls in odontogenic lesions&tumours: A practical guide. K D Hunter, S Niklander, Diagn Histopathol. 262020

Primary intraosseous carcinoma of the maxilla arising from an odontogenic keratocyst: A case report and review of the literature. J M Gonçalves, Lhg Marola, F Modolo, Dsc Vieira, Los De, G P Santos, J E León, Gen Dent. 672019

Malignant changes developing from odontogenic cysts: A systematic review. J Borrás-Ferreres, A Sánchez-Torres, C Gay-Escoda, J Clin Exp Dent. 82016

Primary intraosseous squamous cell carcinoma arising in odontogenic cysts: A report of five cases & a review of the literature. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol 2022. D R Wolk, D P Freedman, D R Reich, 133e154

Carcinomatous transformation of odontogenic keratocyst and primary intraosseous carcinoma: A systematic review and report of a case. H Kumchai, A F Champion, J C Gates, J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 7910812021

Central mucoepidermoid carcinoma of the maxilla developing from a calcifying odontogenic cyst: A rare case report. M Isshiki-Murakami, H Tachinami, K Tomihara, A Noguchi, K Sekido, S Imaue, Clin Case Rep. 9e049282021

Hedgehog signaling pathway and vitamin D receptor gene variants as potential risk factors in odontogenic cystic lesions. M Magic, K Zeljic, S Jovandic, J Stepic, M Pejovic, S Colic, Clin Oral Investig. 232019

Insight into the molecular pathogenesis of odontogenic lesions. L Bhuyan, R Nishat, S S Behura, N Mahapatra, H Kumar, J Oral Biosci. 632021

Primary intraosseous squamous cell carcinoma derived from a maxillary cyst: A case report and literature review. T Morita, M Yamashiro, K Kayamori, M Mizutani, K Nakakuki, Y Michi, Mol Clin Oncol. 42016

Squamous cell carcinoma arising in dentigerous cysts. S Colbert, P A Brennan, J Theaker, B Evans, J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 402012

Unicystic ameloblastoma arising from a residual cyst. A D Mahajan, B S Manjunatha, N M Khurana, N Shah, BMJ Case Rep. 20142051572014. 2014

A case of central mucoepidermoid carcinoma associated with dentigerous cyst. S M Razavi, R Yahyaabadi, S Khalesi, Dent Res J (Isfahan). 142017

Intraosseous carcinoma arising from an odontogenic cyst: A case report. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol. C Bereket, B Bekçioğlu, M Koyuncu, İ Şener, B Kandemir, A Türer, 2013116