Expression of early growth response factor-1 in rats with cerulein-induced acute pancreatitis and its significance
2005

Lan-Bo Gong lbgong@fimmu.com 
Li He 
Yang Liu 
Xue-Qing Chen 
Bo Jiang 
Lan-Bo Gong 
Yang Liu 
Xue-Qing Chen 
Bo Jiang 

E L S E V I E R
Department of Gastroenterology
Nanfang Hospital
PO Box 2345100023BeijingChina


Department of Gastroenterology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Shenyang Medical College
Department of Gastroenterology
Southern Medical University
Guangdong Province, China Li He510515, 110002Guangzhou, Shenyang, Liaoning ProvinceChina


Guangdong Province
Nanfang Hospital
Southern Medical University
510515GuangzhouChina

Expression of early growth response factor-1 in rats with cerulein-induced acute pancreatitis and its significance

World J Gastroenterol
11322005Received: 2004-12-07 Accepted: 2005-01-26• BRIEF REPORTS • World Journal of Gastroenterology Supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, No. 30370648 Correspondence to: Lan-Bo Gong,
AIM:To observe the expressions of early growth response factor-1 (Egr-1) and tissue factor (TF) in rats with cerulein-induced acute pancreatitis and to explore its significance.

INTRODUCTION

Acute pancreatitis is a common disease with its severe case having a mortality of up to 25-40%, while its pathogenesis still remains unclear [1,2] . The activation of pancreatic enzyme in acinar cells and its digestion of pancreatic tissues have been generally regarded as its trigger so far. However, recent studies on transcription factor, nuclear factor-B (NFB) and other cytokines showed that inflammatory cytokines play an important role in the pathogenesis of acute pancreatitis due to their inflammation-inducing properties [3][4][5][6][7] . Early growth response factor-1 (Egr-1), also known as nerve growth factor-induced protein A, Krox-24 or Zif268, is a transcription factor -NFB [8] . A recent study showed that Egr-1 may be an initial factor of inflammation [9] . In our experiment, we studied the expression of Egr-1 in rats with cerulein-induced acute pancreatitis to understand its role in the pathogenesis of acute pancreatitis.


MATERIALS AND METHODS


Animal models

Following the procedures for construction of animal models [3,6] , cerulein was dissolved in normal saline. Then cerulein solution [20 g/(kg·h)] was injected into abdominal cavity of male Wistar rats. After 4 h of the stimulation, a large dose of sodium pentobarbital was injected into the abdominal cavity of the rats, followed by incision of the thorax cavity to collect blood by a syringe needle; besides, a little lung tissue was harvested. Subsequently, an incision was made to open the abdominal cavity to expose the pancreatic tissue and a piece of pancreatic tissue was harvested and put into the pre-cooled neutral PBS (pH 7.4) with its fat removed. Pancreatic tissue was fixed in neutral 10% paraformaldehyde and cooled in liquid nitrogen and preserved at -70 ℃. The blood was centrifuged for blood serum, which was then preserved at -70 ℃.


Histology and immunohistochemistry

The tissue was processed routinely, dehydrated and paraffinembedded, cut into 5-µm-thick sections and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Then, the histological and morphological changes were observed under an optical microscope. During immunohistochemistry, the tissue sections were routinely dewaxed and liquefied and rabbit Egr-1 antibody was added. Then, Egr-1 was detected.


Statistical analysis

The data were expressed as mean±SD and analyzed with SPSS 1.0 software package.


RESULTS

Large dose of cerulein-induced obvious acute pancreatitis and the pancreatic tissue had the manifestations of acute abscess, widened tissue interspace and obvious, swollen pancreatic acinar cells (Figure 1). The indexes for diagnosis of acute pancreatitis, including blood serum amylase, tissue MPO, and percentage of water content, significantly increased ( Figure 2). Similar to the previous report [10] , bombesin failed to induce typical experimental acute pancreatitis. Large dose of bombesin induced only tissue edema, which was relatively milder than that induced by cerulein, amylase, and MPO increased with no statistical significance ( Figure 2).

The expression of Egr-1 mRNA reached its peak 30 min after the injection of cerulein, which was 60 times higher than that in the control ( Figure 3B). However, it significantly declined after 4 h. Correspondingly, the expression of Egr-1 protein occurred 2 h after injection and obviously declined after 4 h. Egr-1 protein expression occurred 2 h after the stimulation, and almost all acinar cells had the expression of Egr-1 protein, while the expression was locally stronger and the expression of Egr-1 was found in nuclei. The expression of TF was later than that of Egr-1. Obvious expression of TF mRNA was seen 1 h after the stimulation and peaked in 2-4 h ( Figure 3A).   


DISCUSSION

Recent studies have shown that Egr-1, as one of the transcription factors during the early stage of inflammation, can regulate the expression of multiple inflammatory factors, such as tumor necrosis factor, interleukin-2, transforming growth factor-1, intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), and TF, and eradication of Egr-1 can protect lungs from injuries induced by ischemia and decrease the expression of tissue IL-1, IL-6, ICAM-1, MCP-1, TF, and PAI [9] . However, the expression and function of Egr-1 in acute pancreatitis remain unclear. In our study, during the early stage of acute pancreatitis induced by cerulein, Egr-1 demonstrated high expression in mRNA and protein. Its protein expression occurred 1 h after stimulation, peaked at 2 h, and lasted for at least 4 h. Egr-1 was found in nuclei 2 h after stimulation in our experiment, indicating that Egr-1 may play an important regulatory role during the early stage of acute pancreatitis. We also found that the expression of Egr-1 in acinar cells was locally distinct, which may be related to the property of Egr-1 that it is extremely easy to attenuate. Being different from cerulein, bombesin could not induce typical acute pancreatitis [10] and did not increase blood serum amylase and tissue MPO level although bombesin could also induce mild edema of pancreatic tissue. Correspondingly, bombesin induced only trace expression of Egr-1 mRNA, but expression of protein could not be detected. The result further indicates, that the expression of Egr-1 plays a role in the pathogenesis of acute pancreatitis.

Previous studies have shown that during the initial and developmental process of acute pancreatitis, ischemiareperfusion plays an important role [11] and TF is an initial factor for coagulation, which can result in decrease of the tissue blood flow and ischemia [8,9] . It was reported that TF is an important targeting factor of Egr-1, whose expression is modulated by Egr-1 [9] . Our study indicated that during the early stage of acute pancreatitis, TF also had high expression. However, compared to Egr-1, its expression was 1-2 h later. Therefore, we believe that during acute pancreatitis, Egr-1 may regulate the expression of TF and trigger coagulation to induce ischemia of pancreatic tissue, thus aggravating the disease. Nevertheless, the detailed mechanism of TF during acute pancreatitis needs further studies.

In conclusion, Egr-1, as a pro-inflammatory transcription factor that may play an important role in the pathogenesis of acute pancreatitis.  

Figure 2
2Effects of cerulein and bombesin on rat blood serum amylase (A), water content of pancreatic tissue (B), and MPO level (C). Con: control group; Bom: bombesin control; CRE: cerulein group.

Figure 1
1Immunohistochemistry of Egr-1 in rats with acute pancreatitis.

Figure 3
3Expression of Egr-1 and TF in rats with acute pancreatitis (A) and Science Editor Wang XL and Guo SY Language Editor Elsevier HK control (B). Con: control; Bom: bombesin control.

Pathobiology of experimental acute pancreatitis. M L Steer, Yale J Biol Med. 65Steer ML. Pathobiology of experimental acute pancreatitis. Yale J Biol Med 1992; 65: 421-430

Early trypsinogen activation in acute pancreatitis. M M Lerch, F S Gorelick, Med Clin North Am. 84Lerch MM, Gorelick FS. Early trypsinogen activation in acute pancreatitis. Med Clin North Am 2000; 84: 549-563

Early NF-kappaB activation is associated with hormone-induced pancreatitis. I Gukovsky, A S Gukovskaya, T A Blinman, V Zaninovic, S J Pandol, Am J Physiol. 2756Pt 1Gukovsky I, Gukovskaya AS, Blinman TA, Zaninovic V, Pandol SJ. Early NF-kappaB activation is associated with hormone-induced pancreatitis. Am J Physiol 1998; 275(6 Pt 1): G1402-G1414

Chemokine gene expression in rat pancreatic acinar cells is an early event associated with acute pancreatitis. T Grady, P Liang, S A Ernst, C D Logsdon, Gastroenterology. 113Grady T, Liang P, Ernst SA, Logsdon CD. Chemokine gene expression in rat pancreatic acinar cells is an early event asso- ciated with acute pancreatitis. Gastroenterology 1997; 113: 1996-1975

Effect of hyperthermia on NF-kappaB binding activity in cerulein-induced acute pancreatitis. J L Frossard, C M Pastor, A Hadengue, Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 280Frossard JL, Pastor CM, Hadengue A. Effect of hyperther- mia on NF-kappaB binding activity in cerulein-induced acute pancreatitis. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001; 280: G1157-1162

NF-kappaB activation in pancreas induces pancreatic and systemic inflammatory response. X Chen, Ji B Han, B Ernst, S A Simeone, D Logsdon, C D , Gastroenterology. 122Chen X, Ji B, Han B, Ernst SA, Simeone D, Logsdon CD. NF- kappaB activation in pancreas induces pancreatic and sys- temic inflammatory response. Gastroenterology 2002: 122: 448- 45 7

Inhibition of nuclear factor-kappaB activation improves the survival of rats with taurocholate pancreatitis. A Satoh, T Shimosegawa, M Fujita, K Kimura, A Masamune, M Koizumi, T Toyota, Gut. 44Satoh A, Shimosegawa T, Fujita M, Kimura K, Masamune A, Koizumi M, Toyota T. Inhibition of nuclear factor-kappaB activation improves the survival of rats with taurocholate pancreatitis. Gut 1999; 44: 253-258

Early growth response protein 1 (Egr-1): prototype of a zinc-finger family of transcription factors. A Gashler, V P Sukhatme, Prog Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol. 50Gashler A, Sukhatme VP. Early growth response protein 1 (Egr-1): prototype of a zinc-finger family of transcription factors. Prog Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol 1995; 50: 191-224

Egr-1, a master switch coordinating upregulation of divergent gene families underlying ischemic stress. S F Yan, T Fujita, J Lu, K Okada, Shan Zou, Y Mackman, N Pinsky, D J Stern, D M , Nat Med. 6Yan SF, Fujita T, Lu J, Okada K, Shan Zou Y, Mackman N, Pinsky DJ, Stern DM. Egr-1, a master switch coordinating upregulation of divergent gene families underlying ischemic stress. Nat Med 2000; 6: 1355-1361

Different effects of hyperstimulation by similar classes of secretagogues on the exocrine pancreas. R E Powers, T Grady, J L Orchard, T B Gilrane, Pancreas. 8Powers RE, Grady T, Orchard JL, Gilrane TB. Different ef- fects of hyperstimulation by similar classes of secretagogues on the exocrine pancreas. Pancreas 1993; 8: 58-63

L Gullo, L Cavicchi, P Tomassetti, C Spagnolo, A Freyrie, D &apos;addato, M , Effects of ischemia on the human pancreas. Gullo L, Cavicchi L, Tomassetti P, Spagnolo C, Freyrie A, D'Addato M. Effects of ischemia on the human pancreas.