Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre -including this research content -immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.


differences in the WTP for curative treatments across different therapeutic areas, which is particularly low for antibacterials. Further research is required to better understand the reasons and implications of such findings.


POSA221 5-YEARS ON: REFLECTIONS ON THE CANCER DRUGS FUND

Critchlow S, 1 Lilley C 2 1 Delta Hat, Nottingham, UK, 2 BresMed Health Solutions, Sheffield, UK Objectives: In June 2016, the Cancer Drugs Fund (CDF), an important mechanism for managed access in England, underwent significant reform. Between June 2016 and June 2021 NICE considered the evaluation of over 300 individual single technology appraisals (STAs). During these 5-years, the CDF has played a pivotal role in expanding access to promising cancer medicines whilst further data are collected with the aim of reducing uncertainty. This research evaluated the CDF recommendations made during this period and reflects on the role of the CDF in the context of the imminent 2021 launch of the new 'Innovative Medicines Fund' (IMF); which will expand the role of the CDF to include non-cancer diseases. Methods: A targeted literature review was conducted to identify STAs where the treatment under evaluation was recommended for use within the CDF with additional research undertaken to understand which of those STAs had subsequently been reappraised on exit from the CDF. Results: The review identified 198 STAs conducted between June 2016 and June 2021 in an oncology setting. 40 recommendations were made for use within the CDF. Of those 40, 12 have been fully reappraised following submission of new evidence. Of those, nine have been accepted for routine commissioning, two were terminated, and one received a negative recommendation from NICE. Conclusions: Although a substantial number of recommendations have been made for treatments on the CDF, there remains a relatively low number of reappraisals. There are an additional 11 appraisals for which the data collection period has passed, indicating that there may be time lags in the reappraisal process. Based on outcomes from the CDF to date, the introduction of the IMF could act as a great opportunity for many more patients to gain early access to promising medicines, however scheduling of reassessments may contribute to considerable capacity constraints in the future.


POSA222 CRITICAL REFLECTIONS ON REIMBURSEMENT AND ACCESS OF ADVANCED THERAPIES

Simoens S, 1 De Groote K, 2 Boersma C 3 1 KU Leuven, Leuven, VBR, Belgium, 2 Innosens, Brakel, Belgium, 3 University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands; Department of Management Sciences, Open University, Heerlen, the Netherlands; Health-Ecore, Zeist, UT, Netherlands Objectives: The health economic literature has questioned the cost-effectiveness and affordability of advanced therapies, proposed adjustments to value assessment frameworks, and discussed the use of outcome-based managed entry agreements and staggered payments in the last few years. The aim of this study is to conduct a critical reflection on assessment criteria and access conditions for reimbursement of advanced therapies. Methods: A narrative review of the peerreviewed literature and grey literature was conducted in April 2021 by searching PubMed; Google Scholar; policy and legislative documents; websites of health technology assessment agencies, advanced therapy organisations, governmental advanced therapy innovation programmes, consultancy agencies; ISPOR conference abstracts and presentations. Results: Based on the available evidence, this study argues that: a) advanced therapies can be cost-effective at high prices set by manufacturers; b) the narrow economic evaluation framework adopted by many payers under-values these products; c) advanced therapies can be affordable and may not require spread payments; d) outcome-based managed entry agreements are theoretically attractive, but challenging in practice; e) the cost-effectiveness of advanced therapies depends on the outcome-based managed entry agreement and payment approach; f) there is a role for pan-European collaborations to manage reimbursement and access of advanced therapies. Conclusions: This study shows that there is no single approach to reimbursement and access of advanced therapies. Instead, we support a more tailored assessment of health economic aspects of advanced therapies, which takes into account the heterogeneity of these products and their target populations.


POSA223 DYNAMICS OF EU MARKET EXCLUSIVITY: THE IMPACT OF ORPHAN DESIGNATION ON GENERIC OR BIOSIMILAR ENTRY

Collins S, 1 Patel B, 2 Saada R, 1 Kelly S 1 1 Charles River Associates, London, UK, 2 Charles River Associates, Cambridge, UK Objectives: Orphan designation (OD) status was introduced to encourage development of therapies for rare disease. Products that fulfil the OD criteria benefit from a 10-12 year market exclusivity period from market authorisation (MA), which can extend protection from generic competition beyond patent expiry. In this study we explore the impact of OD market exclusivity on the likelihood of generic and biosimilar entry. Factors which may influence the attractiveness of generic entry are also analysed. Methods: A database containing all products with an OD which were granted MA from 2000-2020 was compiled by supplementing data from the European Medicines Agency (EMA) community register. The database was curated to distinguish paediatric vs. non-paediatric and oncologic vs. non-oncologic orphan medicinal products (OMPs). Patent expiry dates were collected using GlobalData, Evaluate Pharma and other publicly available sources. An EMA database was used to identify the earliest date of centralised MA for generics and biosimilars, and the numbers of these competitors that were approved. Results: This study provides an overview of the exclusivity status of 173 OMPs with 213 OD indications granted MA from 2000-2020. The majority of OMPs are still patent protected, whilst a small proportion (w10%) benefit from OD market exclusivity after loss of patent exclusivity. Approximately one fifth of OMPs have no exclusivity protection and generic entry has occurred in around half of these OMPs. There is a small trend for higher likelihood of generic entry for oncology and non-oncology paediatric OD-products. Analysis shows that non-OD products are more likely to experience generic entry than OMPs, with a higher number of generics approved also. Conclusions: This study shows that OD status protects OMPs from generic competition beyond the 10-12 year market exclusivity period, with generic entry less likely after the lapse of market exclusivity than observed with non-OD products.


POSA225 COMPARING THE US DRUG DEVELOPMENT, PRICING, ACCESS, AND REIMBURSEMENT STRATEGIES FOR COVID-19 VACCINES AS A POTENTIAL MODEL FOR NOVEL ONCOLOGY THERAPIES

Lee Y, 1 Lee K, 1 Park H, 1 Neese M, 2 Khan ZM 1 1 Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2 Bayer Pharmaceuticals, Whippany, NJ, USA Objectives: Research and development (R&D) and pricing, access, and reimbursement (PAR) barriers often prevent innovative therapies from reaching patients in a timely manner. Rapid R&D and PAR strategies have allowed COVID-19 vaccines to become available globally. We compare COVID-19 vaccines with other innovative therapies with expedited approvals to learn from and potentially model future frameworks when bringing new therapies to market. Methods: As a comparative exploratory case, two innovative therapies, tisagenlecleucel, and pembrolizumab, with expedited approval designation, variable profitability, and adequate public data were identified. Each therapy lifecycle was outlined through a targeted literature review from 2006 to 2021. A descriptive analysis was conducted for concept elicitation and the identified categories were interpreted accordingly. Key features of product lifecycles and barriers were compared. Finally, potential adaptation strategies for future innovative therapies were outlined. Results: Each comparator had notable differences in R&D and PAR such as therapeutic expansion strategy for pembrolizumab and safety program hurdle for tisagenlecleucel. Likewise, various strategies were implemented for COVID-19 vaccines. Existing and novel stakeholders shared data to accelerate R&D through global collaborations. Risk-pooling, government development funds, and early contracted purchases ensured limited profitability and mitigated associated risk. Various phases of clinical trials and manufacturing processes occurred in parallel with ongoing pooled data analysis of outcomes, compared to the traditional method of the interim and final analysis of clinical trial endpoints. The need for paradigm shift during the pandemic highlighted the important evolution of digitalization, advanced technologies, and reconsideration of evidence acceptability criteria in rapid R&D and PAR strategies. Conclusion: Findings suggest it may be valuable to further investigate the possibilities of following similar R&D and PAR strategies as those used for COVID-19 vaccines for future innovative therapies with expedited approval designations. Objectives: Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is one of the leading causes of death in people of working age. Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator (ICD) should be considered as the primary means of preventing SCD. The number of ICD in Russia is 19.4 per 1 million people (2 841 implantations in 2019), but in the countries of Western and Eastern Europe this indicator is approximately 10 times higher. This study aims to estimate the number of patients requiring ICD treatment due to SCD-associated diseases in Russia. Methods: The calculations were carried out using information on the population of Russia. Incidence was modelled based on the hospital bills data in 2019 and expert assessment of the proportion of patients with SCD-associated diseases who potentially required ICD.


POSA226


S144

VALUE IN HEALTH -JANUARY 2022


ANALYSIS OF REQUIREMENT OF IMPLANTATION FOR IMPLANTABLE CARDIOVERTER DEFIBRILLATOR IN THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION Seryapina Y, 1 Pustovalov D, 2 Fedyaev D, 2 Musina NZ, 3 Omelyanovskiy V 3 Center of Healthcare Quality Assessment and Control of the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, Moscow, MOW, Russia, 2 Center of Healthcare Quality Assessment and Control of the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3 Center of Healthcare Quality Assessment and Control, Moscow, MOW, Russia1