Big data approach in the field of gastric and colorectal cancer research


Ka Shing Cheung 
Department of Medicine
School of Clinical Medicine
The University of Hong Kong
Queen Mary Hospital
Hong Kong

Department of Medicine
The University of Hong Kong-Shenzhen Hospital
ShenzhenChina


Department of Medicine



School of Clinical Medicine
The University of Hong Kong
Queen Mary Hospital
102 Pokfulam RoadHong KongChina

Big data approach in the field of gastric and colorectal cancer research
B0404B53E3D1E4AA2C195034FF45E18410.1111/jgh.16527Accepted for publication 7 February 2024.Gastric cancerHelicobacter pyloriInterval cancerPostcolonoscopy colorectal cancer
Big data is characterized by three attributes: volume, variety,, and velocity.In healthcare setting, big data refers to vast dataset that is electronically stored and managed in an automated manner and has the potential to enhance human health and healthcare system.In this review, gastric cancer (GC) and postcolonoscopy colorectal cancer (PCCRC) will be used to illustrate application of big data approach in the field of gastrointestinal cancer research.Helicobacter pylori (HP) eradication only reduces GC risk by 46% due to preexisting precancerous lesions.Apart from endoscopy surveillance, identifying medications that modify GC risk is another strategy.Population-based cohort studies showed that long-term use of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) associated with higher GC risk after HP eradication, while aspirin and statins associated with lower risk.While diabetes mellitus conferred 73% higher GC risk, metformin use associated with 51% lower risk, effect of which was independent of glycemic control.Nonetheless, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NA-NSAIDs) are not associated with lower GC risk.CRC can still occur after initial colonoscopy in which no cancer was detected (i.e.PCCRC).Between 2005 and 2013, the rate of interval-type PCCRC-3y (defined as CRC diagnosed between 6 and 36 months of index colonoscopy which was negative for CRC) was 7.9% in Hong Kong, with >80% being distal cancers and higher cancer-specific mortality compared with detected CRC. Certain clinical and endoscopy-related factors were associated with PCCRC-3 risk.Medications shown to have chemopreventive effects on PCCRC include statins, NA-NSAIDs, and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors/angiotensin receptor blockers.

Introduction

The origin of the term 'big data' can be traced back to the 1990s and became more popular after it was used by John Mashey, the former chief scientist at Silicon Graphics. 1 Although there is no universally accepted definition of big data, the characteristics related to the data collection process, storage, processing, and analysis of the data have contributed to a more concrete understanding of the term.In 2001, Doug Laney described big data as having 3Vs: Volume (amount of storage space required for recording and storing data), Velocity (the speed of data generation and transformation), and Variety (diversification of data sources). 2From that point onward, several other traits have been added to the description such as variability, value, veracity, indexicality, relationality, scalability, exhaustivity (n = all), fine-grained resolution, and extensionality. 3he third Health Programme (2014-2020) from the Consumer, Health, Agriculture and Food Executive Agency (Chafea) authorized by the European Commission defined big data in health as the extensive datasets that are gathered regularly or automatically and electronically stored. 4The integration of big data with the existing databases repositioned the data to multipurpose level and is reusable to enhance health and healthcare system efficiency.Another factor to consider is the scale and complexity of the data that requires specialized analytical and statistical methods. 5The immense amount of data arises from not only the number of subjects but also the wide range of factors such as socioeconomic, clinical, environmental, lifestyle, biological, and omics at multiple time points.The sources of big data are myriad.Some of the examples in health setting are electronic medical records, biomarker data, medical images, pharmaceutical data, insurance claims, cohort study data, clinical trial data, omics data, administrative databases, social media, income statistics, environmental databases, mobile applications, telemedicine, and e-Health tools. 6ence, a systematic connection or "data fusion" is vital to integrate the various datasets to provide meaningful insights and valuable perspectives in health data interpretation across multiple nations or regions.In essence, big data analysis allows for subclassification of a disease entity (i.e.phenomapping), development of predictive risk models, public health, resource allocation, pharmacovigilance, drug repositioning or repurposing, 7 and drug precision medicine. 6,8,9n this review, we will demonstrate how to utilize the big data approach to conduct research on gastric cancer (GC) and colorectal cancer (CRC).We utilized our local territory-wide electronic healthcare database system, known as the Clinical Data Analysis and Reporting System (CDARS), managed by the Hong Kong Hospital Authority serving all public hospitals and clinics in Hong Kong with more than seven million population.This database captures various anonymized parameters, including demographic data, diagnosis, deaths, medication prescription and dispensing information, laboratory tests, hospital admissions, histology results, procedures, and operations.

Gastric cancer.GC is the fifth most common cancer and the third leading cause of cancer-related mortality in the worldwide. 10ast Asia accounts for approximately half of the new cases.The majority of GC patients are diagnosed at advanced stage with median survival of less than 1year. 11,12elicobacter pylori (HP) infection is the most important risk factor for development of GC, with a meta-analysis showing a 2.8-fold increase in risk. 13HP infection triggers and promotes the Correa's cascade, 14 starting from chronic gastritis to atrophic gastritis, intestinal metaplasia, dysplasia, and finally adenocarcinoma.Notably, atrophic gastritis, intestinal metaplasia, and dysplasia are considered to be precancerous lesions.Nevertheless, eradication of this inciting agent (HP) does not fully eliminate GC risk.A meta-analysis of seven randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of 8323 subjects concluded that eradication of HP reduced GC risk by 46% only. 15This is likely related to the development of precancerous lesions before HP eradication. 16,179][20] However, a prospective study with up to 10-year observation showed intestinal metaplasia might regress after a minimum of 3 years. 21Evidence from RCTs showed that among patients undergoing endoscopic resection for early gastric neoplasia, HP eradication could still reduce subsequent GC risk by half. 15owever, it remains unknown whether treating HP infection can reduce GC risk in older age groups who may have already developed precancerous lesions.By recruiting a cohort of 73 237 HPinfected subjects who had received eradication therapy, we showed that HP treatment was associated with a 18% lower risk of GC development in comparison with the age-and sex-matched general population (comprised of both HP-infected and noninfected subjects) among older subjects aged ≥60 years. 22he most prominent effect was observed at or beyond 10 years after eradication, in which the risk reduction was 58%.Our study findings echoed a long-term follow-up study of an RCT showing a 64% lower GC risk among HP-treated subjects aged ≥55 years. 16esearch on modifiable risk factors for GC after HP eradication is lacking.Increasing evidence has shown that certain medications may increase GC risk, while some reduce cancer risk.However, the majority of these studies included both HP-infected and HPnegative subjects, hence introducing significant bias.We identified a cohort of approximately 63 000 HP-eradicated subjects and investigated the effect of various medications, including proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), aspirin, non-aspirin nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NA-NSAIDs), statins, and metformin.

Proton pump inhibitors.PPIs worsen atrophic gastritis due to profound acid suppression, especially in the presence of HP infection. 23,24Furthermore, hypochlorhydria increases gastrin (with trophic effect on gastric mucosa), which in turn stimulates hyperplasia of enterochromaffin-like cells. 24We showed that PPI use (defined as at least weekly use) associated with a 2.4-fold higher GC risk even after HP eradication. 25A biological gradient was observed in terms of both frequency (hazard ratio [HR]: 2.43 for weekly to less than daily use and HR: 4.55 for daily use) and duration of PPI use (HR: 5.04, 6.65, and 8.3 for ≥1 year, ≥2 years, and ≥3 years, respectively).The incidence rate of GC was 8.1 and 2.9 per 10 000 person-years in the HP-eradicated PPI users and HP-eradicated PPI nonusers, respectively.To address confounding by indication, we recruited another cohort of PPI users without prior HP eradication therapy, and the GC incidence rate was 0.8 per 10 000 person-years.It thus appears that prior HP infection, rather than PPI use, is a more important determinant of GC risk; and PPI-associated GC risk is likely significant only in those with preexisting precancerous lesions.

Aspirin.Aspirin exerts its chemopreventive effect via both cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 and non-COX related pathways, including phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), 26,27 NF-κB, 28 Wnt-ßcatenin, extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), and activated protein1 (AP-1). 29Prior studies showed that the chemopreventive effect of aspirin only existed for HP-infected but not HP-negative subjects. 30,31We found that aspirin use (defined as at least weekly use) after HP eradication associated with a 70% lower GC risk. 32 biological gradient existed in terms of frequency, duration, and dose.The major hurdle to routine use of aspirin for chemoprevention is the side effect of upper gastrointestinal bleeding (UGIB).PPIs reduce UGIB risk but may be associated with higher GC risk.To address this clinical dilemma, we further analyzed the data and showed that PPI use associated with higher GC risk only in aspirin nonusers (HR: 3.73) but not aspirin users. 33Aspirin use likely negates the potential carcinogenic effect of PPIs in HP-eradicated subjects, and therefore, concomitant PPI use for aspirin users at high risk of UGIB is recommended.

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.Meta-analyses suggested a potential chemopreventive role of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in GC development, 34,35 but HP status was not taken into consideration.In addition, prior studies treated both aspirin and NA-NSAIDs as a single variable for exposure of interest.Time-dependent analysis was rarely performed to address immortal time bias, which may spuriously augment the chemopreventive effect of NA-NSAIDs. 36By addressing these limitations, we showed that NA-NSAIDs associated with lower GC risk only by time-fixed analysis (aHR: 0.65, 95% CI: 0.47-0.90),but not time-dependent analysis (aHR: 1.35, 95% CI: 0.97-1.87). 37Furthermore, an updated meta-analysis in our study showed that nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were not associated with lower GC risk, with a pooled adjusted risk ratio of 0.88 (95% CI: 0.77-1.01). 37atins.Statins were shown in in vitro studies to exert chemopreventive effects on solid organs by halting cell-cycle progression, 38 induction of apoptosis, 39 inhibiting angiogenesis, 40 and arresting tumor cell growth. 41In our HP-eradicated cohort, statins associated with a 66% lower GC risk, in a duration-and dose-response manner.For every 100 increase in cDDD of statins, the subdistribution HR was 0.90.3][44] This is likely because our study recruited subjects with prior HP infection who had higher baseline GC risk due to preexisting precancerous lesions.

Metformin.A meta-analysis of 17 studies reported a 19% higher GC risk when comparing diabetes mellitus (DM) subjects with non-DM subjects. 45Increased levels of insulin and insulin-growth factor (IGF) stimulate cell production, 46 and higher vascular endothelial growth factor level promotes angiogenesis. 47In addition, hyperglycemia has a direct effect on DNA damage. 48Among 46 460 HP-eradicated subjects, we showed that type II DM was an independent risk factor for GC with an adjusted HR of 1.73. 49There was a differential effect of DM on GC site (cardia: HR of 3.4 [95% CI: 1.45-7.97]vs non-cardia: HR of 1.53 [95% CI: 0.84-2.78]).HP eradication improves gastritis and restores gastric acid production and hence may worsen gastroesophageal reflux disease. 50his may explain the site-specific risk due to the interaction among DM, obesity, and gastroesophageal reflux disease on cardia GC development.Among DM patients, metformin may have anticancer effect due to insulin sensitization and AMP-activated protein kinase activation with subsequent inhibition of the mammalian target of rapamycin pathway. 51Metformin was reported to be associated with a 24% lower GC risk from a meta-analysis. 52However, a more recent met-analysis by Wang et al. showed that beneficial effect was only seen in studies that did not address immortal time bias. 53By utilizing our HP-eradicated cohort, we found that metformin use associated with a 51% lower GC risk, effect of which was independent of glycemic control. 54A biological gradient existed in terms of dose and duration (HR: 0.85, 95% CI: 0.74-0.96for every 1-year increase in use), with beneficial effect only observed among those who took metformin for three or more years.A similar beneficial effect was seen for both time-fixed analysis 54 and time-dependent analysis (by treating metformin as a time-varying variable). 55lorectal cancer.CRC was the third and second most common cancer in males and females, respectively.Although screening colonoscopy effectively reduces CRC incidence and mortality, CRC may still develop before the next recommended surveillance interval-a condition known as interval-type postcolonoscopy CRC (PCCRC).Up to 9% of all CRCs are PCCRCs. 56A meta-analysis showed that one in 27 CRCs was PCCRC, with a predilection for proximal colon (2.4 times more common than distal colon). 57Approximately 50% of PCCRC cases are due to missed lesions, 56 and therefore, PCCRC rate is one of the important indicators of colonoscopy service quality in detecting and preventing CRC. 58][61] The World Endoscopy Organization advocates the use of PCCRC rate for an interval of 3 years (PCCRC-3y), and PCCRC rate is calculated as [false negatives/(true positives + false negatives)].3][64][65][66] On the other hand, true positive (or "detected cancer") refers to CRC diagnosed at or within 6 months of colonoscopy, 58 based on the assumption that CRC suspected at the index procedure would be confirmed during this time interval. 62e utilized the CDARS to retrieve data of 197 902 patients aged ≥40 years who underwent colonoscopy between 2005 and 2017 and followed them till 2013.Exclusion criteria included prior CRC, prior colectomy, and inflammatory bowel disease.Our study provides important data of PCCRC in Asia, including epidemiology, predictive factors, and survival of PCCRC.There were 10 005 (5.1%) detected CRC and 854 (0.4%) PCCRC-3y cases.82.8% and 17.2% of PCCRC cases developed in distal and proximal colon, respectively.Between 2005 and 2013, the overall PCCRC-3y rate was 7.9%-similar to Western data ranging from 0.8% of all colonoscopies to 9% of all diagnosed CRCs. 56e observed that patients with PCCRC-3y were older than those with detected CRC (75.9 vs 72.0 years), and there was higher prevalence of proximal colon involvement (17.2% vs 9.8%).][64] Older age (adjusted odds ratio [aOR]:1.07),male (aOR: 1.45), polyp resection/biopsy at index colonoscopy (aOR: 3.97), prior history of colonic polyps (aOR: 1.31), index colonoscopy by surgical specialty (aOR: 1.53), and higher annual center colonoscopy volume (compared with quartile 1, aORs: 1.09, 1.50, and 1.83 for quartiles 2, 3, and 4, respectively) were risk factors for PCCRC-3y.As mentioned, incomplete polypectomy is one of the risk factors of PCCRC. 67While risk of interval cancer decreases with higher procedure volume of individual endoscopist, 64,68 a higher center endoscopy volume may imply a shorter procedure duration with higher chance of missed lesions.We demonstrated a worse cancer-specific survival in patients with PCCRC-3y than those with detected CRC (5-year cancer-specific survival rate: 57.7% vs 66.8%) with an aHR of 1.32.Data are conflicting among different studies with some reporting better survival of PCCRC, 62 while others showed no difference. 69,70This could be related to the different prevalence of distal and proximal colon involvement in various studies.Interval CRC in proximal colon is more often associated with aberrant methylation and microsatellite instability 62 and hence better survival than microsatellite-stable CRC. 71,72tudies have shown that statins and NA-NSAIDs have chemopreventive effects against CRC.A systematic review concluded that NA-NSAIDs reduced the risk of colorectal adenoma and CRC. 73Possible mechanisms include inhibition of prostaglandin (PG) synthesis, 74 tumor angiogenesis and proliferation, 75 and epidermal growth factor receptor signaling. 76[79][80] On the other hand, whether angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) are oncoprotective or carcinogenic remains a topic of heated debate.[81][82][83][84] However, to our best knowledge, population-based studies focusing on the chemopreventive role of statins, NA-NSAIDs, and ACEIs/ARBs in PCCRC are lacking.

From our territory-wide cohort of more than 180 000 subjects, we showed that statin use (defined as cumulative use for ≥90 days within 5 years before index colonoscopy) was associated with a 28% lower risk of PCCRC-3y in a dose-dependent manner (7% reduction for every 100 increase in cDDD).This effect existed for proximal (SHR: 0.50, 95% CI: 0.28-0.91)but not distal colon (SHR: 0.80, 95% CI: 0.59-1.09).As a higher percentage of proximal CRCs arise from serrated pathway (from which adenoma progression to cancer is much faster than the adenoma-carcinoma sequence), future studies on whether statins prevent PCCRC via targeting the serrated polyp pathway are warranted.We further showed that statin users had fewer advanced adenomas than statin nonusers, but not non-advanced adenomas.Statins inhibit HMG-CoA reductase, which results in reduced expression of carcinogenic intermediates from mevalonate pathway known to mediate the later stage of adenoma-carcinoma progression (i.e.neoplastic transformation of adenomas and cancer progression rather than adenoma development). 85e found that NA-NSAID use (defined as cumulative use for ≥90 days within 5 years before index colonoscopy) associated with a 47% lower risk of PCCRC-3y, with beneficial effect being observed for both proximal and distal colon (52% and 45% reduction in risk, respectively). 86A duration-and frequency-response relationship was also demonstrated.Prior studies showed that NA-NSAIDs inhibited the growth of preexisting neoplastic lesions (either missed lesions or incompletely resected lesions during colonoscopy). 75,76,87Interestingly, we could not observe a protective effect of aspirin on PCCRC-3y development.A network meta-analysis also showed that NA-NSAIDS were more effective than low-dose and high-dose aspirin in the prevention of advanced metachronous colorectal adenoma and/or CRC within 3-5 years of prior colorectal neoplasia (odds ratio: 0.37 and 0.71 for NA-NSAIDs and aspirin, respectively). 88Aspirin is more selective for COX-1 inhibition rather than COX2 inhibition, which has a more important role in chemopreventive effects. 89,90In addition, chemopreventive effects of NA-NSAIDs on CRC exist even with shorter duration of use, 73 while aspirin use for at least 5 years with a latency of 10 years or more is needed to prevent CRC from post hoc analysis of prospective cohort studies and RCTs. 91,92All these evidence suggests that NA-NSAIDS are more potent than aspirin to prevent CRC, in particular PCCRC.

We showed that ACEI/ARB use was associated with a 22% lower risk of PCCRC-3y. 93For every year increase in ACEI/ARB use, there was a 5% PCCRC-3y risk reduction.The beneficial effect was more prominent for distal colon (aHR: 0.77) but nonsignificant for proximal colon (aHR: 0.83).Calcium channel blockers (dihydropyridine and non-dihydropyridine) and diuretics (loop diuretics, thiazide diuretics, aldosterone antagonists, and potassium-sparing diuretics), used as negative control exposures, 94 were not shown to have significant association with PCCRC-3y risk, hence ruling out significant residual/unmeasured confounding.Angiotensin II stimulates neovascularization, 95 cell proliferation, and tumor growth 96,97 and fosters PKC-dependent ERK activation, 98 which in turn transduce mitogenic signals-related DNA synthesis and cell division in intestinal epithelial cells.


Conclusion

In the era of digitalized healthcare research, big data presents a valuable opportunity to conduct research by merging different data sources in a swift and cost-effective manner.Big data should be leveraged to converting routine clinical data into various purposes to enhance both individual and public health.
 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology 39 (2024) 1027-1032 © 2024 The Authors. Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology published by Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

The origins of 'big data': an etymological detective story. S Lohr, 

3D data management: controlling data volume, velocity and variety. D Laney, ad949-3D-Data-Management-Controlling-Data-Volume-Velocity-and-Variety. META Group Research Note

What makes big data, big data? Exploring the ontological characteristics of 26 datasets. R Kitchin, G Mcardle, Big Data Soc2016

European Comission. Study on big data in public health, telemedicine and mealthcare. Health and Food Executive Agency (Chafea). December 2016Consumer

A systematic review of techniques and sources of big data in the healthcare sector. S G Alonso, D I De La Torre, J. Med. Syst. 411832017

Peyrin-Biroulet L. Big data in IBD: a look into the future. P Olivera, S Danese, N Jay, G Natoli, Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2019

The influence of big (clinical) data and genomics on precision medicine and drug development. J C Denny, S L Van Driest, W Q Wei, Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 1032018

A review of approaches to identifying patient phenotype cohorts using electronic health records. C Shivade, P Raghavan, E Fosler-Lussier, J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 212014

Urbanization and the gut microbiota in health and inflammatory bowel disease. T Zuo, M A Kamm, J F Colombel, S C Ng, Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 152018

Global Cancer Observatory. Internal agency for research on cancer. 

Current questions for the treatment of advanced gastric cancer. A Cervantes, D Roda, N Tarazona, S Roselló, J A Pérez-Fidalgo, Cancer Treat. Rev. 392013

Gastric cancer. E Van Cutsem, X Sagaert, B Topal, Lancet. 3882016

Helicobacter pylori infection and gastric cardia cancer: systematic review and metaanalysis. M Cavaleiro-Pinto, B Peleteiro, N Lunet, H Barros, Cancer Causes Control. 222011

The future of gastric cancer prevention. P Correa, M B Piazuelo, M C Camargo, Gastric Cancer. 72004

Helicobacter pylori eradication therapy to prevent gastric cancer: systematic review and meta-analysis. A C Ford, Y Yuan, P Moayyedi, Gut. 692020

Helicobacter pylori eradication to prevent gastric cancer in a high-risk region of China: a randomized controlled trial. B C Wong, S K Lam, W M Wong, JAMA. 2912004

Helicobacter pylori eradication cannot reduce the risk of gastric cancer in patients with intestinal metaplasia and dysplasia: evidence from a meta-analysis. H N Chen, Z Wang, X Li, Z G Zhou, Gastric Cancer. 192016

Helicobacter pylori eradication improves gastric histology and decreases serum gastrin, pepsinogen I and pepsinogen II levels in patients with duodenal ulcer. S I Pimanov, E V Makarenko, A V Voropaeva, M E Matveenko, E V Voropaev, J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 232008

The long-term impact of Helicobacter pylori eradication on gastric histology: a systematic review and meta-analysis. T Rokkas, D Pistiolas, P Sechopoulos, I Robotis, G Margantinis, Helicobacter. 122007

Effect of eradication of Helicobacter pylori on the histology and cellular phenotype of gastric intestinal metaplasia. J Watari, K K Das, P S Amenta, Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 62008

Reversibility of atrophic gastritis and intestinal metaplasia after Helicobacter pylori eradication -a prospective study for up to 10 years. Y J Hwang, N Kim, H S Lee, Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 472018

Effects of Helicobacter pylori treatment on incidence of gastric cancer in older individuals. W K Leung, Iol Wong, K S Cheung, Gastroenterology. 1552018

Atrophic gastritis and Helicobacter pylori infection in patients with reflux esophagitis treated with omeprazole or fundoplication. E J Kuipers, L Lundell, E C Klinkenberg-Knol, N. Engl. J. Med. 3341996

Systematic review: the effects of long-term proton pump inhibitor use on serum gastrin levels and gastric histology. L Lundell, M Vieth, F Gibson, P Nagy, P J Kahrilas, Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 422015

Long-term proton pump inhibitors and risk of gastric cancer development after treatment for Helicobacter pylori: a population-based study. K S Cheung, E W Chan, Ays Wong, L Chen, Ick Wong, W K Leung, Gut. 672018

Chemoprevention of gastrointestinal malignancies with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. N J Shaheen, W L Straus, R S Sandler, Cancer. 942002

Aspirin and non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs for cancer prevention: an international consensus statement. J Cuzick, F Otto, J A Baron, Lancet Oncol. 102009

Sulindac inhibits activation of the NF-kappaB pathway. Y Yamamoto, M J Yin, K M Lin, R B Gaynor, J. Biol. Chem. 2741999

Aspirin and Cancer. P Patrignani, C Patrono, J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 682016

Aspirin protects against gastric cancer: results of a case-control study from Moscow, Russia. D Zaridze, E Borisova, D Maximovitch, V Chkhikvadze, Int. J. Cancer. 821999

Aspirin and risk for gastric cancer: a population-based case-control study in Sweden. K Akre, A M Ekstrom, L B Signorello, Br. J. Cancer. 842001

Aspirin and risk of gastric cancer after Helicobacter pylori eradication: a territory-wide study. K S Cheung, E W Chan, Ays Wong, J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 2018

Modification of gastric cancer risk associated with proton pump inhibitors by aspirin after Helicobacter pylori eradication. K S Cheung, W K Leung, Oncotarget. 92018

Meta-analysis on the relationship between nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use and gastric cancer. W Tian, Y Zhao, S Liu, X Li, Eur. J. Cancer Prev. 192010

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug use and the risk of gastric cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. W H Wang, J Q Huang, G F Zheng, S K Lam, J Karlberg, B C Wong, J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 952003

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and risk of gastric and oesophageal adenocarcinomas: results from a cohort study and a meta-analysis. C C Abnet, N D Freedman, F Kamangar, M F Leitzmann, A R Hollenbeck, A Schatzkin, Br. J. Cancer. 1002009

Nonaspirin nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and gastric cancer risk after Helicobacter pylori eradication: A territory-wide study. B Li, K S Cheung, I Y Wong, W K Leung, S Law, Cancer. 1272021

Synchronization of tumor and normal cells from G1 to multiple cell cycles by lovastatin. K Keyomarsi, L Sandoval, V Band, A B Pardee, Cancer Res. 511991

Microarray and biochemical analysis of lovastatin-induced apoptosis of squamous cell carcinomas. J Dimitroulakos, W H Marhin, J Tokunaga, Neoplasia. 42002

3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors interfere with angiogenesis by inhibiting the geranylgeranylation of RhoA. H J Park, D Kong, L Iruela-Arispe, U Begley, D Tang, J B Galper, Circ. Res. 912002

3-hydroxy-3-methylglutarylcoenzyme a reductase inhibitors reduce human pancreatic cancer cell invasion and metastasis. T Kusama, M Mukai, T Iwasaki, Gastroenterology. 1222002

Statins are associated with a reduced risk of gastric cancer: a population-based case-control study. H F Chiu, S C Ho, C C Chang, T N Wu, C Y Yang, Am. J. Gastroenterol. 1062011

Incidence of cancer and statin usage--record linkage study. J Haukka, R Sankila, T Klaukka, Int. J. Cancer. 1262010

Pravastatin use and cancer risk: a meta-analysis of individual patient data from long-term prospective controlled trials in Japan. Y Matsushita, M Sugihara, J Kaburagi, Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 192010

Pre-existing diabetes mellitus increases the risk of gastric cancer: a meta-analysis. J M Yoon, K Y Son, C S Eom, D Durrance, S M Park, World J. Gastroenterol. 192013

Insulin and insulin-like growth factor signalling in neoplasia. M Pollak, Nat. Rev. Cancer. 82008

Correlation between expression of vascular endothelial growth factor and tumor vascularity, and patient outcome in human gastric carcinoma. N Tanigawa, H Amaya, M Matsumura, T Shimomatsuya, J. Clin. Oncol. 151997

High glucose induces DNA damage in cultured human endothelial cells. M Lorenzi, D F Montisano, S Toledo, A Barrieux, J. Clin. Invest. 771986

Diabetes increases risk of gastric cancer after Helicobacter pylori eradication: a territory-wide study with propensity score analysis. K S Cheung, E W Chan, L Chen, W K Seto, Ick Wong, W K Leung, Diabetes Care. 422019

High incidence of reflux oesophagitis after eradication therapy for Helicobacter pylori: impacts of hiatal hernia and corpus gastritis. H Hamada, K Haruma, M Mihara, Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 142000

Metformin: taking away the candy for cancer?. M Jalving, J A Gietema, J D Lefrandt, Eur. J. Cancer. 462010

Association between metformin and the risk of gastric cancer in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis of cohort studies. X L Zhou, W H Xue, X F Ding, Oncotarget. 2017

Immortal time bias exaggerates the effect of metformin on the risk of gastric cancer: a meta-analysis. Y Wang, L M Tan, L Luo, Pharmacol. Res. 1651054252021

Metformin use and gastric cancer risk in diabetic patients after Helicobacter pylori eradication. K S Cheung, E W Chan, Ays Wong, J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 1112019

Response to Khosrow-Khavar, Kurteva, and Douros. K S Cheung, W K Leung, J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 11111092019

Definition and taxonomy of interval colorectal cancers: a proposal for standardising nomenclature. S Sanduleanu, C M Le Clercq, E Dekker, Gut. 642015

Prevalence, risk factors, and outcomes of interval colorectal cancers: a systematic review and meta-analysis. S Singh, P P Singh, M H Murad, H Singh, J N Samadder, Am. J. Gastroenterol. 1092014

World Endoscopy Organization consensus statements on post-colonoscopy and post-imaging colorectal cancer. M D Rutter, I Beintaris, R Valori, Gastroenterology. 2018

Sessile serrated adenomas/polyps with cytologic dysplasia: a triple threat for interval cancer. N G Burgess, N J Tutticci, M Pellise, M J Bourke, Gastrointest. Endosc. 802014

CIMP status of interval colon cancers: another piece to the puzzle. M A Arain, M Sawhney, S Sheikh, Am. J. Gastroenterol. 1052010

Hyperplastic-like colon polyps that preceded microsatellite-unstable adenocarcinomas. N S Goldstein, P Bhanot, E Odish, S Hunter, Am. J. Clin. Pathol. 1192003

Characteristics of missed or interval colorectal cancer and patient survival: a population-based study. N J Samadder, K Curtin, T M Tuohy, Gastroenterology. 1462014

Prevalence and predictors of interval colorectal cancers in medicare beneficiaries. G S Cooper, F Xu, Barnholtz Sloan, J S Schluchter, M D Koroukian, S M , Cancer. 1182012

Analysis of administrative data finds endoscopist quality measures associated with postcolonoscopy colorectal cancer. N N Baxter, R Sutradhar, S S Forbes, L F Paszat, R Saskin, L Rabeneck, Gastroenterology. 1402011

Rate and predictors of early/missed colorectal cancers after colonoscopy in Manitoba: a population-based study. H Singh, Z Nugent, A A Demers, C N Bernstein, Am. J. Gastroenterol. 1052010

Rates of new or missed colorectal cancers after colonoscopy and their risk factors: a population-based analysis. B Bressler, L F Paszat, Z Chen, D M Rothwell, C Vinden, L Rabeneck, Gastroenterology. 1322007

Incomplete polyp resection during colonoscopy-results of the complete adenoma resection (CARE) study. H Pohl, A Srivastava, S P Bensen, e1Gastroenterology. 1442013

Incidence of interval colorectal cancer attributable to an endoscopist in clinical practice. F U Ertem, U Ladabaum, A Mehrotra, Gastrointest. Endosc. 882018e1

Mortality from postscreening (interval) colorectal cancers is comparable to that from cancer in unscreened patients-a randomized sigmoidoscopy trial. H C Jodal, M Loberg, O Holme, Gastroenterology. 1552018e3

Features of postcolonoscopy colorectal cancer and survival times of patients in Korea. J M Cha, H S Kim, M S Kwak, Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2018

Colorectal carcinomas in MUTYH-associated polyposis display histopathological similarities to microsatellite unstable carcinomas. M Nielsen, N F De Miranda, M Van Puijenbroek, BMC Cancer. 91842009

Microsatellite instability is a favorable prognostic indicator in patients with colorectal cancer receiving chemotherapy. A Hemminki, J P Mecklin, H Jarvinen, Gastroenterology. 1192000

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors for primary prevention of colorectal cancer: a systematic review prepared for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. A Rostom, C Dube, G Lewin, Ann. Intern. Med. 1462007

Effects of long-term sulindac therapy on colonic polyposis. J Rigau, J M Pique, E Rubio, Ann. Intern. Med. 1151991

Cyclooxygenase-2 and epidermal growth factor receptor: pharmacologic targets for chemoprevention. A J Dannenberg, S M Lippman, J R Mann, K Subbaramaiah, R N Dubois, J. Clin. Oncol. 232005

Prostaglandin E2 stimulates the growth of colon cancer cells via induction of amphiregulin. J Shao, S B Lee, H Guo, B M Evers, H Sheng, Cancer Res. 632003

Combination of atorvastatin and celecoxib synergistically induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in colon cancer cells. H Xiao, Q Zhang, Y Lin, B S Reddy, C S Yang, Int. J. Cancer. 1222008

Statin use and the risk of colorectal adenoma: a meta-analysis. Y S Jung, C H Park, C S Eun, D I Park, D S Han, J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 312016

Statins and the risk of colorectal cancer: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis of 40 studies. T Lytras, G Nikolopoulos, S Bonovas, World J. Gastroenterol. 202014

Association between statin use and colorectal cancer risk: a meta-analysis of 42 studies. Y Liu, W Tang, J Wang, Cancer Causes Control. 252014

Effects of candesartan on mortality and morbidity in patients with chronic heart failure: the CHARM-Overall programme. M A Pfeffer, K Swedberg, C B Granger, Lancet. 3622003

Angiotensin receptor blockers and risk of cancer: cohort study among people receiving antihypertensive drugs in UK General Practice Research Database. K Bhaskaran, I Douglas, S Evans, T Van Staa, L Smeeth, BMJ. 344e26972012

Angiotensinreceptor blockade and risk of cancer: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. I Sipahi, S M Debanne, D Y Rowland, D I Simon, J C Fang, Lancet Oncol. 112010

Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and risk of lung cancer: population based cohort study. B M Hicks, K B Filion, H Yin, L Sakr, J A Udell, L Azoulay, BMJ. 36342092018

Statins and colorectal cancer. P Lochhead, A T Chan, Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 112013

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs but not aspirin are associated with a lower risk of post-colonoscopy colorectal cancer. K S Cheung, L Chen, E W Chan, W K Seto, Ick Wong, W K Leung, Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 512020

Colorectal cancer prevention by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: effects of dosage and timing. J P Collet, C Sharpe, E Belzile, J F Boivin, J Hanley, L Abenhaim, Br. J. Cancer. 811999

Chemoprevention of colorectal cancer in individuals with previous colorectal neoplasia: systematic review and network meta-analysis. P S Dulai, S Singh, E Marquez, BMJ. 35561882016

Aspirin as prophylaxis against colorectal cancer. A J Marcus, N. Engl. J. Med. 3331995

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use and protection against colorectal cancer in women. M J Reeves, P A Newcomb, A Trentham-Dietz, Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 51996

British Doctors Aspirin Trial and the UK-TIA Aspirin Trial. Effect of aspirin on long-term risk of colorectal cancer: consistent evidence from randomised and observational studies. E Flossmann, P M Rothwell, Lancet. 3692007

Aspirin dose and duration of use and risk of colorectal cancer in men. A T Chan, E L Giovannucci, J A Meyerhardt, E S Schernhammer, K Wu, C S Fuchs, Gastroenterology. 1342008

ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitors/angiotensin receptor blockers are associated with lower colorectal cancer risk: a territory-wide study with propensity score analysis. K S Cheung, E W Chan, W K Seto, Ick Wong, W K Leung, Hypertension. 762020

Negative controls: a tool for detecting confounding and bias in observational studies. M Lipsitch, Tchetgen Tchetgen, E Cohen, T , Epidemiology. 212010

Neovascularization produced by angiotensin II. L A Fernandez, J Twickler, A Mead, J. Lab. Clin. Med. 1051985

Induction of angiogenesis during the transition from hyperplasia to neoplasia. J Folkman, K Watson, D Ingber, D Hanahan, Nature. 3391989

Angiotensin II induces smooth muscle cell proliferation in the normal and injured rat arterial wall. M J Daemen, D M Lombardi, F T Bosman, S M Schwartz, Circ. Res. 681991

ANG II stimulates PKC-dependent ERK activation, DNA synthesis, and cell division in intestinal epithelial cells. T Chiu, C Santiskulvong, E Rozengurt, Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 2852003