2E0C7705BF8EF50D03B6E6D26998355D


with the very flat posterior segment said to be so characteristic of the " male " or " android " pelvis.

Influence of Environment.-Theinodence of flat P^es a 1 & small women in this series, approximately one in confirmed by further routing X-ray prTportL was 5 ft.I in. in height attending the clinic.The same p p ' pH If this pelvic shape is a found in the next 200 eases exarmn ^ Moloy suggested, it should normal " growth variant as Caldw wQmen Smce> in surely be found as often among tall .among small women, fact, a flat pelvis occurs much more'?? for b pelvic flattening some common factor must be found rupiv to be environmental, and short stature and this factor is most 1 small, there is no proof Even although her parents may a so Heredity only deter- that the stature of a small woman is in environment determines mines the potentials of an individual, w ^ probable that in some how far these potentials are achieved.environment has pre- families at least the same type of un av .vented full growth in both parents an o> sp ghow that environ-There is sufficient evidence in t e i ^ one the most Rental factors, of which nutrition mus hd ht and state of health.

lrnportant, can have a marked eltect of Tapanese immi- As an example, Shapiro 7 showed t ^t e were much taller grants to Hawaii, with an improved stanaaru than their blood relatives bred in Japan.

^ families at different Only a few clinical surveys have een .and stature which income levels, but these show differences 1 ^ 8 surveying groups of could have been anticipated.In !945> Round .

.

.All the remainder.

Jt should be noted (ha, the use of such limited precise shape of the pelvic brim.Nevertheless m ^ rulC;

^rtainly the shape of the ?android " posterior segment, for example, , be inferred from the use of the term " scutiform.Sagittal index 30 per cent, or less with brim index of between 81 and 104 per cent.

Round .

. .

All the remainder.

It should be noted that the use of such limited measurements will not clearly indicate he Precise shape of the pelvic brim.Nevertheless in practice the " android " shape and certainly the shape of the " android " posterior segment, for example, can, as a general rule, e inferred from the use of the term " scutiform." 26per cent, of the hospital class came into this category.Most of the private patients belonged to the Registrar-General's Social Classes I and II, and the hospital patients to Social Classes III, IV and V The Registrar-General's classification is based on the occupation the husband.Social Class I includes the professional classes, Social-Class III the skilled workers, and Social Class V the unskilled workers 'r Classes II and IV are intermediate.Although the classification i& somewhat arbitrary it has proved highly valid and gives a useful index of the variation in living standards within a community.In Baird's series, the private patients were considered to be of better physique than the hospital patients, and within the latter group a detailed physical examination showed that taller women as a group were healthier than the small.

If environment were to be assessed accurately, a prolonged study over many years of individuals, their diets, housing conditions and all the other factors which serve to make up environment, would be necessary.Failing this a useful assessment should be obtained by (1) noting the place of upbringing, the father's occupation and social class, and the number of other children in the parents' household.

(2) studying the end result of environmental influences, e.g. the present physical state of the individual, which is unlikely to vary very   much, since most people tend to live their adult life under conditions analogous to those of their upbringing.

In this series, as had been expected, more of the small women had grown up in poorer parts of the city and in larger families than had the tall women.In Table II the Social Class of the patient's father and the average size of the family of upbringing are compared.Only 4 of the small women came from Social Classes I and II.The average number of children in the family of upbringing was 2*5.The rest came from Social Classes III, IV and V, with a size of family averaging 5'5- Eighteen of the tall women were from Social Classes I and II, and the average number of children in their families was 2-9.The remainder from Social Classes III, IV and V came from families averaging 3*6* While social data was not obtainable from all patients these figures leave no doubt that more tall women than small women came from the the shape and size of the FEMALE PELVIS 5 higher social classes and from considerably smaller families.In the lower income groups the larger the family the worse the environment, and the majority of the small women had grown up in such c^rcumstances.

As already stated each woman was examined clinically before being X-rayed ; she was placed in one of two grades according to whether ner state of physical well-being was judged to be superior or inferior.

n general terms a patient of superior physique (Grade I) has a healthy aPpearance and good colour, is well proportioned and is neither under nor over-weight ; her skin has a healthy bloom, and her teeth, gums, hair and nails are in good condition.A woman failing to meet these standards is classed as of inferior physique (Grade II).

In this series only 19 of the 100 small women were graded superior as opposed to 76 of the 100 tall women.

It has been suggested that preconceived ideas may have resulted a. tendency to grade tall women as good and small women as poor.From the outset I was thoroughly alive to this possibility, and strove assess each patient on her general physique without respect to height.

The following correlation between this rather rough physical grading and pelvic form would appear to show that the effort must have been f?r the most part successful.

Physique and Pelvic Shape.?Table III shows the relationship between physical grade, height and pelvic shape.In both tall and small groups those women graded as physically inferior show an increased OBST.

A 2 incidence of the abnormal pelvic shapes, the flat and scutiform and proportionally less round or narrow.Of course some abnormal pelves were also found amongst the women graded as physically superior, but a comparison of the degree of flattening in these pelves as gauged by the brim index showed that pelvic flattening is much less marked amongst these women of better physique.

In order to measure varying degrees of difference in the shape of the pelvic brim three main indices were adopted as follows :?

. ., antero-posterior diameter

(1) The brim index X 100 per cent.; widest transverse diameter this provides a broad indication of the curvature of the brim as a whole.

(2) The sagittal index antero-posterior diameter of posterior segment antero-posterior diameter of brim A low index indicates that the posterior segment is relatively flat and in practice absolutely flat in most cases.

(3) An index I have called the posterior sagittal-transverse index.This expresses the ratio of the posterior sagittal diameter to the widest transverse diameter as a percentage.As this index relates the depth of the posterior segment to its width, it provides a more accurate assessment of the curvature of the posterior brim segment than does the sagittal index and is thus a more sensitive means of measuring flattening of that segment.

Table IV shows the mean values of each of these indices in the two groups of women classified by physique.Each index is less in the True conjugate diameter . .12-1 cm.

12-9 cm.True conjugate diameter . .12-1 cm.

12-9 cm.43-0 per cent.39-0 per cent.

12-7 cm.13-0 cm.43-0 per cent.39-0 per cent.

12-7 cm.13-0 cm.

Women of poor physique than in those of good physique and this means that in both small and tall women, the pelvic brim as a whole and the posterior segment in particular is more flattened in the women of poorer development.

Physique and Pelvic Size.?Poor general growth affects not only the shape of the pelvic brim but also its size.This is best shown by a consideration of two of the most practically useful indices of the actual capacity of the brim?the brim area and the true conjugate diameter.

Table V compares the mean values of these two measurements in both height groups in relation to physical grade.The trend is the same as in the previous table.Not only is there a very marked difference Jn capacity between the " tall " and the " small " but inside each group the pelvic brims of women of good physique are more spacious than those of inferior physique.

A knowledge of the brim area is a useful guide to the possible outcome of labour although its value is limited by other variables such as the size and position of the foetal head and the strength of the forces.It would appear from a study of the literature that the figure for a normal " pelvis lies somewhere between 110 to 130 sq.cm.The mean value in the group of small women of poor physique is 106 sq.cm.While even in the small women of superior physique it is just on the  borderline of normal with a mean value of 109-9 scl-cm- P?int of fact 27 of these small women had a pelvic brim area of below 100 sq.cm. and 8 an area of below 90 sq.cm.Since difficulties in labour due to disproportion occur quite often when the area is below 100 sq.cm., if the infant is of average size or more, many of these small women would be candidates for difficult labour, but fortunately many of them produce small babies.

On the other hand, in the tall women the mean brim area of 137-6 Sclcm. is well above the " normal " range, in no case being less than Ho sq.cm., while it was less than 120 sq.cm. in only 8 instances.With such a brim capacity, even if the infant were large, there should be no mechanical difficulty at the brim unless the true conjugate diameter were small.This was, however, not the case.Only 6 out of the 100 tall women were found to have a true conjugate diameter of less than 11 -4 cm.(4^ ins.), a measurement which is nowadays con- sidered " normal."

In all but one of the 6, the measurement was> 11 ? 1 cm.(4-4 ins.) and in the single case 10-5 cm.(4*2 ins.) a measure- ment which used to be considered by many as normal.In the small women, the average measurement of 11 -oi cm.(or very nearly 4-4 ins.) for the conjugate diameter in those women of good physique would seem reasonably satisfactory from the practical point of view.In the small women of poor physique, however, the true conjugate diameter measured actually below 10 cm.(3-9 ins.) in 21 cases, and in each the pelvis was flat.It would therefore appear that small women have small pelves which are also often flat, and in the women of poor physique the number with flat pelves is much increased.In tall women, the pelvic brim is large and well curved, but in those of inferior physique flattening also occurs, although to a much less marked degree than in small women.It would seem as though there was a maximum " normal " height for human races and the nearer the actual height of an individual approaches this " ceiling " the less is there likely to be any defect of growth and thus of flattening of the pelvis.

HormonalInfluences.?It has been suggested by Caldwell and Moloy and others that flattening of the posterior segment, especially when associated with an angulated forepelvis, is due to the effect of a male hormone influence ; hence the term android pelvis.In a series of pelves they classified 2-6 per cent, as flat and 32*5 per cent, as android, and these were described as normal growth variants.Since the android pelvis was found to be frequently associated with difficult labour, it would seem more probable that this pelvic shape is not a normal but literally an abnormal growth variant.

In Aberdeen, during the last decade, it has been the routine practice to carry out X-ray pelvimetry whenever there has been any difficulty in labour.In spite of this only a few examples have been seen of a pelvic brim which could be considered typically android in shape.If, as has been suggested, this type of pelvis is associated with difficult labour in from 20 to 30 per cent, of cases, then many more should have beeni seen.

Of course visual impressions do vary and it may be that a shape some call android we describe as flat, and vice versa?nevertheless, a really triangular shape is rarely seen in this clinic.Caldwell and Moloy have included very few actual measurements in their publications.Those published referred to the original series of dried museum specimens upon which their classification is based.One of the most significant features of these is the low value given for the true conjugate diameter in the android pelvis, 10-7 cm.(4-2 ins.) and in the flat pelvis 8*4 cm.(3-3 ins.).It would seem probable that these museum specimens were almost certain to have been obtained from the poorer Undernourished classes and if so these values are not surprising.

Certainly a measurement as low as 8-4 cm.would only be seen in this country in women with definite clinical evidence of stunted growth.

In view of difficulties in classification based on visual impressions of brim shape, Steele and Javert 9 tried to reduce the Caldwell and Moloy classification to terms of measurement by the use of special indices.They based their suggested ranges of measurement for the different pelvic types on a series of 1000 radiographs.It is rather S1gnificant that they also suggest a low measurement for the length of the conjugate diameter (obstetric) in both the " android " and the flat pelves?10-2cm.(4 ins.) for a pure " android," 10*9 cm.(4-3 ins.) f?r a mixed " android " and IO-6 cm.(4*2 ins.) for the flat pelvis.

Using 10-5 cm. as the dividing line between normal and contracted Pelves they found that over 80 per cent, of the " normal " pelves in their series were either gynsecoid or anthropoid in shape whilst nearly half the " contracted " pelves were either platypelloid or android.In fact they concluded that size may be useful clinically as a fairly accurate means of predicting pelvic shape.In the light of this evidence *t is difficult to see how platypelloid and " android " pelves can be classed as " normal " growth variants.Moreover, since the average male is taller than the average female, the effect of any postulated male hormonal influence might be expected to be found more often among tall women, but in fact such women as a group have large and well curved pelves.

All evidence seems to point to the fact that any pelvis with a large true conjugate diameter is very seldom flat or " android " in shape.It seems logical to believe that the " android " shape is only a modi- fication of the flat shape and that both are due to the same cause, stunted growth.


Males

It had long been accepted that the male pelvic brim is typically android " in shape until the work of Thorns10 and of Ince and Young11 cast considerable doubt on this belief.In their series they found that the brim shape was most frequently round.In the light of their work Jt was considered that the android shape was probably as abnormal !n men as it is in women, brought about by the same influences, poor growth.

A somewhat similar investigation was therefore carried out in males.All male medical students attending the anatomy class of Aberdeen University were studied on the assumption that they would represent a group of healthy men, bred in a good environment.Physical assessment and X-ray pelvimetry were carried out in the same manner as in the Women.

The following is a consideration of some of the results found in the first 100 students studied.

The distribution of the various shapes of pelvic brim amongst these students is shown in Table VI.The round pelvis was found in 80 per cent, of cases and in fact only 3 scutiform pelves and 7 flat pelves were found, i.e.only 10 pelves showed flattening of any degree.These findings are in very fair agreement with those of Thorns, who examined 69 students and came to the conclusion that the male pelvic brim showed the same variations as the female, each occurring with much the same frequency.Figs.2b and 3b are radiographs showing the typical shapes of the pelvic brim found amongst the majority of these Aberdeen medical students.These shapes closely resemble those seen amongst the tall females (Figs.ia and 3a).

The high proportion of round and narrow (or long oval) pelves amongst the students probably results from good environment during growth.As one would expect, 70 per cent, of these medical students came from families in Social Classes I and II.The family of upbringing averaged only 2*9, even in the case of students from Classes III, IV and V.As a group they were tall, the average height being 5 ft.gb ins., and their physique was good.Table VII shows that 79 per cent, were graded I.There were only 6 under 5 ft. 6ins. in height, but even these belonged to Grade I. Since there were obviously few small men among the students, I looked amongst the less well-do-do classes for men under 5 ft. 6ins. in height.To date, 39 men in this category have been examined, recruited from varying sources?husbands of hospital patients, factory workers, and soldiers from the local barracks, all from Social Classes III, IV and V. Most of these men were actually under  7>"4 Pcr cent.32-0 per cent.

29-5 pcr cent.9-4 cm.9-0 cm.

Height .


Physical grade

Pelvic brim index .


Sagittal index

True conjugate diameter 78-2 per cent.

22-4 per cent.25-5 per cent.10-4 cm.9-0 cm.

Figs. 6a and 6b.

6a (Mrs M.) 6b (Mr M.) Height .In the vast majority of cases where flattening of the pelvis of a less marked degree {vide 1gs. 4 and 5) was present there was no evidence of rickets on clinical examination or in radiographs of the skull and long bones.True conjugate diameter .9-4 cm.9-0 cm.True conjugate diameter .

. .10-4 cm.9-0 cm.

Figs. 6a and 6b.

6a (Mrs M.) 6b (Mr M.) Height 4 ft.Si ins.q ft.oj in.7-1 cm.

In the vast majority of cases where flattening of the pelvis of a less marked degree {vide "gs. 4 and 5) was present there was no evidence of rickets on clinical examination or in radiographs of the skull and long bones.


Physical grade

Pelvic brim index Sagittal index True coniugate diameter THE SHAPE AND SIZE OF THE FEMALE PELVIS u Jn height, which for a man is very small indeed.The average size ?f the family of upbringing was 5*5, the same as in the comparable group of small women.

Table VIII shows the incidence of the pelvic types amongst these 39 men.Forty-one per cent, had a flat pelvic brim and 13 per cent, a scutiform, i.e. 21men or 54 per cent, showed evidence of flattening of the pelvis, a far higher proportion than occurred among the students.

Thirty-one out of the 39, or 80 per cent., were graded as of inferior Physique (Grade II).Some of the poorest physical types were found among the soldiers.These men had been recruited into the artillery, and their medical officer stated that when they reported for duty many ?fthem could not even lift the gun parts, let alone assemble them.

Many of them needed a course of physical training before they were fit for duty, and most gained a stone in weight in three months of service conditions.It may even be that some of those graded I would have been graded II if they had been seen a few months earlier.

Figs. 4b and 5b are radiographs showing the typical varieties of flattening seen amongst these men?quite analogous to those seen amongst females (Figs.4a and 5a), whilst Figs.6a and 6b show the close Slmilarity between the shape of the male and female brim where definite clinical evidence of rickets was present.It is not proposed to discuss the male pelvic brim in detail in this Paper but merely to draw attention to the similarity between the effects ?f height and physique on the pelvis in both sexes.Analysis of the male pelves by height and physique gives the same result for the student group and the other men and therefore the results for all available males (a total of 157, 100 students and 57 men from other sources) have been combined.

The average difference in height between the male and the female *s not known, but the average height of 100 women medical students entering Aberdeen University during the last five years is 5 ft.3^ ins., So that this group, at least, are 5 ins.shorter than a comparable group ?f men.

Using this as a guide, roughly corresponding standards for males and females were adopted, the " small " males being under 5 ft. 6ins.and the " tall " over 5 ft. 10 ins. in height.Table IX ^hows the inci- dence of pelvic types among both sexes and shows that in both the incidence of the flat and scutiform types is much greater among both short men and short women.

Table X gives the same information about the males as does Table III for females.The same general trend is apparent?thereare more essentially normal (round and narrow pelves) amongst the physically superior group and many more essentially abnormal pelves (flat and  scutiform) amongst those of inferior physique, and, just as among the women, this difference is more evident in those of small stature.It should be noted that the incidence of narrow pelves in the small males and scutiform pelves in the tall males is outwith the general pattern, but the small numbers available diminish the importance of this observa- tion.As with the females the degree of flattening was considerably more severe in abnormal pelves of males graded I compared with those ?fmales graded II.

Table XI shows the incidence of the pelvic types for males of all heights by physical grade.It shows quite clearly that there are very niany more flattened pelves in those of Grade II than in those of Grade I.The lower table shows that the three indices of curvature are all lower ln the poor physical grades.A closer study of the actual degree of flattening of the posterior segment showed that, if anything, it is slightly more accentuated in the male than in the female, but certainly not to such a degree as would warrant the designation of a female pelvis as android " just because it shows a degree of flattening insufficient to be regarded as rachitic.

If the actual size of the male pelvic brim as indicated by the area and the true conjugate diameter is examined, again the same trend as Seen in the female is apparent.Both these measurements increase With height, and both decrease with poor physique irrespective of height.

On the whole, the measurements are somewhat smaller than those of the female, suggesting that the male pelvic brim is slightly smaller than the female (an observation which has been noted by other workers), hut since the size of the pelvis is very dependent on stature, and since one really knows the actual differences in height between the sexes, it Would be very difficult to come to any conclusion about this point.

The flat and the scutiform pelves were found to be small in the female ; the same also applies to the males.In this series the average conjugate in the flat pelvis of the male was 9-4 cm. (3-7ins.) and in the scutiform 10-9 cm.(4-3 ins.).In only one of the latter was it high, Measuring 12-i cm.(4-7 ins.).These shapes, by and large, were only f?und in small pelves in both sexes.It would thus appear from this investigation that the pelvic brim ln both male and female has an essentially similar round or long oval shape in individuals who have grown to full stature, and that such a shape should be regarded as the normal.Other shapes which show flattening, i.e. the flat and the scutiform, are found almost exclusively in small pelves and should be regarded as abnormal, produced by poor growth.


Clinical Significance

These results should have some obstetric significance.A tall patient is almost certain to have a large well-curved pelvic brim which can accommodate a normal infant of any size, and since outlet con- traction sufficient to cause serious difficulty in labour is seldom found if the brim is normal, the chances of difficult labour due to abnormality of the pelvis are remote.In fact, Caesarean section for disproportion is extremely rare among women over 5 ft. 2 ins. in height.In the tall group there were 13 forceps deliveries, all easy low outlet forceps de- liveries with the exception of one case in which uterine dysfunction was marked and the cervix only three-quarters dilated at the time of delivery.Very slight outlet contraction may have been a factor in 6 of the cases, but the indication for delivery was usually uterine inertia, rigidity of the soft parts, foetal or maternal distress.There was, in act, no problem related to the size of the pelvis among these 100 tall women.

A small patient from the poorer classes is likely to be of poor physique and to have a small pelvis of abnormal shape.If the infant is small?and fortunately it often is?no great problem may arise, but when the infant is a little larger, labour is likely to be difficult.In the first labours of this series of 100 small women, 6 Caesarean sections and 5 difficult mid-forceps deliveries were necessary because of disproportion, so that major mechanical difficulty was encountered in 11 per cent.In each case the patient was of inferior physique (Grade II).There were 14 other forceps deliveries in this group, the indications for which were comparable to those among the tall women?uterine inertia, foetal and maternal distress, and sometimes slight outlet contraction.

It is hoped that a further detailed study of the pelvis at all levels in 1000 cases accumulated to date will throw further light on pelvis form and its clinical significance.


Conclusion

As a result of this preliminary investigation, it may be postulated that:

(1) Amongst the well-to-do social classes, as a result of good environment during growth, small women usually reach their optimal height and may be classed genetically small?thetrue pelvis though smaller than in tall women of the same class is well curved with no evidence of flattening or other distortion.

(2) In the less well-to-do, short stature is often the end result of poor environment.The stature of a " genetically " small woman is often still further reduced by poor environment during growth, and in this case the pelvis shows evidence of considerable flattening, especially ?f the posterior segment superimposed on a generally small pelvis.

The number of small women in this class is increased by those " genetically " taller but whose short stature is due to poor environment, and these will show a similar deformity of the pelvis which may possibly be a little larger, especially transversely.

(3) Tall women in general are of better physique since any defects ?f environment have been insufficient to disturb general growth to any degree.As a rule, the pelvis is large and well curved.Deformities at the brim may occur but these are of a minor degree, since growth has not been greatly disturbed, and their significance in obstetrics is negligible.

My thanks are due to Professor Dugald Baird for his advice and encouragement; to Mr Aberdein and Miss McEwan, Senior Radiographers of the Aberdeen General and Special Hospitals for their technical assistance; to the Maternity Hospital Almoners, Mrs McGhee and Miss Thompson for their help with social data, and to ^iss Grassick for her assistance with much of the documentation.I am also grateful to the Medical Research Council for defraying expenses.



Pelvic brim classification.Nicholson classified the pelvic brim as follows :Flat . . .Brim index 81 per cent, or less.Narrow . . .Brim index 104 per cent, or less ^ Scutiform . .Sagittal index 30 per cent, or less with between 81 and 104 per cent.


Fig.

Fig. i.?Pelvic brim classification.Nicholson classified the pelvic brim as follows :?Flat


Fig

Fig?. ia and lb.2a (Mrs S.) lb (Mr T.) Height . . . . .


Fig

Fig?. 2a and 2b.2a (Mrs S.) 2b (Mr T.) Height . . . . .


Figs

Figs. 3a and 3b.3a (Mrs F.) 2>b (Mr M.)


Figs

Figs. 3a and 3b.33 (Mrs F.) 3b (Mr M.) Height 5 ft.5i ins.6 ft.2^ ins.Physical grade Pelvic brim index .Sagittal index True conjugate diameter


Figs

Figs. 5a and 5b.5a (Mrs P.) 5b (Mr B.) 4 ft. 11J ins. 1; ft. 1 in.II II 77-0 per cent.




. 8b ins. 5 ft.oj in.Physical grade .... II II Pelvic brim index . . ..65-8 per cent.5S-6 per cent.Sagittal index .... 23-2 per cent.22-5per cent.


Figs. 4
4
Figs. 4*7 and 4b.4a (Mrs S.) 4b (Mr F.) Height . . . . 4 ft.11 ins.5 ft. 2 ins.


Figs

Figs. 5a and 5b.(Mrs P.) $b (Mr B.) Height .. .




per cent.58-6 per cent.. 23-2 per cent.22-5 per cent.v_0 7'5 cm.


TABLE II Size
II
of Family of Upbringing by Social Class of Father
Social Class.I and II.Small womenNumber of casesSize of familyTall womenNumber of casesSize of family

TABLE III Pelvic
III
Type Incidence by Physique
Small Women.Tall Women.Grade I.Grade ILGrade I.Grade ILRound Narrow .. .8S-2% 6-6%S3 "3%Normal pelvic shapes73'?/o o-o%^63-0%4-2%o*o%Fiat . Scutiform.. .| 5.2% ^ 1 o-o%^12-5% o-o%Abnormal pelvic shapes26-4% o-o%^35-8%1-2%Number of cases76 (100%)/ \ (100%)19 (100%)8l (lOO%)

TABLE V Pelvic
V
Brim Capacity by.Height
ioo Tall100 SmallWomen.Women.Brim area (sq. cms.) (Nicholson's formulaGrade I Grade II All grades138-5 134-2 137-6109-9 106-0 106-8d'\2 d"12)Difference30-S?i-6Grade II2-SO11 -01True conjugate diameter (cms.)Grade II All grades12-33 12-6910-71 10-77DifferenceI -92^0-12
All Heights.


TABLE VI Pelvic
VI
Type Incidence i?i 100 Male Students
Pelvic Type.Number of Cases.Round .80NarrowIOFlat7Scutiform3Total

TABLE VII Physical
VII
Grades in Relation to Height in 100 Male Students
Over 5 ft. 10 ins.5 ft. 6 ins.-5 ft. 10 ins.Under 5 ft. 6 ins.All Heights.Grade I3637679Grade II615Nil21All grades4252



5 ft. 2 ins.
Figs. 4a and 4b.4a (Mrs S.)4b (Mr F.)Height . Physical grade Pelvic brim index. .4 ft. 11 ins. II 79-8 per cent.5 ft. 2 ins. IISagittal index True conjugate diameter

TABLE VIII Pelvic
VIII
6ypes in 39 Males from Social Classes III, IV and V All Under 5 ft.6ins. in Height
Pelvic Type.Number.Percentage.Roundl641Narrow25Flat.l641Scutiform513Total39

TABLE IX Pelvic
IX
Type Incidence in Both Sexes by Height
Males.FemalesPelvic Type.Tall (Height over 5 ft. 10 ins.).Small (Height under 5 ft. 6 ins.).Tall (Height over 5 ft. 5 ins.).Small (Height under 5 ft.).Round Narrow Flat . Scutiform84% 4% 8% 4%50% 4% 36% "%87% 6% 7% Nil65% Nil 34% 1%Total number of cases4845100100(100%)(100%)(100%)(100%)

TABLE XI Incidence
XI
of Pelvic Types and Means of Indices of Curvature in 15 7 Males of AII Heights
Pelvic Type.Grade I.Grade II.Round . Narrow Flat Scutiform78% 10% 9% 3%58% 3% 25% 12%Total number of cases9067(100%)(100%)index .... Sagittal index P osterior sagittal transverse index92*5% 36-2% 33'5%S6-i% 33-8% 29-3%
DiscussionDr Fahmy (Edinburgh) found it difficult to believe that a genetic factor was not responsible, to some degree, for a woman's stature, and suggested that useful information might be obtained, in this respect, from an examination of the mothers of the young girls already investigated by Dr Bernard.He noted that the android pelvis was seldom seen in Edinburgh.Dr de Soldenhoff (Irvine) discussed the value of X-ray pelvimetry as an aid to delivery.He believed that in most cases sufficient information could be obtained from clinical examination, including estimation of height.X-ray pelvimetry should be restricted to selected patients and even then limited to the lateral view.Dr Liston (Edinburgh) thought that if pelvic development was influenced by dietetic factors there should be similar evidence of maldevelopment in the other bones of the body.General assessment of the patient should give valuable information concerning pelric shape.Size of feet varied in proportion to height and he had noted that short stocky fingers were sometimes associated with pelvic abnormality.Dr Black (Lanark) believed that the stage of growth during which malnutrition occurred might well affect the type of pelvic abnormality : thus with early malnutrition flattening of the pelvis might result whereas with later malnutrition the deformity might be of the android type.The President, Professor Dugald Baird (Aberdeen), referred to the growth of the present generation which resulted in sons growing much taller than their fathers.He considered that height was a good index of nutrition and a valuable clinical guide as it was easy to estimate.It was difficult to define exactly the difference between a rickety flat and simple flat pelvis.In London many women had flat pelves with the contraction due to poor nutrition.Was this not in fact similar to the pelvis in Scotland in which the changes were attributed to rickets ?He advised routine measurement of height at the antenatal clinic in order to obtain an idea whether there was likely to be difficulty or not during labour.Dr Duncan and Dr Lindsay also took part in the discussion.In replying, Dr Bernard said that he did not intend to be dogmatic on the relative importance of genetic influences and of environmental influences on stature.Both undoubtedly contribute to the adult stature attained.Whilst routine pelvimetry was useful for academic purposes and clinically helpful in small women many of these would have uncomplicated spontaneous deliveries.
The Anatomical Variations in the Female Pelvis and Their Classification according to Morphology. W Caldwell, H C Moloy, P Swenson, Amer. Journ. Roentgen. 5051939

The Study of Pelvic Type and Its Relationship to Body Build in White Women. W W Greulich, H Thoms, Journ. Amer. Med. Assoc. 1124851939

Variations in the Female Pelvis. E Nicholson, H Allen, Sandeman, Lancet. 21921946

Standardised Radiological Pelvimetry. P Allen, Brit. Journ. Radiol. 202051947

The Use of Radiology in Predicting Difficult Labour. J Moir, Chassar, 1946

. Journ. Obstet. Gyncec. Brit. Emp. 53487

Etude radiographique de l'arcade pubienne chez. la femme enceinte une nouvelle methode d'appreciation du diametre biischiatique. Lapine ; Chassard, H L Shapiro, Migration and Environment. A Study of the Physical Characteristics of the Japanese Immigrants to Hawaii and the Effects of Environment on their Descejidants. LondonOxford University Press1923. 19397

Social Factors in Obstetrics. D Baird, Lancet. 1949

Classification of the Obstetric Pelvis Based on Size and Mensuration and Morphology. K B Steele, C T Javert, Amer. Journ. Obstet. Gynec. 447831942

A Comparative Study of Male and Female Pelves. H Thoms, W W Greulich, Amer. Journ. Obstet. Gynec. 39561940

The Bony Pelvis and Its Influence on Labour. J G H Ince, Young , M , Journ. Obstet. Gyncec. Brit. Emp. 471301940