THE INFLUENCE OF COMMUNICATION AND COMPENSATION TOWARD SPIRIT AT WORK OF UNIVERSITAS NEGERI JAKARTA LECTURER
June 2021

Immanuel Tanacha immanueltanacha@gmail.com 
P Sianturi 
Universitas Persada Indonesia Y.A.I


Maria Sondang 
Silaen 
Universitas Persada Indonesia Y.A.I

THE INFLUENCE OF COMMUNICATION AND COMPENSATION TOWARD SPIRIT AT WORK OF UNIVERSITAS NEGERI JAKARTA LECTURER
24June 202110.31933/dijdbm.v2i4Received: 10 th June 2021, Revised: 25 th June 2021, Publish: 11 st July 2021Available Online: https://dinastipub.org/DIJDBM Page 603 Corresponding Author: First AuthorKeyword: CommunicationCompensationSpirit at work
The purpose of this research are: 1) to know job description of compensation and spirit at work of lecturer of Faculty of Economics, Universitas Negeri Jakarta, 2) to know the influence of communication to spirit at work of lecturer of Faculty of Economics, Universitas Negeri Jakarta; 3) to know the effect of compensation On spirit at work of lecturer of Faculty of Economics, Universitas Negeri Jakarta, 4) to know communication and compensation can predict increase of spirit at work of lecturer of Faculty of Economics, Universitas Negeri Jakarta. The research model used in this research is regression analysis. This research will be conducted on 67 lecturers of Faculty of Economics, Universitas Negeri Jakarta. This research uses descriptive and explanatory analysis. Data collection techniques using SPSS statistical application program version 22.0 The results in this study are: 1) compensation has a positive and significant impact on spirit at work of FE UNJ lecturers. 2) the communication has a positive and significant impact on the spirit at work of FE UNJ lecturer. 3) the result of model feasibility test shows that communication and compensation can predict spirit at work of FE UNJ lecturer.

the next symptom is to complete the lecture faster than the time should be, the next symptom of some lecturers who often do not attend without notice to students. Here is the attendance data of lecturers: From the data obtained above in 4 semesters of 102 to 105 is known there are some lecturers who do not provide ideal lectures set by the dictation of 16 meetings. In addition, the lecturers also expressed dissatisfaction in terms of journal publication, in this case the final value of their performance derived from the study was only given an assessment of (0,5) for national journals and (0,6) for Scopus journals or international journals. Some lecturers argue that it is caused by the compensation they receive and also the communication they feel.

In terms of compensation, some lecturers complained about the remuneration system which was considered to be complicated and not open. This causes confusion that lecturers feel each time they get income from remuneration. In addition to that often happens revenue from the BLU is not on time, thus creating a sense of upset among the lecturers FE UNJ.

The lecturer also complained about the inconsistency of the income earned by lecturers because the remuneration system provides the calculation through the burden of teaching which is not always the same every semester.

Whereas in terms of communication, the lecturer explains the dissatisfaction of the lecturers' room which is not in one place, but spread in IDB building and N building. This makes the lecturer difficult to meet with other lecturers so that the relationship happened only to the lecturers who are on One room. In addition, because of the busyness and the if high morale then the workers work diligently, persistent and full of sincerity of heart.


Compensation

Veithzal Rivai (2013: 103) argues that compensation is something that employees or employees receive as a substitute for the contribution of their services to an agency or agency.

Wibowo (2013: 104) provides understanding of compensation as counter-achievement to the use of labor or remuneration that has been provided by the workforce. Mutiara Pangabean (2016: 853) compensation is any form of award given by employees as a consideration for the contribution they provide to the organization.

Garry Dessler (2002: 127) argues that employee compensation is any form of payment or remuneration given to employees and timbil from the employee's employment. From some definitions it can be concluded that compensation is anything that is given from a company or agency to someone over their contract. (2007: 54) argues that Communication can be defined as the transition of information and understanding through the use of common symbols from one person or group to another. The symbols can be either verbal or non-verbal.


Communication


Ivancevich

Veitzal Rivai (2010: 49) communication is defined as the process of delivering information or delivery to the recipient of information by using the mediums of communication as an intermediary.

Thomas and Scott (2012: 1220) argues that communication is the transfer of information and meaning from one party to another through the use of symbols together. Good communication will minimize the conflict between employees so as to improve employee morale for the better.

From the definition it can be concluded that communication is a process of delivering information or a message from its message to the recipient with a message through communication media as an intermediary between the recipient and the giver of the message.


Research model

Source: Data processed by author, 2017


Hypotesis

Based on the study of the theories and frameworks above, then the translation of the hypothesis as follows:

Hypothesis 1 (H1):

Ho: Compensation has no effect on the Spirit of Lecturer of Faculty of Economics, State University of Jakarta.


Ha: Compensation affects the Spirit of Lecturer Faculty of Economics, State

University of Jakarta.

Hypothesis 2 (H2):  
Compensation (X1) -Financial -Non Financial Communication (X2) -Supportiveness -Trust -Oppeness Spirit at work (Y) -Presence -Work Discipline -Cooperation -

RESEARCH METHODS

This research uses descriptive and explanatory method. The data used in this study comes from the primary data obtained through interviews and questionnaires, while secondary data obtained from the Faculty of Economics, State University of Jakarta, books, journals and thesis from previous research. Sampling method using saturated sampling technique or also called census. The number of samples used in this study is 67 lecturers with the criteria of permanent lecturers who get the teaching load each semester and not being served at the faculty and university level from the data obtained.


RESULT AND DISCUSSION


Result of Test Instrument Result of Validity Test

Validity test is used to find out whether there is a statement in the questionnaire that should be removed or replaced because it is considered irrelevant. The number of respondents for the validity test is 20% of the population, so there were 17 respondents as the sample of validity test. Validity test in this research, using correlation product moment.

Where if the value rhitung> rtabel then the instrument is valid and if rhitung <rtabel then the instrument is invalid. Rtabel in this study amounted to 0.482.  Based on Table 4 above, it is known that the reliability test results for each variable with the value of Cronbach's Alpha> 0.6 then the three variables can be declared reliable.


Descriptive Analysis

Descriptive analysis is used to provide an overview of the distribution and distribution of research data through questionnaires distributed to 67 lecturers FE UNJ. Can be seen the results of descriptive analysis in the table below: Based on Table 5, it can be seen the results of descriptive analysis of each variable that is for the morale variables respondents answered strongly agree and agree summed 41.4%

when compared with the criteria score (26% -50%) then the spirit of lecturer work FE UNJ quite low. This is due to the dissatisfaction with the payroll system that the clarity of the payroll system used by the faculty for the lecturers, as well as the problem of not knowing well their bosses in the faculty.

Then for the respondent compensation variables answered strongly disagree and do not agree summed as much as 31.4% when compared with the criteria score (26% -50%) then compensation lecturers FE UNJ classified as not feasible. This is due to the income received by UNJ FE lecturers is not balanced with the expenses made by the lecturers ..

Communication variables respondents answered strongly agree and agree summed up by 39.3% when compared with the criteria score (26% -50%) then the communication lecturer FE UNJ classified as not feasible. This is due to the difficulty of several lecturers to meet with other FE UNJ lecturers due to the difference of the room and the different interests.


Classical Asumption Test Result


Normality Test

Normality test is used to determine whether the samples taken are normally distributed or not. The test was performed with one sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test and stated normally distributed if the value of significance> 0.05.  Based on the results of linearity test above between communication variable with spirit at work variable, it is known to have a linearity significance value of 0.000. That is, the significance value is less than 0.05 so it can be concluded that between the two variables there is a linear relationship. Based on the results of linearity test between compensation variables with spirit at work variables in the table above, it is known that the value of linearity significance of 0.000. That is, the significance value is less than 0.05 so it can be concluded that between the two variables there is a linear relationship. 


Multicollinearity Test

Multicollinearity test is used to determine whether the regression model found strong correlation between independent variables (independent). Measuring multicolinearity by calculating VIF (variance inflation factor) and correlation coefficient between independent variables. The criterion is that if the VIF value <10 or close, then there is no multicollinearity. Based on Table 9 above multicollinearity test results, it is known that VIF value for communication is 1.062 and compensation is 1.062. Therefore, the independent variable does not occur multicollinearity because the VIF value of all independent variables is <10.


Heteroscedasticity Test

Heteroskedasticity test aims to find out whether in a regression model there is a variant inequality of the residual of an observation to another observation. In this study using

Spearman's Rho test method, which is to correlate residual value (unstandardized residual)

with each independent variable. The criterion, if the significance <0.05 then the problem of heteroscedasticity. Based on Table 10, it can be seen that the correlation between work stress with unstandardized residual yielded a significance value of 0.890 and the correlation between career development with unstandardized residual yielded a significance value of 0.602. This shows that in this regression model there is no problem of heteroscedasticity, because the value of correlation significance> 0.05. 


Multiple Regression Linear Result


Result T Test


Hypothesis 1

Ho: Compensation has no effect on spirit at work.

Ha: Compensation affects work spirit at work. Mahendrawan and Ayu Desi Indrawati (2015) in which both studies stated that compensation has a positive and significant effect Against work morale.


Based on


Hypothesis 2

Ho: Communication has no effect on morale.

Ha: Communication has no effect on morale.

Based on    Table 13, the value of Adjusted R2 is 0.516 or (51.6%). This shows that 51.6% spirit at work is influenced by workload factor and compensation. While the rest of 48.4% is explained by other variables outside this study. 


Determination Coefficient Analysis Result


CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMENDATIONS Conclusion

Figure 1 .
1Research


Based on the results of research on "The Influence of Compensation and Communication to the Spirit of Lecturer Faculty of Economics, State University of Jakarta", it can be concluded as follows: 1. The description of compensation, communication and morale of lecturer of Faculty of Economics, State University of Jakarta are: a. Compensation to FE-UNJ lecturers is not feasible. b. Communication to FE-UNJ lecturers is not feasible c. The Spirit of Work on FE-UNJ lecturers is low.

Table 1 .
1Lecturer's attendance FE UNJSemester 
Number of 
Courses 

< 16 
encounters 

≥16 
encounters 

Encounters 
<16 

Encounters 
≥16 

105 
409 
139 
270 
33,99 
66,01 

104 
390 
282 
108 
72,31 
27,69 

103 
461 
220 
241 
47,72 
52,28 

102 
469 
97 
372 
20,68 
79,32 




burden of different teaching, it is very difficult to meet all the lecturers at the meeting so that the relationship back and communication processes become obstructed. Is there any influence of compensation to the morale of faculty of economics of state university of Jakarta? 3. Is there any influence of communication on morale on lecturer of Faculty of Economics, State University of Jakarta? 4. Can compensation and communication predict the rise of the morale of Faculty of Economics of Jakarta State University? Research purpose 1. To know the description of compensation, communication and morale on lecturer of Faculty of Economics, State University of Jakarta. 2. To determine the effect of compensation on the morale of faculty of economics faculty of state university Jakarta 3. To know the effect of communication on morale at the lecturer of Faculty of Economics, State University of Jakarta. 4. To know the compensation and communication can predict the increase of morale of lecturer of Faculty of Economics, State University of Jakarta.Available Online: https://dinastipub.org/DIJDBM 
Page 605 

Research indication 

Many factors that can affect morale include compensation, communication, interpersonal 

communication, intrapersonal communication etc., but in this study will only discuss morale 

is only influenced by compensation and interpersonal communication on the object of the 

Faculty of Economics, State University of Jakarta. 

Research problem 

1. What is the description of compensation, communication and morale on the lecturer 

at the Faculty of Economics, Jakarta State University? 

2. LITERATURE REVIEW 
Spirit at work 
Guba (2012: 83) argues that morale is the condition of a group where there is a clear 

and fixed goal that is felt to be important and integrated with the individual goals. Malayu 
Available Online: https://dinastipub.org/DIJDBM 
Page 606 

S.P. Hasibuan (2012: 89) said that the spirit of work is the desire and sincerity of a person 

doing his job well and disciplined to achieve maximum performance. 

Alex S. Nitisemito (2012: 89) states that morale is to do the job more actively, so that 

the work will be expected faster and better. Wahyuni (2015: 1505) argues that morale is an 

individual's sense of work and organization. If morale is low, the likelihood of participation 

will be limited to what is ordered. Conversely, if the high morale will reflect that the 

individual will participate with the antigian and with full commitment. 

From some definitions can be concluded that morale is the attitude or feeling of a 

worker like or dislike, happy or not happy with his work. This can imply on the work done, 




Ho: Compensation and Environment Physical Work Can not predict the rise of morale of lecturer of Faculty of Economics, State University of Jakarta.Ha:Compensation and Environment Physical Work can predict the rise of morale of lecturer of Faculty of Economics, State University of Jakarta.Available Online: https://dinastipub.org/DIJDBM 
Page 608 

Ho: Communication has no effect on the Spirit of Lecturer of Faculty of 

Economics, State University of Jakarta. 

Ha: 
Communication affects the Spirit of Lecturer Faculty of Economics, State 

University of Jakarta. 

Hypothesis 3 (H3): 



Table 2 .
2The result of the validity testVariables 
Item before 
being tested 

Invalid item 
Valid item 

Spirit at work 
17 
0 
17 

Compensation 
12 
0 
12 



Table 3 .
3The result of the reliability testUji Reliabilitas 
Cronbach's Alpha 
Keterangan 

Spirit at work (Y) 
0,923 
Reliabel 

Compensation (X1) 
0,941 
Reliabel 

Communication (X2) 
0,897 
Reliabel 
Source: Data processed by author, 2017 



Table 4 .
4The result of the descriptive analysisSpirit at work 
Compensation 
Communication 

Strongly Agree 
20,5% 
16,4% 
20,2% 

Agree 
20,9% 
15,0% 
19,1% 

Disagree 
31,0% 
31,6% 
33,5% 

Strongly Disagree 
27,6% 
37,0% 
27,2% 

Source: Data processed by author, 2017 



Table 5 .
5The result of the normality test Test distribution is Normal. b. Calculated from data. c. Lilliefors Significance Correction. d. This is a lower bound of the true significance. Source: calculation SPSS 22, 2017 Based on Table 6 can be seen from the value of significance of each variable that is the spirit at work variable of 0.200, compensation of 0.200, and communication of 0.200. The Available Online: https://dinastipub.org/DIJDBM Page 611 overall value of significance is greater than the significance level of 0.05. This shows that all variables are normally distributed and qualify multiple linear regression analysis methods.One-Sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test 
Spirit at work Compensation Communication 
N 
67 
67 
67 
Normal Parameters a,b 
Mean 
27,10 
19,55 
14,00 
Std. Deviation 
3,345 
3,304 
3,238 
Most Extreme Differences 
Absolute 
,095 
,072 
,084 
Positive 
,095 
,059 
,077 
Negative 
-,087 
-,072 
-,084 
Test Statistic 
,095 
,072 
,084 
Asymp. Sig. (2-tailed) 
,200 c,d 
,200 c,d 
,200 c,d 
a. 

Table 6 .
6The result of the linearity test between workload with spirit at workANOVA Table 
Sum of 
Squares 
Df 

Mean 
Square 
F 
Sig. 


Table 7 .
7The result of the linearity test between compensation with spirit at workANOVA Table 
Sum of 
Squares 
Df 

Mean 
Square 
F 
Sig. 


Table 8 .
8The result of the multicllonearity testCoefficients a 

Model 

Collinearity Statistics 

Tolerance 
VIF 

1 
Compensation 
,941 
1,062 

Communication 
,941 
1,062 

a. Dependent Variable: job sarisfaction 

Source: calculation SPSS 22, 2017 



Table 9 .
9The result of the heteroscedasticity testCorrelations 
Unstandardized 
Residual 
Compensation Communication 


Table 10 .
10The result of the t testCoefficients a 



Table 11 ,
11the compensation variable has a tcount of 4.667. Then the value of tcount is compared with ttable value. Therefore, t count <-ttable (4,667 <1,997) with a significance value of 0.000 <0.05. This shows that hypothesis 1 Ho is rejected and Ha accepted. This means that the compensation variable has a positive and significant influence on morale. The results of this study support research that has been done previously by Putu Melati Purbaningrat Yo and Ida Bagus Ketut Surya (2015) and research conducted by I GedeAvailable Online: https://dinastipub.org/DIJDBM 
Page 614 



Table 11 ,
11career development variables have a t count of 5.491. Then the value of tcount is compared with ttable value. Therefore, thitung> ttable (5,491> 1,997) with a significance value of 0.00 <0.05. This shows that hypothesis 2 Ho is rejected and Ha accepted. This means that communication variables have a positive and significant influence on morale. This research supports previous research that has been done by Gurawan Dayona and Ridha Agus (2016) and research done by Quinerita Stevani Aruan and Mahendra Fakhri (2015) where from research result found that communication have positive and significant effect to work spirit, beside that The results of this study are also supported by other researchers namely Kadek Sujana, AA Sagung Kartika Dewi (2015) and research conducted by Sandi J, Djumadi, Anwar Alaydrus (2016) where the results of research conducted by them also found that Communication has a positive and significant effect on morale. The f test (Model feasibility test) according to Ken Black is used to test the overall model in which the independent variables contribute significantly in predicting the dependent variable. Ho: Compensation and communication can not predict the rise of morale of lecturer of Faculty of Economics, State University of Jakarta. Ha: Compensation and Communication can predict the rise of morale of lecturer of Faculty of Economics, State University of Jakarta.Result F test (feasiblity model) 

Hypothesis 3 (H3): 



Table 11 .
11The result of the f test Dependent Variable: spirit at work b. Predictors: (Constant), compensation, workload Available Online: https://dinastipub.org/DIJDBM Page 615 Source: calculation SPSS 22, 2017 In table 12. F arithmetic obtained for 34.181. The value of F arithmetic is then compared with the value of F table sought with a 95% confidence level, α = 5% with df 1 (number of variables-1) or 3-1 = 2, and df 2 (nk-1) or 67-2-1 = 64. Based on these calculations, obtained F table of 3.14 thus F arithmetic> F table. Significance on the F test of 0.000; Thus less than 0.05. The conclusion is that the research model of compensation and communication can predict the increase of the dependent variable of morale. These results support the research of Mark Apriono (2014) which found the result that compensation and communication affect simultaneously to morale.ANOVA a 


Table 12 .
12The result of determination coefficient Predictors: (Constant), compensation, communication b. Dependent Variable: spirit at work Source: calculation SPSS 22, 2017Model Summary b 

Model 
R 
R Square 

Adjusted R 
Square 

Std. Error of the 
Estimate 
1 
,719 a 
,516 
,501 
2,362 
a. From 
SuggestionSuggestions addressed to Universitas Negeri Jakarta:Endeavor to increase morale by increasing compensation and communication bygiving a directed promotion to lecturers who are able, including all Lecturers to follow Character Building training and hold family gathering of Faculty of Economics in order to establish closer communication, giving awards to lecturers who have Achievement, and provide seminars on morale to improve work ethic 2. In the communication variables, apply to the university to provide lecturers room located in one place or on one building just for the establishment of stronger and stronger lecturer relationship.
. Gary Dessler, Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia. Penerjemah: Kosasih. PrenhallindoDessler, Gary. 2002. Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia. Penerjemah: Kosasih, Jakarta: Prenhallindo.

Komunikasi Bisnis. Edisi Ketiga. Jakarta: Erlangga. Djoko Purwanto, Djoko Purwanto. 2006. Komunikasi Bisnis. Edisi Ketiga. Jakarta: Erlangga.

Joseph Devito, Komunikasi Antarmanusia. 5th Edition. Penerjemah: Agus Maulana (et.al.), Tanggerang Selatan: Karisma Publishing Group Nitisemito, Alek S. 2006. Manajemen Personalia. Jakarta: Ghalia Indonesia. Joseph Devito. 2011. Komunikasi Antarmanusia. 5th Edition. Penerjemah: Agus Maulana (et.al.), Tanggerang Selatan: Karisma Publishing Group Nitisemito, Alek S. 2006. Manajemen Personalia. Jakarta: Ghalia Indonesia.

Veithzal Rivai, Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia untuk Perusahaan. Penerjemah: Agus Maulana (et.al.). JakartaPT Grafindo PersadaRivai, Veithzal. 2010. Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia untuk Perusahaan. Penerjemah: Agus Maulana (et.al.), Jakarta: PT Grafindo Persada.

Judge Robbins, Organizational Behavior. New Jersey, penerjemah: Agus Maulana. Pearson EducationRobbins, Judge. 2007. Organizational Behavior. New Jersey, penerjemah: Agus Maulana (et.al.), Pearson Education.