530 THE HOSPITAL. February 15, 1908.


Pathology in General Practice. THE 


EXAMINATION OF URINE FOR SUGAR.?II.

The fallacies attendant on Fehling's reaction depend on two main factors. In the first place, the urine may contain substances other than dextrose capable of reducing cupric oxide; in the second place, there may be present substances which obscure the reaction of dextrose on Fehling's solution, by rendering soluble the product of reduction, cuprous oxide, and preventing its precipitation. The former group includes albumen, maltose, lactose, galactose, uric acid, hippuric acid, urates, and glycuronic acid; these substances, with the exception of glycuronic acid, seldom produce a typical reduction of Fehling's solution, but usually give a greenishwhite, or, at times, almost a black precipitate. The latter group includes creatin, mucin, and ammonia.

Of the substances reducing Fehling's solution the most important, from a practical point of view, are albumin, glycuronic acid, uric acid, and urates. Any albumin present must always be removed before applying Fehling's test; this is easily done by heat and filtration. Glycuronic acid, an oxidation product of dextrose, is not infrequently present in normal urine, especially after taking such drugs as morphia, chloral, chloroform, camphor, copaiba, or salicylic acid; it seems to have no pathological significance. Its reaction on Fehling's solution is almost identical with that of dextrose, for which, no doubt, it has been frequently mistaken. Glycuronic acid is not fermented by yeast, and can also be distinguished from dextrose by the phenylhydrazine test.

An aqueous solution of uric acid or urates in such quantities as are present in normal urine has a distinct reducing action on Fehling's solution; in urine, however, these bodies must be present in excess before any reduction occurs.

Of the substances inhibiting the reduction of Fehling's solution creatinin seems to be the most important.

In health the urine contains 2 to 3 milligrammes of creatinin per c.c.? an amount sufficient to counteract the reducing action of 1 per cent, of sugar. Creatin and mucin have a similar, but less powerful, retarding influence. It is probable that the small amount of sugar present in normal urine would be shown by Fehling's reaction but for the combined retarding effect of these three compounds. Whenthe percentage of sugar is slightly increased Fehling's solution often assumes a dirtygreen colour, or there may be a greenish precipitate. Another important interfering agent is ammonia. This must be removed by boiling or neutralisation, when the urine is highly ammoniacal.

2. The Fermentation Test.?This depends on the conversion of any sugar present into alcohol and CO2 by the yeast-ferment. An inverted test-tube {or special fermentation-tube) is filled with urine, and to this is added a small piece of yeast of the size of a pea. The urine is then incubated at a temperature of 25? to 30? C. for twelve hours, when any gas evolved will have collected at the top of the tube.

For two reasons this test is unreliable when dealing with small quantities of sugar?e.g. less than 1 per cent.

First, the C02 given off may become dissolved in the urine, in which it is soluble to a considerable extent. Secondly, the " has been discharged, as is almost cex^1 0$$ happen, add a further 2 c.c. of safranin and ag'?> boil; once more reduction may occur withou ^ . pathological import. Continue adding sa * until the red colour no longer disappears. The s tion should not be shaken after boiling, as oxi by the air readily occurs. Precipitation of a ^ derivative may cause a white cloud, but this not affect the reaction.

. ,


^ it

The advantages of the safranin test are (i) \e$, is not affected by creatinin, creatin, mucin, u or albumin; (ii) that it never gives a doubtful r the change of colour being definite and c0lT1P gS a (iii) that it is not only a qualitative test, but g1 ^ fairly accurate idea of the quantity of sugar p eep

On the other hand, it fails to distinguish b? glycuronic acid and dextrose; this can only by the fermentation or phenylhydrazine tests-


The test cannot be considered complete unless melting-point of the crystals is determined. The Safranin Test.?Safranin is a red ^ dissolving in water to give a deep red solution.boiling this with glucose, in alkaline solution, re tion occurs and the red colour disappears, lea a clear yellow solution. For urinary work a s tion of 1 gramme of safranin to the litre of watei the best; a normal solution of caustic soda I grammes to the litre) is also required. With t The exact technique is as follows: Mix in a tube 2 c.c. each of safranin solution, a jQlir solution, and urine, and boil.pressed 

" 

yea? 

of commerce often contains some starch, as rna}_ 

seen by testing with iodine. It is always advisab e, 
therefore, to perform a control experiment wi 

? 

? 
"rnPfl 

yeast and water, to make sure that 110 gas is io1IU 

under these conditions. 

, 

3. The Phenylhydrazine Test depends on ? 

formation of crystals of phenyl dextrosazone by ' 

interaction of dextrose and phenylhydrazine. 

50 c.c. of the urine add 2 grammes of sodium ace^ 

tate and 1 gramme of phenylhydrazine hy 

^ 

chloride, and heat the mixture in a water-batA 

100? C. for thirty minutes; stand aside till dold, an^ 

examine any sediment under a microscope. 

0f 

urine contains sugar there will be seen clusters 

radiating, needle-shaped crystals of a bright ye 

colour. 

Glycuronic acid also forms a crystal 
osazone, but the melting-point of these crystal 

125? 0., compared with 204? C. for dextrosazo^ 

Lactose and maltose form similar compounds, 

melting-points of 200? C. and 190? 0. respectlVe ^ 

, 

r 

4. ^ 

, 

;5 

^ 
reagents it may be reckoned that each 2 c.c-
^ 

safranin reduced?i.e. decolorised?by 2 c,c"a$. 
urine represents approximately .1 per cent, of s^? er* 

Inasmuch as healthy urine contains .1 or even 

cent, of sugar, it follows that 2 to 4 c.c. of sa 

aI1y 

may be decolorised under normal conditions, 
^ 

further reduction must be regarded as patholog^^ 

When the c? 

^0