Cartas aos editores


Cartas aos editores
33149049C6282DE8A4D272E44E44B0D3


Plus-maze following the microinjection of muscimol into the dorsal periaqueductal gray of the rat Performance no labirinto em cruz elevado após microinjeção de muscimol na substância cinzenta periaquedutal dorsal do rato Dear Editor, Some experimental findings have indicated that the rat dorsal periaqueductal gray (DPAG) is part of a longitudinally organized neural system responsible for behavioral and vegetative manifestations of anxiety-like and aversive/defensive behaviors as well as active and passive emotional coping strategies towards threatening stimuli. 1 DPAG-evoked defense reactions might also provide some insights about panic attacks in humans.Systemically injected diazepam or intra-DPAG injection of midazolam promoted anxiolytic effects when animals were tested in the elevated plus-maze (EPM), 2 a behaviorally and pharmacologically validated animal model for the study of anxiety. 3The inhibitor y neurotransmitter γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and both GABA A and GABA B receptors are found in the DPAG.Here we report discrepant results found when we looked for the behavioral effects of microinjections of different doses of muscimol, a GABA A receptor agonist, into the DPAG of rats tested in the EPM compared to the reported anxiolytic effects of midazolam.

We studied 3-month old male Wistar rats locally bred under standard laboratory conditions and according to international laws for ethical care.The EPM and its use were identical to previous descriptions. 2Rats were submitted to unilateral stereotaxic surgery (Figure 1) and were microinjected into the DPAG with saline (0.3 µl, n = 10), muscimol at the doses of 20 pg (n = 8), 50 pg (n = 12) and 150 pg (n = 8) or midazolam at the doses of 0.1µg (n = 5) or 35.3 µg (n = 7).Other experimental groups served for testing the experimental procedure itself and we studied rats injected i.p. with saline and midazolam and tested in the EPM (n = 5-8, respectively) and a 'non-target' group (n = 15), i.e., rats that received saline or muscimol microinjections in the vicinity of the DPAG.

Moreover, in another experiment, muscimol decreased maternal aggressive behavior when microinjected into the paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus (data not shown).

Interestingly, results showed that DPAG microinjections of muscimol or midazolam had no effects on EPM performance.Neither the percentage of open arm entries nor the time spent in open arms, which are considered two indexes of anxiety, 3 were affected by muscimol when we compared both the saline and the 'non-target' groups.Intra-DPAG muscimol did not promote an overall sedative action as evaluated by the total number of arm entries and the entries in closed arms (Figure 2).On the other hand, systemically injected midazolam promoted its expected anxiolitic actions compared to saline.

Therefore, DPAG GABA A receptors appear not to affect rat EPM performance.Caution is recommended when interpreting previously reported intra-DPAG midazolam anxiolytic actions 2 due to its intrinsic chemical characteristics (i.e., its solubility occurs in low pH solutions) and possible diffusion to other areas that can also affect this behavior, such as the nearby dorsal raphe. 2,4It is noteworthy that midazolam effects cannot be completely antagonized by bicuculline, a GABA receptor antagonist.Indeed, benzodiazepines can interact with other neurotransmitters within the DPAG and, compared to muscimol, can exert different actions on heterogeneous GABAA receptor subtypes. 5The well-known complexity of the neurochemical basis of anxiety is supported by the findings reported above.


Rosa M M de


Bipolar disorder: building the path of return to the ideas of Kraepelin

Transtorno bipolar: a construção do caminho de retorno às idéias de Kraepelin Dear Editor, Kraeplin (1921) described a wide spectrum of cases of mania and hypomania ranging from euphoric episodes up to predominantly dysphoric or mixed presentations with symptoms of depression. 1 However, in the middle of the 20 th century, influential psychoanalytical writings focused on the euphoric cases of these episodes.Post-hoc interpretations of Kraepelin's ideas led to the adoption of the term 'bipolar' which implies that mania and hypomania are opposite poles of depression. 2 Many authors suggest that a return to the concepts developed by Kraepelin would be advantageous. 2However, there are some criticisms to the widening of the concept of BD. 3 Recent advances (to some extent referring to the original descriptions of Kraeplin) 1 expanded bipolarity to a broader spectrum. 4rom a pragmatic standpoint, we believe that the adoption of the concept of a bipolar spectrum may be rather premature.Even using the standard DSM-IV nomenclature, the lag between the initial symptoms of the disorders and the diagnosis of bipolar illness is usually of about one decade, across different countries. 5-6A worrying scenario would be "an overenthusiastic" adoption of the bipolar spectrum in the international nomenclature, not matched by the necessary re-education of health care professionals.The descriptions made by Kraepelin derived from careful observation, which was systematic and longitudinal.Would such sophisticated psychopathology be feasible within the managed care era?We believe that there is a lot to be done in order to bridge the advances made in the psychopathological appraisal of bipolar patients and the adoption of operational criteria to classify patients suffering from the 'soft spectrum' of the Bipolar Disorders.

Should we return to Kraepelin?This seems the right thing to do.However, its important to pave this returning path with sound evidence, and continuing medical education programs.


Mogens Schou e o uso do lítio em psiquiatria

Mogens Schou and the use of lithium in psychiatry Sr. Editor, Muitos artigos na literatura científica fornecem dados históricos sobre a descoberta do lítio e seu desenvolvimento na psiquiatria, desde sua descoberta na Austrália, seu desenvolvimento primeiramente na Europa e então nos Estados Unidos. 1 O grande marco na história do lítio ocorreu em 1954, quando o pesquisador dinamarquês Mogens Schou e colegas publicaram seu primeiro estudo duplo-cego do lítio na mania, iniciando um trabalho de toda a vida de Schou na pesquisa do lítio e ensino. 2 O uso do lítio no transtorno bipolar (TB) causou uma revolução na psicofarmacologia, pois forçou os psiquiatras a pensarem em termos de diagnóstico, pois a utilidade do lítio nos quadros de mania clássica foi consagrada por diversos estudos científicos 2-4 e pela prática clínica.

Durante muitos anos, o lítio foi o único estabilizador do humor.Mais recentemente, outras medicações começaram a ser utilizadas para esse fim, principalmente os anticonvulsivantes e antipsicóticos atípicos.Estas medicações, com características farmacológicas, posológicas e clínicas diferentes, colocaram em cheque o "reinado" do lítio e o seu papel atual no arsenal terapêutico do TB.O que se observa na prática clínica é um declínio do uso desta medicação.Diversos motivos podem ser alegados para isso: dificuldades posológicas, efeitos adversos graves (raros) e o investimento da indústria farmacêutica no desenvolvimento de novas medicações.

Contudo, o carbonato de lítio, após 50 anos, continua sendo um tratamento de primeira linha para a maioria dos pacientes bipolares.Os estudos e a prática clínica ainda consagram o lítio como o estabilizador de humor por excelência.Diretrizes elaboradas através de uma abordagem baseada em evidências

Financing:

NoneConflict of interests: None




Almeida, Márcia Giovenardi, Adriana Damra, Rosana M Frey, Alberto A Rasia-Filho Laboratory of Neurosciences, Universidade do Vale do Rio dos Sinos (UNISINOS), São Leopoldo (RS), Brazil Financing: Universidade do Vale do Rio dos Sinos (UNISINOS), Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado do Rio Grande do Sul (FAPERGS) and Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq) Conflict of interests: None
References1 .Keay KA, Bandler R. Parallel circuits mediating distinct emotionalcoping reactions to different types of stress. Neurosci Biobehav Rev.2001;25(7-8):669-78.2 .Russo AS, Guimarães FS, de Aguiar JC, Graeff FG. Role of benzodiazepinereceptors located in the dorsal periaqueductal grey of rats in anxiety.Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1993;110(1-2):198-202.3 .Fernandes C, González MI, Wilson CA, File SE. Factor analysisshows that female rat behaviour is characterized primarily by activity,male rats are driven by sex and anxiety. Pharmacol Biochem Behav.1999;64(4):731-8.4 .Menard J, Treit D. Effects of centrally administered anxiolyticcompounds in animal models of anxiety. Neurosci Biobehav Rev.1999;23(4):591-613.
5 .Mehta AK, Ticku MK.An update on GABAA receptors.Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 1999;29(3-2):196-217.


Manic-Depressive Insanity and paranoia. E Kraeplin, Barclay RM. Edinburgh1921LivingstoneScotland

Self-reported quality of life across mood states in bipolar disorder. C Vojta, B Kinosian, H Glick, L Altshuler, M S Bauer, Compr Psychiatry. 4232001

A plea for integrity of the bipolar disorder concept. R J Baldessarini, Bipolar Disord. 212000

The depressed patient with comorbid illness. W J Katon, Program and abstracts of the 154th. Annual Meeting of the American Psychiatric Association. New Orleans, Louisiana, USA2001 May 5-1043BIndustry Symposium; part 2