N-acetylcysteine and neurodegenerative diseases: Basic and clinical pharmacology


Motoki Arakawa 
Department of Clinical Pharmacy
College of Pharmacy
Research Unit of Pharmacology
Nihon University
FunabashiJapan

Yoshihisa Ito 
Department of Clinical Pharmacy
College of Pharmacy
Research Unit of Pharmacology
Nihon University
FunabashiJapan

N-acetylcysteine and neurodegenerative diseases: Basic and clinical pharmacology
10.1080/14734220601142878ORIGINAL ARTICLEN-acetylcysteineebselenneuronal death4-hydroxynonenalcerebellar granule neurons
Increasing lines of evidence suggest a key role of oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases. Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, myoclonus epilepsy of the Unverricht-Lundborg type, spinocerebellar degeneration, tardive dyskinesia and Down's syndrome have been associated with several mitochondrial alterations. Oxidative stress can decrease cellular bioenergetic capacity, which will then increase the generation of reactive oxygen species resulting in cellular damage and programmed cell death. First, this review examines the mechanisms of action of N-acetylcysteine (NAC), an antioxidant and a free radical-scavenging agent that increases intracellular GSH, at the cellular level. NAC can act as a precursor for glutathione synthesis as well as a stimulator of the cytosolic enzymes involved in glutathione regeneration. The chemical properties of NAC include redox interactions, particularly with other members of the group XIV elements (selenium, etc.) and ebselen, a lipid-soluble seleno-organic compound. Second, NAC has been shown to protect against oxidative stressinduced neuronal death in cultured granule neurons. Recent findings on the protective effect of NAC against 4hydroxynonenal (HNE)-induced toxicity in cerebellar granule neurons are summarized. Finally, the protective pharmacokinetics of NAC in humans and the possible usefulness of NAC for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases are discussed with reference to basic and clinical studies.

Introduction

N-Acetylcysteine (NAC) is a thiol-containing compound that has been used in clinical practice since the mid-1950s. NAC was originally introduced for the treatment of congestive and obstructive lung diseases (1), primarily those associated with hypersecretion of mucus, e.g., chronic bronchitis and cystic fibrosis (2,3). NAC has also been used since the mid-1970s as the drug of choice for the treatment of paracetamol intoxication (4). In more recent times, its applications have included attempts to use it for the treatment of pulmonary oxygen toxicity and adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) (5,6), and exploratory studies have been performed to investigate its efficacy in the treatment of a variety of acute and chronic inflammations (7,8), a number of disorders involving the immune system, such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 infection (9), and several neurodegenerative diseases (10). In addition to its clinical uses, this compound has, in recent years, been used increasingly as a tool for basic research, particularly in studies of the basic molecular and cellular aspects of the regulation of apoptosis and gene transcription (11,12).

This review covers various pharmacological properties of NAC, focusing particularly on the basic pharmacology of NAC, recent data on the protective effect of NAC against 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE)induced toxicity in cerebellar granule neurons, human pharmacokinetic data, and the effect of NAC on neurodegenerative diseases.


Basic pharmacology of NAC and its co-factors

NAC has been shown to exert survival-promoting effects in several cell systems (13). Cysteine is transported mainly by the alanine-serine-cysteine (ASC) system, a ubiquitous system of Na + -dependent neutral amino acid transport, in a variety of cells (14,15); however NAC is a membrane-permeable cysteine precursor that does not require active transport and delivers cysteine to the cell in a unique way ( Figure 1) (16). After free NAC enters a cell, it is rapidly hydrolyzed to release cysteine, a precursor of glutathione (GSH). GSH is synthesized intracellularly by the consecutive actions of cglutamylcysteine synthetase (glutamate+cysteine+ ATP u c-glutamylcysteine+ADP+P i ,) and GSH synthetase (c-glutamylcysteine+glycine+ATP u GSH+ADP+P i ). The synthesis of GSH is limited by the availability of substrates; cysteine is usually the limiting precursor (17). c-Glutamylcysteine synthetase is inhibited by feedback from GSH (K i about 1.5 mM) (18). Thus, under physiological conditions, this enzyme is probably not operating at its maximal rate. In addition, intracellular GSH is maintained in its thiol form by glutathione reductase, which requires NADPH (16). GSH participates nonenzymatically and enzymatically (GSH S-transferases (GSTs)) in protection against toxic compounds (19). Perhaps one of its most important functions is protection against oxidative damage caused by reactive oxygen species (ROS), many of which are generated during normal metabolism (20). In addition, GSH can react nonenzymatically with ROS, and GSH peroxidase (and non-selenium (Se) peroxidase) catalyzes the destruction of hydrogen peroxide and hydroperoxides (17). Thus, NAC is an antioxidant and a free radicalscavenging agent that increases intracellular GSH, a major component of the pathways by which cells are protected from oxidative stress. The efficacy of NAC in protecting cells from apoptosis has generally been interpreted within the context of a mechanism involving oxidative stress (21).

The apparent diversity in the pharmacological use of NAC is rather unique, and is due to the multifaceted chemical properties of the thiol of the molecule. These include its nucleophilicity and redox interactions, particularly with other members of the group XIV elements (Se, etc.), providing 'scavenger' and antioxidant properties, as well as the ability to undergo transhydrogenation or thioldisulfide exchange (TDE) reactions with other thiol redox couples (11,22,23). Ebselen, 2-phenyl-1,2benzisoselenazol-3[2H]-one, is a lipid-soluble seleno-organic compound that exhibits both glutathione peroxidase-like and antioxidant activity (24). The redox properties of ebselen confer activity as GSH peroxidase to this low-molecular-weight compound. Thus, in the presence of thiols it acts as an enzyme mimic with much lower substrate specificity constraints, as ebselen is more readily accessible than active sites in proteins (25). This explains the relative unspecificity toward the thiol reductant involving NAC, whereas GSH peroxidase is highly specific for GSH. Ebselen has antioxidant activity and reacts rapidly with peroxynitrite (ONOO 2 /ONOOH) in a bimolecular manner, yielding the selenoxide of the parent molecule, ebselen Se-oxide [2-phenyl-l,2-benzisoselenazol-3(2H)-one 1-oxide], as the sole Se-containing product with 1:1 stoichiometry (26). Ebselen Seoxide is readily reduced to ebselen by reducing equivalents such as GSH (27), as shown in the GSH peroxidase-like catalytic cycle of ebselen. This reversible reaction allows its utilization for potential sustained defense against peroxynitrite. 


Effect of NAC on HNE-induced neurotoxicity in cerebellar granule neurons

HNE is an aldehydic product of membrane lipid peroxidation (28), which is reportedly associated with inhibition of the activity of several types of cellular function and signaling, such as membrane transport, microtubule formation mitochondrial respiration and synaptic plasticity, and exhibits cytotoxicity through alkylation (29)(30)(31)(32)(33)(34)(35). In addition, elevated levels of HNE have been reported in the brain regions of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) in comparison with normal controls (36) and also in plasma from AD patients in comparison with controls (37). An increased HNE level has also been observed in the cerebellum of patients with spinocerebellar degeneration (SCD) (38). We have shown that HNE-induced neurotoxicity is suppressed by Ac-DEVD-CHO, a caspase-3 inhibitor, in rat cerebellar granule neurons and rat hippocampal neurons, suggesting that HNE-induced neuronal death is attributable to activation of the caspase-3dependent pathway (39,40).

The mitochondrial detoxification of HNE can occur through phase I or phase II processes ( Figure 2). In the phase I process, brain mitochondria oxidize HNE to 4-hydroxynonenoate (HNEAcid) by the ALDHs, ALDH2 and ALDH5A (41,42). The formation of HNEAcid is a major pathway of HNE detoxification, comprising approximately 30-40% of HNE metabolism in multiple systems including the heart, liver, and brain (42)(43)(44). ALDH2 and ALDH5A have been shown to be localized in the mitochondrial matrix. Mitochondrial membrane potential is maintained by the respiratory chain, which contains the four electron-transporting complexes I-IV and one H + -translocating ATP synthetic complex (complex V); electron transporting complex I has NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase activity (45). The mitochondrial detoxification phase II process has been shown to involve glutathione conjugation to the electrophilic C3 carbon directly or through the action of GSTs, forming the GSH-HNE adduct S-(4-hydroxy-l-oxononan-3-yl)glutathione (GSHNE) (46). Mitochondria in rat brain possess GST A4-4, an inducible GST isoform with high activity toward HNE (47).

The HNE-modified protein is produced by multiple action of HNE, which affects mitochondrial function, signal transduction, transport function, cytokine production and the cytoskeleton (31). Pretreatment with high concentrations of NAC completely suppresses the formation of HNE-modified protein, mitochondrial injury and neuronal death (48). It is suggested that this protective effect is due to an increase of GSH-HNE conjugation by increased GSH levels after treatment with NAC, whereas low concentrations of NAC are ineffective (48). A previous study in our laboratory has shown that HNE-induced neurotoxicity in cerebellar granule neurons is not suppressed by single administration of ebselen (12). However, ebselen completely protected these neurons from HNE-induced death after pretreatment with low concentrations of NAC that, alone, exhibited no protective effect (48). Pretreatment with high concentrations of NAC, and pretreatment with low concentrations of NAC followed by ebselen treatment, suppressed the HNEinduced decrease in intracellular GSH levels, and the combined treatment partially but significantly restored the level of sulfhydryl base, suggesting that these effects play an important role in the synergistic effect of NAC and ebselen (48). Ebselen has been shown to lack the ability to synthesize GSH, which reacts with HNE (11). In addition, NAC is effective in supplying reducing equivalents for the peroxidaselike activity of ebselen (11). Therefore, it is suggested that ebselen can exert its neuroprotective effect under conditions of increased GSH production, and that combination of NAC pretreatment with subsequent ebselen treatment may be a useful therapeutic approach for neurodegenerative diseases.


Basic pharmacokinetics of NAC in humans

In one typical experiment following a single i.v. infusion of 200 mg NAC, the peak plasma level (ca. 200 mM) declined rapidly and biphasically (aT 1/2 and bT 1/2 56 and 40 min, respectively) (49). Infused NAC also rapidly forms disulfides in plasma, which prolongs the existence of the drug in plasma for up to 6 h (49). However, following oral ingestion of 200 mg NAC, the free thiol is largely undetectable, and only low levels of oxidized NAC are detectable for several hours after administration (49). These early data also indicated that the drug was less than 5% bioavailable from the oral formulation. Further pharmacokinetic data were subsequently obtained for different oral formulations of NAC and different dose regimes (50,51), and these generally suggested that the drug itself does not accumulate in the body, but rather its oxidized forms and reduced and oxidized metabolites.

On the other hand, it has been suggested that NAC may cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) (52). It has been shown that NAC crosses the blood-brain barrier and accumulated in the brain, and that it reverses memory impairment and brain oxidative stress in aged SAMP8 mice (53). In addition to pharmacokinetic studies of NAC at doses indicated for the treatment of various neurodegenerative diseases, attempts have also been made to define the pharmacokinetics of the drug following several doses, as indicated during its use as a chemical adjunct for chemotherapy (54). NAC was found to readily cross the blood-brain barrier when given into the carotid artery, and treatment with NAC can prevent cisplatin-induced ototoxicity in rats (54,55).


Effect of NAC against diseases of the central nervous system

Oxidative stress has been shown to play a pivotal role in neuronal dysfunction and death in various neurodegenerative diseases, including SCD (38), myoclonus epilepsy of the Unverricht-Lundborg type (ULD) (56)(57)(58), AD (59), Parkinson's disease (PD) (10,59), tardive dyskinesia (TD) (60,61) and Down's syndrome (DS) (62) (Figure 3).

SCD is a diverse group of rare, slowly progressive, neurological diseases, often inherited but of Figure 3. Neurodegenerative diseases and mechanism of cell death thought to be associated with oxidative stress. SCD, spinocerebellar degeneration; ULD, myoclonus epilepsy of the Unverricht-Lundborg type; HNE, 4-hydroxynonenal; ROS, reactive oxygen species. incompletely understood pathophysiology, which affect the cerebellum and its related pathways. Evidence of oxygen-mediated damage in SCD has been reported (38). If free radical species play an important role during cerebellar degeneration in SCD, then NAC may be therapeutically effective. However, there have been no basic or clinical studies.

ULD is an autosomal recessive disorder that typically develops between the ages of 6 and 15 years with stimulus-sensitive myoclonus and tonicclonic seizures, followed by the development of a progressive cerebellar syndrome (63). NAC has been tested in patients with ULD, and shown to achieve a dramatic clinical improvement. However, further study is required to confirm anecdotal reports of improved speech, coordination, and gait in patients with ataxia (56)(57)(58).

In AD, whose etiology is almost certainly multifactorial, there is both direct and indirect evidence of free radical involvement. Increased levels of lipid peroxides have been reported in the temporal and cerebral cortex of patients with AD as compared with controls (64). Previous studies have demonstrated that GSH is decreased in cortical areas and the hippocampus (65,66). Abnormal GSH metabolism may also be involved in AD. NAC has been tested in some murine models of AD, and these studies provided supportive evidence that administration of NAC buffers oxidative damage in AD (67,68).

PD is due primarily to an abnormality in the substantia nigra, and is to date the most suggestive example of a condition resulting from neural degeneration due to oxidative stress. Increased lipid peroxidation has been reported in PD, although its causality was not established (64); subsequent studies then found that GSH levels were dramatically decreased in PD patients (65,66).

Clinical trials for the treatment of PD have been performed using antioxidants such as vitamin E (69,70) and vitamin C (71). However, no apparent success was reported, possibly due to the poor ability of antioxidants to penetrate the BBB (69,71). On the other hand, it has been suggested that NAC may cross the BBB (52). In addition, it has been reported that NAC exerts a preventive effect in a MPTPinduced mouse model of PD (72), but there have been no clinical trials of NAC for treatment of PD. Further controlled trials involving administration of NAC or GSH precursors, preferably in combination with other antioxidants, are needed.

TD, a movement disorder due to an abnormality in the basal ganglia, has been linked to long-term treatment with neuroleptic drugs. The basal ganglia are exceptionally vulnerable to free-radical overload because they are rich in dopamine as well as other catecholamines. By blocking dopamine receptors, neuroleptics may cause dopamine buildup in the basal ganglia, which then increases free radical production. NAC has been shown to decrease disease severity in both in vivo and in vitro TD models (60,61), suggesting that further clinical trials may be warranted.

DS, a classic mental deficiency disease resulting from trisomy of chromosome 21, is known to involve increased systemic oxidative stress (62). The 50% overexpression of SOD on chromosome 21 contributes to heightened fluxes of superoxide in all tissues. However, DS is not manifested until after birth, as the mother's antioxidant defenses may protect the fetus until delivery. DS children are also at greatly increased risk of Alzheimer-type dementia as they age (64). Although NAC has been shown to protect neuronal migration in DS models in vitro (73), further clinical trials should help to clarify whether supplementation of NAC from birth can delay the onset of dementia in DS patients.

Increasing evidence to date helps in understanding the possible roles of oxidative stress in various neurodegenerative disorders. If oxidative stress does contribute to certain neural degeneration, irrespective of whether it is eventually proven to be a primary or secondary factor in the etiologic progression, the therapeutic rewards are likely to be great. Future clinical trials of NAC, administered in combination with other antioxidants, antioxidant co-factors, and non-antioxidant brain-trophic nutrients, are expected.


Summary

The thiol drug NAC has a diversity of applications in both an experimental setting, as a tool for studies of oxidative stress induced by various agents including HNE, and in a clinical setting, as a therapeutic agent against several neurodegenerative diseases sharing primary or secondary mitochondrial defects that result in ROS overproduction and/or mitochondria-associated apoptosis. As our understanding of such redox processes increases, particularly their roles in specific pathophysiological processes, new avenues will open for the clinical use of NAC. As a drug, NAC represents perhaps the ideal xenobiotic, capable of directly entering endogenous biochemical processes as a result of its own metabolism. In addition, NAC may cross the BBB. Thus, it is hoped that the experience gained with this unique agent will help in future efforts to design antioxidants and chemoprotective principles that are able to more accurately utilize endogenous biochemical processes for therapy of neurodegenerative diseases.

Figure 1 .
1Mechanism of action of N-acetylcysteine. NAC, N-acetylcysteine; ASC, alanine-serine-cysteine (ASC) transport system; c-GCS, c-glutamylcysteine synthetase; cys, cysteine; glu, glutamine; gly, glycine; GSH, glutathione.

Figure 2 .
2Potential routes of mitochondrial HNE loss and metabolism. HNE is able to alkylate diverse classes of biological molecules. Balancing this toxicity is the metabolism of HNE by multiple phase I and phase II pathways. *GSHNE and GSHNEAcid can dehydrate to form a cyclic hemiacetal and lactone, respectively. Adapted from Meyer MJ et al. 2004(41).

Macrophage activation by N-acetylcysteine in COPD patients. A Vecchiarelli, M Dottorini, D Pietrella, C Cociani, A Eslami, T Todisco, F Bistoni, Chest. 105Vecchiarelli A, Dottorini M, Pietrella D, Cociani C, Eslami A, Todisco T, Bistoni F. Macrophage activation by N-acetyl- cysteine in COPD patients. Chest. 1994;105:806-11.

The reduction in vitro in viscosity of mucoprotein solutions by a new mucolytic agent, N-acetyl-L-cysteine. A L Sheffner, Sheffner AL. The reduction in vitro in viscosity of mucopro- tein solutions by a new mucolytic agent, N-acetyl-L-cysteine.

. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 106Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1963;106:298-310.

Oral acetylcysteine reduces exacerbation rate in chronic bronchitis: Report of a trial organized by the Swedish Society for Pulmonary Diseases. G Boman, U Bäcker, S Larsson, B Melander, L Wåhlander, Eur J Respir Dis. 64Boman G, Bäcker U, Larsson S, Melander B, Wåhlander L. Oral acetylcysteine reduces exacerbation rate in chronic bronchitis: Report of a trial organized by the Swedish Society for Pulmonary Diseases. Eur J Respir Dis. 1983;64: 405-15.

Pharmacological considerations and clinical management. L F Prescott, Paracetamol Overdosage, Drugs. 25Prescott LF. Paracetamol overdosage. Pharmacological con- siderations and clinical management. Drugs. 1983;25: 290-314.

N-acetylcysteine enhances recovery from acute lung injury in man. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical study. P M Suter, G Domenighetti, M D Schaller, M C Laverrière, R Ritz, C Perret, Chest. 105Suter PM, Domenighetti G, Schaller MD, Laverrière MC, Ritz R, Perret C. N-acetylcysteine enhances recovery from acute lung injury in man. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical study. Chest. 1994;105:190-4.

Effects of Nacetylcysteine stereoisomers on oxygen-induced lung injury in rats. B Särnstrand, A Tunek, K Sjö Din, A Hallberg, Chem Biol Interact. 94Särnstrand B, Tunek A, Sjö din K, Hallberg A. Effects of N- acetylcysteine stereoisomers on oxygen-induced lung injury in rats. Chem Biol Interact. 1995;94:157-64.

N-acetylcysteine enhances hippocampal neuronal survival after transient forebrain ischemia in rats. N W Knuckey, D Palm, M Primiano, M H Epstein, C E Johanson, Stroke. 26Knuckey NW, Palm D, Primiano M, Epstein MH, Johanson CE. N-acetylcysteine enhances hippocampal neu- ronal survival after transient forebrain ischemia in rats. Stroke. 1995;26:305-11.

Nacetylcysteine protects against age-related decline of oxidative phosphorylation in liver mitochondria. J Miquel, M L Ferrándiz, De Juan, E Sevila, I Martínez, M , Eur J Pharmacol. 292Miquel J, Ferrándiz ML, De Juan E, Sevila I, Martínez M. N- acetylcysteine protects against age-related decline of oxidative phosphorylation in liver mitochondria. Eur J Pharmacol. 1995;292:333-5.

Supplementation of N-acetylcysteine fails to increase glutathione in lymphocytes and plasma of patients with AIDS. A Witschi, E Junker, C Schranz, R F Speck, B H Lauterburg, AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 11Witschi A, Junker E, Schranz C, Speck RF, Lauterburg BH. Supplementation of N-acetylcysteine fails to increase glu- tathione in lymphocytes and plasma of patients with AIDS. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 1995;11:141-3.

Oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases. N A Simonian, J T Coyle, Ann Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 36Simonian NA, Coyle JT. Oxidative stress in neurodegenera- tive diseases. Ann Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 1996;36:83-106.

N-acetylcysteine and glutathione-dependent protective effect of PZ51 (Ebselen) against diquat-induced cytotoxicity in isolated hepatocytes. I A Cotgreave, M S Sandy, M Berggren, P W Moldéus, M T Smith, Biochem Pharmacol. 36Cotgreave IA, Sandy MS, Berggren M, Moldéus PW, Smith MT. N-acetylcysteine and glutathione-dependent protective effect of PZ51 (Ebselen) against diquat-induced cytotoxicity in isolated hepatocytes. Biochem Pharmacol. 1987;36:2899-904.

N-acetylcysteine selectively protects cerebellar granule cells from 4-hydroxynonenal-induced cell death. M Arakawa, N Ushimaru, N Osada, T Oda, K Ishige, Y Ito, Neurosci Res. 55Arakawa M, Ushimaru N, Osada N, Oda T, Ishige K, Ito Y. N-acetylcysteine selectively protects cerebellar granule cells from 4-hydroxynonenal-induced cell death. Neurosci Res. 2006;55:255-63.

N-acetyl-L-cysteine is a pluripotent protector against cell death and enhancer of trophic factormediated cell survival in vitro. M Mayer, M Noble, Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 91Mayer M, Noble M. N-acetyl-L-cysteine is a pluripotent protector against cell death and enhancer of trophic factor- mediated cell survival in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1994;91:7496-500.

Role of membrane transport in metabolism and function of glutathione in mammals. S Bannai, N Tateishi, J Membr Biol. 89Bannai S, Tateishi N. Role of membrane transport in metabolism and function of glutathione in mammals. J Membr Biol. 1986;89:1-8.

Distinct nuclear factor-kB/Rel proteins have opposing modulatory effects in glutamate-induced cell death in HT22 cells. K Ishige, M Tanaka, M Arakawa, H Saito, Y Ito, Neurochem Int. 47Ishige K, Tanaka M, Arakawa M, Saito H, Ito Y. Distinct nuclear factor-kB/Rel proteins have opposing modulatory effects in glutamate-induced cell death in HT22 cells. Neurochem Int. 2005;47:545-55.

Nutritional biochemistry of cellular glutathione. C K Sen, J Nutr Biochem. 8Sen CK. Nutritional biochemistry of cellular glutathione. J Nutr Biochem. 1997;8:660-72.

Glutathione metabolism. A Meister, Meth Enzymol. 251Meister A. Glutathione metabolism. Meth Enzymol. 1995;251:3-7.

Regulation of c-glutamyl-cysteine synthetase by nonallosteric feedback inhibition by glutathione. P G Richman, A Meister, J Biol Chem. 250Richman PG, Meister A. Regulation of c-glutamyl-cysteine synthetase by nonallosteric feedback inhibition by glu- tathione. J Biol Chem. 1975;250:1422-6.

The importance of glutathione in human disease. D M Townsend, K D Tew, H Tapiero, Biomed Pharmacother. 57Townsend DM, Tew KD, Tapiero H. The importance of glutathione in human disease. Biomed Pharmacother. 2003;57:145-55.

Role of glutathione in the radiation response of mammalian cells in vitro and in vivo. E A Bump, J M Brown, Pharmacol Ther. 47Bump EA, Brown JM. Role of glutathione in the radiation response of mammalian cells in vitro and in vivo. Pharmacol Ther. 1990;47:117-36.

N-acetylcysteine (D-and Lstereoisomers) prevents apoptotic death of neuronal cells. G Ferrari, C Y Yan, L A Greene, J Neurosci. 15Ferrari G, Yan CY, Greene LA. N-acetylcysteine (D-and L- stereoisomers) prevents apoptotic death of neuronal cells. J Neurosci. 1995;15:2857-66.

The antioxidant action of N-acetylcysteine: its reaction with hydrogen peroxide, hydroxyl radical, superoxide, and hypochlorous acid. O I Aruoma, B Halliwell, B M Hoey, J Butler, Free Radic Biol Med. 6Aruoma OI, Halliwell B, Hoey BM, Butler J. The antioxidant action of N-acetylcysteine: its reaction with hydrogen peroxide, hydroxyl radical, superoxide, and hypochlorous acid. Free Radic Biol Med. 1989;6:593-7.

. P Moldéus, I A Cotgreave, N-Acetylcysteine, Methods Enzymol. 234Moldéus P, Cotgreave IA. N-acetylcysteine. Methods Enzymol. 1994;234:482-92.

Reaction of lipoic acid with ebselen and hypochlorous acid. G P Biewenga, A Bast, Meth Enzymol. 251Biewenga GP, Bast A. Reaction of lipoic acid with ebselen and hypochlorous acid. Meth Enzymol. 1995;251:303-14.

Ebselen: A glutathione peroxidase mimic. H Sies, Methods Enzymol. 234Sies H. Ebselen: A glutathione peroxidase mimic. Methods Enzymol. 1994;234:476-82.

The reaction of ebselen with peroxynitrite. H Masumoto, H Sies, Chem Res Toxicol. 9Masumoto H, Sies H. The reaction of ebselen with peroxynitrite. Chem Res Toxicol. 1996;9:262-7.

Formation of thiocarbonyl compounds in the reaction of ebselen oxide with thiols. R S Glass, R Farooqui, M Sabahi, K W Ehler, J Org Chem. 54Glass RS, Farooqui R, Sabahi M, Ehler KW. Formation of thiocarbonyl compounds in the reaction of ebselen oxide with thiols. J Org Chem. 1989;54:1092-7.

Evidence that 4-hydroxynonenal mediates oxidative stress-induced neuronal apoptosis. I Kruman, A J Bruce-Keller, D Bredesen, G Waeg, M P Mattson, J Neurosci. 17Kruman I, Bruce-Keller AJ, Bredesen D, Waeg G, Mattson MP. Evidence that 4-hydroxynonenal mediates oxidative stress-induced neuronal apoptosis. J Neurosci. 1997;17:5089-100.

Role of 4-hydroxynonenal in stressmediated apoptosis signaling. Y C Awasthi, R Sharma, J Z Cheng, Y Yang, A Sharma, S S Singhal, S Awasthi, Mol Aspects Med. 24Awasthi YC, Sharma R, Cheng JZ, Yang Y, Sharma A, Singhal SS, Awasthi S. Role of 4-hydroxynonenal in stress- mediated apoptosis signaling. Mol Aspects Med. 2003;24:219-30.

4-Hydroxynonenal, an aldehydic product of lipid peroxidation, impairs signal transduction associated with muscarinic acetylcholine and metabotropic glutamate receptors: possible action on Ga q/11. E M Blanc, J F Kelly, R J Mark, G Waeg, M P Mattson, J Neurochem. 69Blanc EM, Kelly JF, Mark RJ, Waeg G, Mattson MP. 4- Hydroxynonenal, an aldehydic product of lipid peroxidation, impairs signal transduction associated with muscarinic acetylcholine and metabotropic glutamate receptors: possible action on Ga q/11 . J Neurochem. 1997;69:570-80.

Roles of lipid peroxidation in modulation of cellular signaling pathways, cell dysfunction, and death in the nervous system. J N Keller, M P Mattson, Rev Neurosci. 9Keller JN, Mattson MP. Roles of lipid peroxidation in modulation of cellular signaling pathways, cell dysfunction, and death in the nervous system. Rev Neurosci. 1998;9:105-16.

Congeners of N a -acetyl-L-cysteine but not aminoguanidine act as neuroprotectants from the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal. M D Neely, L Zimmerman, M J Picklo, J J Ou, C R Morales, K S Montine, V Amaranth, T J Montine, Free Radic Biol Med. 29Neely MD, Zimmerman L, Picklo MJ, Ou JJ, Morales CR, Montine KS, Amaranth V, Montine TJ. Congeners of N a -acetyl-L-cysteine but not aminoguanidine act as neuro- protectants from the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxy-2- nonenal. Free Radic Biol Med. 2000;29:1028-36.

4-Hydroxy-2(E)-nonenal inhibits CNS mitochondrial respiration at multiple sites. M J Picklo, V Amarnath, J O Mcintyre, D G Graham, T J Montine, J Neurochem. 72Picklo MJ, Amarnath V, McIntyre JO, Graham DG, Montine TJ. 4-Hydroxy-2(E)-nonenal inhibits CNS mito- chondrial respiration at multiple sites. J Neurochem. 1999;72:1617-24.

4-Hydroxynonenal modulates the long-term potentiation induced by L-type Ca 2+ channel activation in the rat dentate gyrus in vitro. T Akaishi, K Nakazawa, K Sato, Y Ohno, Y Ito, Neurosci Lett. 370Akaishi T, Nakazawa K, Sato K, Ohno Y, Ito Y. 4- Hydroxynonenal modulates the long-term potentiation induced by L-type Ca 2+ channel activation in the rat dentate gyrus in vitro. Neurosci Lett. 2004;370:155-9.

Modulation of voltage-gated Ca 2+ current by 4-hydroxynonenal in dentate granule cells. T Akaishi, K Nakazawa, K Sato, H Saito, Y Ohno, Y Ito, Biol Pharm Bull. 27Akaishi T, Nakazawa K, Sato K, Saito H, Ohno Y, Ito Y. Modulation of voltage-gated Ca 2+ current by 4-hydroxyno- nenal in dentate granule cells. Biol Pharm Bull. 2004;27:174-9.

Four-hydroxynonenal, a product of lipid peroxidation, is increased in the brain in Alzheimer's disease. W R Markesbery, M A Lovell, Neurobiol Aging. 19Markesbery WR, Lovell MA. Four-hydroxynonenal, a pro- duct of lipid peroxidation, is increased in the brain in Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiol Aging. 1998;19:33-6.

Increased oxidative stress in Alzheimer's disease as assessed with 4-hydroxynonenal but not malondialdehyde. L T Mcgrath, B M Mcgleenon, S Brennan, D Mccoll, S Mcilroy, A P Passmore, QJM. 94McGrath LT, McGleenon BM, Brennan S, McColl D, McILroy S, Passmore AP. Increased oxidative stress in Alzheimer's disease as assessed with 4-hydroxynonenal but not malondialdehyde. QJM. 2001;94:485-90.

Oxidative injury is present in Purkinje cells in patients with olivopontocerebellar atrophy. T Yamashita, Y Ando, K Obayashi, H Terazaki, N Sakashita, K Uchida, E Ohama, M Ando, M Uchino, J Neurol Sci. 175Yamashita T, Ando Y, Obayashi K, Terazaki H, Sakashita N, Uchida K, Ohama E, Ando M, Uchino M. Oxidative injury is present in Purkinje cells in patients with olivopontocerebellar atrophy. J Neurol Sci. 2000;175:107-10.

Comparative study of survival signal withdrawal-and 4-hydroxynonenal-induced cell death in cerebellar granule cells. Y Ito, M Arakawa, K Ishige, H Fukuda, Neurosci Res. 35Ito Y, Arakawa M, Ishige K, Fukuda H. Comparative study of survival signal withdrawal-and 4-hydroxynonenal-induced cell death in cerebellar granule cells. Neurosci Res. 1999;35:321-7.

S-allyl-L-cysteine selectively protects cultured rat hippocampal neurons from amyloid b-protein-and tunicamycin-induced neuronal death. Y Kosuge, Y Koen, K Ishige, K Minami, H Urasawa, H Saito, Y Ito, Neuroscience. 122Kosuge Y, Koen Y, Ishige K, Minami K, Urasawa H, Saito H, Ito Y. S-allyl-L-cysteine selectively protects cultured rat hippocampal neurons from amyloid b-protein-and tunica- mycin-induced neuronal death. Neuroscience. 2003;122: 885-95.

Metabolism of 4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal by central nervous system mitochondria is dependent on age and NAD + availability. M J Meyer, D E Mosely, V Amarnath, M J Picklo, Chem Res Toxicol. 17Meyer MJ, Mosely DE, Amarnath V, Picklo MJ. Metabolism of 4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal by central nervous system mitochondria is dependent on age and NAD + availability. Chem Res Toxicol. 2004;17:1272-9.

Mitochondrial oxidation of 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal in rat cerebral cortex. T C Murphy, V Amarnath, M J Picklo, J Neurochem. 84Murphy TC, Amarnath V, Picklo MJ. Mitochondrial oxida- tion of 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal in rat cerebral cortex. J Neurochem. 2003;84:1313-21.

Metabolism of 4-hydroxynonenal, a cytotoxic product of lipid peroxidation, in rat precision-cut liver slices. A Laurent, E Perdu-Durand, J Alary, L Debrauwer, J P Cravedi, Toxicol Lett. 114Laurent A, Perdu-Durand E, Alary J, Debrauwer L, Cravedi JP. Metabolism of 4-hydroxynonenal, a cytotoxic product of lipid peroxidation, in rat precision-cut liver slices. Toxicol Lett. 2000;114:203-14.

Metabolism of the lipid peroxidation product, 4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal, in isolated perfused rat heart. S Srivastava, A Chandra, L F Wang, W E Seifert, B B Dague, N H Ansari, S K Srivastava, A Bhatnagar, J Biol Chem. 273Srivastava S, Chandra A, Wang LF, Seifert WE, DaGue BB, Ansari NH, Srivastava SK, Bhatnagar A. Metabolism of the lipid peroxidation product, 4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal, in isolated perfused rat heart. J Biol Chem. 1998;273: 10893-900.

Mitochondria, oxygen free radicals, disease and ageing. S Raha, B H Robinson, Trends Biochem Sci. 25Raha S, Robinson BH. Mitochondria, oxygen free radicals, disease and ageing. Trends Biochem Sci. 2000;25:502-8.

Glutathione transferase protects neuronal cultures against four hydroxynonenal toxicity. C Xie, M A Lovell, W R Markesbery, Free Radic Biol Med. 25Xie C, Lovell MA, Markesbery WR. Glutathione transferase protects neuronal cultures against four hydroxynonenal toxicity. Free Radic Biol Med. 1998;25:979-88.

Preferential effects of nicotine and 4-(Nmethyl-N-nitrosamine)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone on mitochondrial glutathione S-transferase A4-4 induction and increased oxidative stress in the rat brain. S V Bhagwat, C Vijayasarathy, H Raza, J Mullick, N G Avadhani, Biochem Pharmacol. 56Bhagwat SV, Vijayasarathy C, Raza H, Mullick J, Avadhani NG. Preferential effects of nicotine and 4-(N- methyl-N-nitrosamine)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone on mito- chondrial glutathione S-transferase A4-4 induction and increased oxidative stress in the rat brain. Biochem Pharmacol. 1998;56:831-9.

Characterization of 4-hydroxynonenalinduced neuronal death in cerebellar granule neurons. M Arakawa, A Ishimura, Y Arai, K Kawabe, S Suzuki, K Ishige, Y Ito, Neurosci Res. in pressArakawa M, Ishimura A, Arai Y, Kawabe K, Suzuki S, Ishige K, Ito Y. Characterization of 4-hydroxynonenal- induced neuronal death in cerebellar granule neurons. Neurosci Res. in press.

Methodologies for the analysis of reduced and oxidized N-acetylcysteine in biological systems. I A Cotgreave, P Moldéus, Biopharm Drug Dispos. 8Cotgreave IA, Moldéus P. Methodologies for the analysis of reduced and oxidized N-acetylcysteine in biological systems. Biopharm Drug Dispos. 1987;8:365-75.

Clinical pharmacokinetics of N-acetylcysteine. M R Holdiness, Clin Pharmacokinet. 20Holdiness MR. Clinical pharmacokinetics of N-acetylcys- teine. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1991;20:123-34.

Activated charcoal and acetylcysteine absorption: Issues in interpreting pharmacokinetic data. W A Watson, P E Mckinney, DICP. 25Watson WA, McKinney PE. Activated charcoal and acet- ylcysteine absorption: Issues in interpreting pharmacokinetic data. DICP. 1991;25:1081-4.

Hypothesis: Can N-acetylcysteine be beneficial in Parkinson's disease?. M Martínez, N Martínez, A I Hernández, M L Ferrándiz, Life Sci. 64Martínez M, Martínez N, Hernández AI, Ferrándiz ML. Hypothesis: Can N-acetylcysteine be beneficial in Parkinson's disease? Life Sci. 1999;64:1253-7.

The antioxidants alpha-lipoic acid and N-acetylcysteine reverse memory impairment and brain oxidative stress in aged SAMP8 mice. S A Farr, H F Poon, D Dogrukol-Ak, J Drake, W A Banks, E Eyerman, D A Butterfield, J E Morley, J Neurochem. 84Farr SA, Poon HF, Dogrukol-Ak D, Drake J, Banks WA, Eyerman E, Butterfield DA, Morley JE. The antioxidants alpha-lipoic acid and N-acetylcysteine reverse memory impairment and brain oxidative stress in aged SAMP8 mice. J Neurochem. 2003;84:1173-83.

Therapeutic efficacy of aortic administration of N-acetylcysteine as a chemoprotectant against bone marrow toxicity after intracarotid administration of alkylators, with or without glutathione depletion in a rat model. E A Neuwelt, M A Pagel, B P Hasler, T G Deloughery, L L Muldoon, Cancer Res. 61Neuwelt EA, Pagel MA, Hasler BP, Deloughery TG, Muldoon LL. Therapeutic efficacy of aortic administration of N-acetylcysteine as a chemoprotectant against bone marrow toxicity after intracarotid administration of alkylators, with or without glutathione depletion in a rat model. Cancer Res. 2001;61:7868-74.

Protection against cisplatin-induced ototoxicity by N-acetylcysteine in a rat model. Thomas Dickey, D Muldoon, L L Kraemer, D F Neuwelt, E A , Hear Res. 193Thomas Dickey D, Muldoon LL, Kraemer DF, Neuwelt EA. Protection against cisplatin-induced ototoxicity by N-acet- ylcysteine in a rat model. Hear Res. 2004;193:25-30.

M J Edwards, I P Hargreaves, S J Heales, S J Jones, V Ramachandran, K P Bhatia, S Sisodiya, Unverricht-Lundborg N-Acetylcysteine, Disease, Variable response and possible side effects. 59Edwards MJ, Hargreaves IP, Heales SJ, Jones SJ, Ramachandran V, Bhatia KP, Sisodiya S. N-acetylcysteine and Unverricht-Lundborg disease: Variable response and possible side effects. Neurology. 2002;59:1447-9.

Treatment of four siblings with progressive myoclonus epilepsy of the Unverricht-Lundborg type with N-acetylcysteine. R W Hurd, B J Wilder, W R Helveston, B M Uthman, Neurology. 47Hurd RW, Wilder BJ, Helveston WR, Uthman BM. Treatment of four siblings with progressive myoclonus epilepsy of the Unverricht-Lundborg type with N-acetylcys- teine. Neurology. 1996;47:1264-8.

N-acetylcysteine therapy for Unverricht-Lundborg disease. L M Selwa, Neurology. 52Selwa LM. N-acetylcysteine therapy for Unverricht- Lundborg disease. Neurology. 1999;52:426-7.

Oxygen free radicals and brain dysfunction. J A Jesberger, J S Richardson, Int J Neurosci. 57Jesberger JA, Richardson JS. Oxygen free radicals and brain dysfunction. Int J Neurosci. 1991;57:1-17.

Haloperidol-induced neurotoxicity-possible implications for tardive dyskinesia. R Galili, Mosberg, I Gil-Ad, A Weizman, E Melamed, D Offen, J Neural Transm. 107Galili R, Mosberg, Gil-Ad I, Weizman A, Melamed E, Offen D. Haloperidol-induced neurotoxicity-possible impli- cations for tardive dyskinesia. J Neural Transm. 2000;107:479-90.

A novel brain-targeted antioxidant (AD4) attenuates haloperidol-induced abnormal movement in rats: Implications for tardive dyskinesia. O Sadan, M Bahat-Stromza, Y Gilgun-Sherki, D Atlas, E Melamed, D Offen, Clin Neuropharmacol. 28Sadan O, Bahat-Stromza M, Gilgun-Sherki Y, Atlas D, Melamed E, Offen D. A novel brain-targeted antioxidant (AD4) attenuates haloperidol-induced abnormal movement in rats: Implications for tardive dyskinesia. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2005;28:285-8.

Apoptosis and increased generation of reactive oxygen species in Down's syndrome neurons in vitro. J Busciglio, B A Yankner, Nature. 378Busciglio J, Yankner BA. Apoptosis and increased generation of reactive oxygen species in Down's syndrome neurons in vitro. Nature. 1995;378:776-9.

Clinical features and genetics of progressive myoclonus epilepsy of the Univerricht-Lundborg type. A E Lehesjoki, M Koskiniemi, Ann Med. 30Lehesjoki AE, Koskiniemi M. Clinical features and genetics of progressive myoclonus epilepsy of the Univerricht- Lundborg type. Ann Med. 1998;30:474-80.

Free radical involvement in neuropsychiatric illnesses. J B Lohr, J A Browning, Psychopharmacol Bull. 31Lohr JB, Browning JA. Free radical involvement in neurop- sychiatric illnesses. Psychopharmacol Bull. 1995;31:159-65.

Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease. Brain levels of glutathione, glutathione disulfide, and vitamin E. J D Adams, L K Klaidman, I N Odunze, H C Shen, C A Miller, Mol Chem Neuropathol. 14Adams JD, Klaidman LK, Odunze IN, Shen HC, Miller CA. Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease. Brain levels of glu- tathione, glutathione disulfide, and vitamin E. Mol Chem Neuropathol. 1991;14:213-26.

Oxidative damage in neurodegenerative disease. P Jenner, Lancet. 344Jenner P. Oxidative damage in neurodegenerative disease. Lancet. 1994;344:796-8.

Nacetyl cysteine alleviates oxidative damage to central nervous system of ApoE-deficient mice following folate and vitamin E-deficiency. F Tchantchou, M Graves, E Rogers, D Ortiz, T B Shea, J Alzheimers Dis. 7Tchantchou F, Graves M, Rogers E, Ortiz D, Shea TB. N- acetyl cysteine alleviates oxidative damage to central nervous system of ApoE-deficient mice following folate and vitamin E-deficiency. J Alzheimers Dis. 2005;7:135-8 discussion 173.

Pilot study of the reducing effect on amyloidosis in vivo by three FDA pre-approved drugs via the Alzheimer's APP 59 untranslated region. S Tucker, M Ahl, A Bush, D Westaway, X Huang, J T Rogers, Curr Alzheimer Res. 2Tucker S, Ahl M, Bush A, Westaway D, Huang X, Rogers JT. Pilot study of the reducing effect on amyloidosis in vivo by three FDA pre-approved drugs via the Alzheimer's APP 59 untranslated region. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2005;2:249-54.

Alpha-tocopherol in the ventricular cerebrospinal fluid of Parkinson's disease patients: Dose-response study and correlations with plasma levels. E J Pappert, C C Tangney, C G Goetz, Z D Ling, J W Lipton, G T Stebbins, P M Carvey, Neurology. 47Pappert EJ, Tangney CC, Goetz CG, Ling ZD, Lipton JW, Stebbins GT, Carvey PM. Alpha-tocopherol in the ventri- cular cerebrospinal fluid of Parkinson's disease patients: Dose-response study and correlations with plasma levels. Neurology. 1996;47:1037-42.

Effects of tocopherol and deprenyl on the progression of disability in early Parkinson's disease, The Parkinson Study Group. N Engl J Med. 328Effects of tocopherol and deprenyl on the progression of disability in early Parkinson's disease, The Parkinson Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1993;328:176-83.

Onoff effects in Parkinson's disease: A controlled investigation of ascorbic acid therapy. D K Reilly, L Hershey, L Rivera-Calimlim, I Shoulson, Adv Neurol. 37Reilly DK, Hershey L, Rivera-Calimlim L, Shoulson I. On- off effects in Parkinson's disease: A controlled investigation of ascorbic acid therapy. Adv Neurol. 1983;37:51-60.

Preventive effect of antioxidants in MPTP-induced mouse model of Parkinson's disease. S W Park, S H Kim, K H Park, S D Kim, J Y Kim, S Y Baek, B S Chung, C D Kang, Neurosci Lett. 363Park SW, Kim SH, Park KH, Kim SD, Kim JY, Baek SY, Chung BS, Kang CD. Preventive effect of antioxidants in MPTP-induced mouse model of Parkinson's disease. Neurosci Lett. 2004;363:243-6.

Redox regulation of neuronal migration in a Down Syndrome model. T N Behar, C A Colton, Free Radic Biol Med. 35Behar TN, Colton CA. Redox regulation of neuronal migration in a Down Syndrome model. Free Radic Biol Med. 2003;35:566-75.