Luminescence of Higher Mushrooms


Vladimir S Bondar bondvs@mail.ru 
Siberian Federal University
79 SvobodnyKrasnoyarsk660041 Russia

Institute of Biophysics SB RAS
50/50, 660036Akademgorodok, KrasnoyarskRussia

Osamu Shimomura 
Siberian Federal University
79 SvobodnyKrasnoyarsk660041 Russia

Marine Biological Laboratory
Woods Hole
02543MassachusettsUnited States of America

Josef I Gitelson 
Siberian Federal University
79 SvobodnyKrasnoyarsk660041 Russia

Institute of Biophysics SB RAS
50/50, 660036Akademgorodok, KrasnoyarskRussia

Luminescence of Higher Mushrooms
AF1FE46E1CBF359E3E56DEDF74FDF43CReceived 13.12.2012, received in revised form 20.12.2012, accepted 27.12.2012higher mushroomsbioluminescencechemiluminescenceluciferaseluciferinemitter
The review highlights the results of experimental studies on fungal luminescence carried out during last two centuries.Present concepts on the luminescent system and light emission mechanism in higher fungi are discussed.

share bioluminescence capability with animals and bacteria, however, the deeper the insight into the mechanism of this amazing phenomenon the more obvious is its fundamental distinction in mushrooms from the luminescence mechanism of animals and plants.

Bioluminescence of fungi, emission of light visible with unaided eye (Fig. 1), has been known down the ages.Several authors (Johnson, Haneda 1966;Shimomura, 2006) note, that according to Harvey, this phenomenon was described as early as by Aristotle (fourth century BC) and Pliny the Elder (first century AC) in «Historia Naturalis» (Harvey, 1952(Harvey, , 1957)).Describing luminescence of rotting tree Aristotle called this phenomenon «shining wood» and «fox fire», while Pliny the Elder noted that luminescent white mushrooms with sweetish taste and exhibiting pharmacological effect can be found on rotting trees.G.E. Rumph wrote in «Herbarium Amboiense», that residents of Moluccas (Indonesia) illuminated their way in a dark forest by fruiting bodies of bioluminescent mushrooms (quote from Harvey, 1957).Harvey (1957) noted that on the one hand the aboriginals of Micronesia used luminescent mushrooms as decorations for ritual dances to paint their faces to intimidate enemies, on the other hand luminous mushrooms were frequently destroyed because to find them was considered an ill omen.

Emotions of people who saw for the first time the mushrooms glow is anyone's guess.Surviving rave records of seafarers of Ancient times speak 20     It should be mentioned that in the two recent centuries a considerable number of the species of luminous mushroom were found; most of them belong to basidiomycetes class (Shimomura, 2006).By now luminous mushrooms have been found in North and South America, Europe, Asia,


For instance, in representatives of Mycena and

Omphalotus genera both mycelium and fruiting body can glow, while in the species of Armillarea genus -only mycelium and rhizomorphs.A luminous mushroom emits light only for a certain period (periods) of its life cycle; after and before that period, it practically does not glow (Shimomura, 2006).On the whole the luminescence of younger fruiting bodies and young actively growing mycelium is brighter than mature fruiting bodies and old mycelium, even though the intensity of their luminescence varies widely with species and environment.

On the one hand, the identical maximum of light emission of luminous mushrooms (Fig. 2) suggests the similarity, if not identity of their molecular basis.This suggestion can be made at least for the mushrooms whose emission spectra have been studied (see above).However, the similarity might be only with the terminal emitters of luminescence in different mushroom species, like identical terminal emitter -green fluorescent protein (GFP) common for animals with different bioluminescent systems (Shimomura et al., 1962).(Lingle, 1989(Lingle, , 1993;;Bermudes et al., 1992).

Evidently, the microbiological works aimed to develop methods and to optimize cultivation conditions for luminous mushrooms (Fig. 3) are of primary significance in investigating fungal bioluminescence.Production under laboratory conditions of mushroom biomass (mycelium, fruiting bodies) with steady glow (Fig. 4    The luminescence of mushrooms has been studied for more than a hundred years.

However, it should be noted, that the structure of luminescence system of luminous mushrooms and mechanism of light emission so far remain an enigma, distinctly differing from the bioluminescence systems of bacteria and many animal species (flagellate, coelenterate, worms, insects, crustaceans, mollusks, fish) decoded in recent decades (Shimomura, 2006).

There is no consensus of opinion among the specialists of fungal bioluminescence about the molecular-cellular organization and light emission mechanism of the luminescence system of higher mushrooms.Currently conventional can be assumed two alternative concepts.

According to the first, mushroom luminescence is determined by functioning of the luciferase-   However, here it is important to note several moments.Luciferin (Ln) and «soluble enzyme» preparations, which were used by the authors, were coarse or only partially purified.
luciferin system (Airth,
Luciferase was the preparation of insoluble particles, probably, containing many different substances.What is more, when the luciferin and luciferase preparations were made from some species of luminous mushrooms the luciferinluciferase reaction was negative.The light production reported by the authors seems to be a result of a sophisticated mechanism involving unknown components in the mixture analyzed, and, probably, the decisive step of light-emitting reaction is not reflected by the above scheme (Fig. 5) (Shimomura, 2006).It is not quite clear, either why to prove the hypothesis of luciferin-luciferase nature of high mushrooms'

luminescence the authors (Airth, Foerster, 1962, 1964) to extract the substrate (luciferin) used one mushroom species, and for the enzyme (luciferase) -a different one.In addition, to isolate luciferase the authors seems to have erroneously used Collybia velutipes mushroom, identifying it as luminous; later Wassink (1978) showed that this species is not bioluminescent.

Twenty years later, positive results were also  it stimulated luminescence of the mycelium, and the luminescence increased by several orders with the addition of hydrogen peroxide (Fig. 7).

Spectral analysis of extracts showed (Fig. 8)

two main peaks in the short-wave range (210 and 255 nm) and a slight bulge in the 400 nm range.

The authors found that the activator-containing extracts exhibit fluorescence in the visible range (wavelength range 480 -630 nm) with a maximum at 520 -537 nm (Fig. 8), which coincides with the data of luminescence spectrum of N. nambi mycelium in vivo (Bondar et al., 2011).It can be argued that the extracts contain the emitter of luminescence system of N. nambi mushroom;

thus, the authors proposed to call it nambin.The authors noted that to extract nambin in pure form and to find its structure and physical-chemical properties are the top priority challenge in further research.

An alternative concept of the luminescence mechanism of higher mushrooms, namely, chemiluminescent reaction that does not involve a specialized enzyme is based on the analysis of the results obtained by various authors.

To date, there are experimental facts indicating that higher mushrooms which do         For instance, as it was described earlier, the destruction of mushroom is always accompanied by the disappearance of luminescence (Buller, 1924;Harvey, 1952).As to the considerable increase of luminescence intensity of Armillaria mellea mycelium after soaking it in water, which the author observed in his studies, he explains it by washing SOD out of the biomass (Shimomura, 2006).

Considering the evidence described above, it is reasonable to suggest the involvement of active forms of oxygen in the light emitting      In our opinion, the proposed scheme (Fig. 13) is in agreement with, and also explains the results of several authors whose works were considered in the present review, and helps develop concepts of the chemiluminescent light-emission of higher mushrooms that do not involve a specialized enzyme.

In summary, this review retrospectively presents experimental facts established by researchers on fungal luminescence in the recent two hundred years.In concluding the review, it would be expedient to make several conclusions.

Even though luminescence mechanism of higher mushrooms is not clearly understood, significant results produced in recent years give new insight into the nature of the light emission of higher fungi.This allows expressing a hope that the mechanism of luminescence of higher fungi will be disclosed in not too distant future.Results of several studies considered in the review suggest that it is different from known mechanisms of luminescence of other organisms, such as bacteria, invertebrates, animals and fish.On this basis, we believe that to transcript of the mechanism of mushroom luminescence will be important not only for fundumental biology, but also to extend the boundaries of luminescent analysis.


G34.31.058).



Unique position the kingdom of mushrooms holds in the living nature was sagaciously foretold by French botanist and mycologist Sebastien Vaillant whose words are given in the epigraph of this paper.Fabulous foresight at the turn of the XVII th and XVIII th centuries when nothing was known about biochemistry, not to mention genetics.Yet, further development of biology proves equidistance of the kingdom of mushrooms from both animals and plants.But traditions die hard and up to now mycology is studied in universities in the course of general botany.The mechanism of bioluminescence in fungi, the knowledge of which is reviewed in this work, also proves their unique position.Fungi r a,b,* , Osamu Shimomura a,c and Josef I. Gitelson a,b and Biotechnology, Siberian Federal University, 79 Svobodny, Krasnoyarsk, 660041 Russia 50/50 Akademgorodok, Krasnoyarsk, 660036 Russia ole, Massachusetts, 02543 United States of America E-mail address: bondvs@mail.ruthe general harmony of nature, to confuse the most ists in despair» (Vaillant Sébastien, 1669-1722).imental studies on fungal luminescence carried out ts on the luminescent system and light emission scence, chemiluminescence, luciferase, luciferin, «Fungi -are the devil product that disturbs the general harmony of nature, to confuse the most talented researchers and get of young botanists in despair» (Vaillant Sébastien, 1669-1722).




Figures:


1
1
Fig. 1.




Fig. 1.


Fig. 2 .
2
Fig. 2.


Fig. 1 .
1
Fig. 1.Emission of visible light by mushrooms: А -Mycena lampadis; B -Filoboletus sp.; C -Mycena sp.; D, E, F -Panellus stipticus; G, H -Omphalotus sp.;I -Neonothopanus nambi.Photographs (A -H) -from official sites of National Geographic (http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/) and Flikr® from Yahoo (http://www.flickr.com/);photo (I) was kindly provided by Vietnamese researcher Dao Thi Van (Bio-Lumi Co., Ltd., Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam)




Australia, and Africa.The list keeps steadily growing because more and more new species are found, specifically in the subtropical and tropical zones of the globe where natural conditions are most favorable for their habitation.While in the first half of the XX th century A.A. Yachevsky (1933) reported only 28 species of luminous mushrooms, by the end of the century their number had grown to 40 species (Wassink, 1978; Herring, 1994).Modern methods of identifying biological objects allowed Desjardin et al. (2008) to attribute about 70 species of basidiomycetes to luminous mushrooms.Further studies of fungal bioluminescence made possible to put in the list already 80 species of luminous mushrooms, not including synonyms (Vydryakova et al., 2009).Recently seven more new species of luminous mushrooms were found; the authors attributed them to Mycena family (Desjardin et al., 2010).Even though mushroom bioluminescence has been studied out for many years, research is focused on three main directions.They are: to develop methods of cultivating luminous mushrooms under laboratory conditions (Endo et al., 1970; Bermudes et al., 1990; Weitz et al., 2001; Mendes et al., 2008; Dao, 2009), to study molecular organization of the luminescent system and the mechanisms of mushroom luminescence (Kawamura, 1915; Airth, McElroy, 1959; Airth, Foerster, 1962; Kuwabara, Wassink, 1966; Kamzolkina et al., 1983; Shimomura, 1992; Shimomura et al., 1993; Shimomura, 2006; Oliveira, Stevani, 2009; Bondar et al., 2011; Oliveira et al., 2012a), and to study feasibility of applying fungal luminescence for analysis (Weitz et al., 2002; Horswell et al., 2005; Brock et al., 2008; Vydryakova et al., 2009; Mendes, Stevani, 2010).It is common knowledge that bioluminescent mushrooms are generally saprophytes (less frequently -pathogenes) of plants.At different stages of their life cycle they emit greenish light (Fig. 1) with maximum in range 520-530 nm (Van den Burg, 1943; Endo et al., 1970; Lavelle et al., 1972; O'Kane et al., 1990; Shimomura, 2006; Desjardin et al., 2008; Bondar et al., 2011).




Fig. 1.


Fig. 2 .
2
Fig. 2.


Fig. 2 .
2
Fig.2.Bioluminescence spectrum of N. nambi mycelium in vivo(Bondar et al., 2011)


Fig. 3 .Fig. 4 .Fig. 5 .
345
Fig. 3.


Fig. 3 .
3
Fig. 3. Different methods of cultivating luminous mushrooms under laboratory conditions.The photographs show the appearance of: 1 -fruiting body of N. nambi, 2 -mycelium of A. borealis cultivated in Petri dishes on liquid nutrient media of different composition, 3 -globules of N. nambi mycelium grown deep in vials in liquid nutrient medium.The samples were produced by S.E.Medvedeva, E.K. Rodicheva and N.S.Manukovsky, researchers of the Institute of Biophysics of SB RAS (photo by E.S. Medvedeva)


Fig. 4 .
4
Fig. 4. Appearance (top) and luminescence (bottom) of the mycelium of different mushroom species grown in Petri dishes on liquid and solid nutrient media. 1 -A.borealis, 2 -P.stipticus, 3 -A.mellea, 4 -N.nambi.Bioluminescence intensity of mycelium samples was recorded with Universal Hood II (USA) system.The samples were produced by S.E.Medvedeva, K.V. Purtov and O.A. Mogilnaya, researchers of the Institute of Biophysics of SB RAS (photo by S.E.Medvedeva and K.V. Purtov)


Fig. 4 .Fig. 5 .
45
Fig. 4.


Fig. 5 .
5
Fig.5.The two-stage luciferin-luciferase reaction in light-emitting mushrooms proposed by Airth and Foerster(Shimomura, 2006)


Fig. 6 .Fig. 7 .Fig. 8 .
678
Fig. 6.


Fig. 6 .
6
Fig. 6.Structure of luciferin precursors from luminous mushrooms: left -panal, PS-А and PS-B from Panellus stipticus; right -partial structure of the precursor of luciferin from Mycena citricolor(Shimomura, 2006)


Fig. 6 .Fig. 7 .Fig. 8 .
678
Fig. 6.


Fig. 7 . 22 time
722
Fig.7.Luminescence of N. nambi mycelium stimulated by different components: a -successive additions of activator-containing extract; b -single addition of hydrogen peroxide; c -successive additions of first extract and then hydrogen peroxide; d -another addition of hydrogen peroxide to the sample (с) after its light emission dropped to steady-state level.Black arrows show moments when globules of mycelium were added into the measurement cell, and additions of components are designated by pink (activator-containing extract) and green (hydrogen peroxide) arrows


Fig. 8 .
8
Fig. 8. Spectral characteristics of extracts from Neonothopanus nambi mycelium: left -absorption spectrum, right -fluorescence spectrum (Bondar et al., 2012b)


Fig. 9 .Fig. 10 .
910
Fig. 9.


Fig. 9 .
9
Fig. 9. Diversity of species of higher mushrooms exhibiting chemiluminescence and Numbers designate specific luminous intensity of fruiting bodies, quanta • s -1 • g -1


Fig. 9 .
9
Fig. 9.


Fig. 10 .
10
Fig. 10.Chemiluminescence intensity of fragments of the fruiting body of various higher mushroom species




reaction of higher mushrooms.This may indicate that the mechanism of mushroom luminescence involves oxidase enzymes for the oxidation of organic substrates.Such a view is held by researchers who studied bioluminescence of the luminous mushroom Neonothopanus nambi(Bondar et al., 2011; Bondar et al., 2012а;Bondar et al., 2012b).Experiments with globular mycelium (Fig.3) grown deep in vials showed that the Fenton reagent (Fe 2+ and Н 2 О 2 ) does not stimulate luminescence in the case of N. nambi.However, luminescence was stimulated by the additions of hydrogen peroxide only (Fig.7), which may be an indicative of the involvement of peroxidase or peroxidases in mushroom luminescence mechanism.It was also established that after the addition of an extract containing probable luminescence emitter nambin (see above) to mycelial globules, subsequent addition of hydrogen peroxide increased luminescence substantially and quickly -often exceeding the initial level of luminescence by several orders.Emission intensity of mycelial globules can be so high, that it is visible in darkness by naked eyes, and the high luminescence level can continue for several hours.After the luminescence decreases to the initial steady state level, a new addition of Н 2 О 2 produces a rapid spike of emission with the light signal amplitude comparable to the initial one (Fig.7).It should be emphasized that luminescence of N. nambi can be stimulated repeatedly without new additions of extract.This may be additional evidence that favors the presence in the extract of the luminescence emitter that is not spent in the course of luminescence reaction, thus providing the possibility of repeated stimulation of luminescence.The luminescence of N. nambi mycelium was shown to be markedly suppressed by the addition of ascorbic acid, an indicative of involving radical mechanisms as the basis of luminescence.The results produced make possible to suggest that the luminescence mechanism in higher mushrooms may be analogous to the mechanism of well-known luminol -Н 2 О 2 chemiluminescent reaction (Fig.11)(Bondar et al., 2012b).From the scheme presented it is evident that to activate mushroom emission, a third componentreaction catalyst -is required in addition to the emitter and active oxygen forms (e.g., hydrogen peroxide).In the luminol reaction, the role of catalyst is performed by ions of transition metals (e.g., Mn, Fe, Cu) or enzymes with oxidase function (specifically -peroxidases).It should be noted that N. nambi mycelium was found to be stimulated by manganese ions(Bondar et al., 2011).This suggests involvement in mushroom light emission reaction of peroxidase enzymes, e.g., Mn-peroxidase (or Mn-peroxidases) of lignin-destroying enzyme complex.So far transformation of the emitter (nambin) in the course of emission reactions (Fig.11) remains unknown.At the same time it cannot be ruled out that ergosterine (provitamin D 2 ) may be the catalyst (or activator) of fungal luminescence(Bondar et al., 2012b).This version seems valid for two reasons.First, ergosterine is among the most important components of the mushroom cell wall that provide the cell wall with an integrity, fluidity and barrier function, and the activities of enzymes associated with it(Sergeev, Sergeev, 2003).Second, ergosterine is also a well-known activator (intensifier) of chemiluminescence in the tissues of a living organism providing higher quantum yields(Zhuravlev, Zhuravleva, 1975).However, this version requires additional investigation.As previously reported by other authors studied of bioluminescent mushroom N. nambi, various methods of mechanical destruction of mycelium result in irreversible loss of luminescence activity(Bondar et al., 2011;Bondar et al., 2012b).Thus, the authors suggested that the luminescent system of N. nambi may be localized on the cell wall or in the structural elements of the mushroom cell wall.Such an assumption is favored by the results of recent studies of luminous mycelium of Panellus stipticus ((Bull: Fr.) Karst., IBSO


Fig. 11 .Fig. 12 .
1112
Fig. 11.


Fig. 11 .
11
Fig. 11.Chemiluminescent luminol-hydrogen peroxide reaction (top) and assumed chemiluminescent reaction for the luminescence of N. nambi mushroom (bottom)




Fig. 11.


Fig. 12 .
12
Fig. 12. Luminescent formations, recorded by confocal scanning microscopy in Panellus stipticus grown on solid nutrient medium: local formations on the surface of hyphae (yellow arrows); vast areas in the agar (red arrows).Marker -20 μm.(photo by A.P. Puzyr and A.E. Burov)




Fig. 13.


Fig. 13 .
13
Fig.13.Hypothetical scheme of possible mechanisms of the chemiluminescent light-emission of higher mushrooms


21 h√ (1) Ln + NADH + H + LnH 2 + NAD + Soluble enzyme (2) LnH 2 + O 2 Ln + H 2 O + Particulate luciferase Light h√ (1) Ln + NADH + H + LnH 2 + NAD + Soluble enzyme (2) LnH 2 + O 2 Ln + H 2 O + Particulate luciferase Light
) opensnew opportunities for a broad range of studies:morphological strains of luminous mushrooms;structural-functional organization of mushroomluminescence systems; feasibility of thepractical application of fungal luminescencefor analysis.

light intensity (quanta х sec -1 х g -1 ) х 10 6
30RUSSULALESCANTHARELLALESrelative OTHERS AGARICALES BOLETALESAgaricusLicoperdonInocybeCortinariusHygrocybeLyophyllumMarasmiusMycenaArmillariaGalerinaHebelomaClitocybeCollybiaLepistaLeccinumChroogomphusSuillusCantharellusHydnumRussula aureaRussula acrifoliaRussula anthracinaRussula cyanoxantaRussula foetensRussula delicaRussula ochroleucaRussula sp.LactariusPolyporalesnot definedfruit body

light intensity (quanta х sec -1 х g -1 ) х 10 6
30RUSSULALESCANTHARELLALESrelative OTHERS AGARICALES BOLETALESAgaricusLicoperdonInocybeCortinariusHygrocybeLyophyllumMarasmiusMycenaArmillariaGalerinaHebelomaClitocybeCollybiaLepistaLeccinumChroogomphusSuillusCantharellusHydnumRussula aureaRussula acrifoliaRussula anthracinaRussula cyanoxantaRussula foetensRussula delicaRussula ochroleucaRussula sp.LactariusPolyporalesnot definedfruit body

Mechanism of the well-known luminol -peroxide reaction
luminol + H 2 O 2Catalyst:α-aminoftalic acid + N 2 + h√
bivalent ions (Fe, Mn, Cu) / or heme / or oxidases (peroxidases)Mechanism of a


hypothetical chemiluminescent reaction in the fungus
nambin + H 2 O 2Catalyst:nambin* → nambin + h√ ???bivalent ions (Fe, Mn, Cu) / or heme / or oxidases (peroxidases)

Mechanism of the well-known luminol -peroxide reaction
luminol + H 2 O 2 luminol + H 2 O 2Catalyst: oxidases (peroxidases) bivalent ions (Fe, Mn, Cu) / or heme / or Catalyst:α-aminoftalic acid + N 2 + h√ α-aminoftalic acid + N 2 + h√
bivalent ions (Fe, Mn, Cu) / or heme / or oxidases (peroxidases)Mechanism of a


hypothetical chemiluminescent reaction in the fungus
nambin + H 2 O 2 nambin + H 2 O 2Catalyst: Catalyst:nambin* → nambin + h√ ??? nambin* → nambin + h√ ???bivalent ions (Fe, Mn, Cu) / or heme / or oxidases (peroxidases) bivalent ions (Fe, Mn, Cu) / or heme / or oxidases (peroxidases)
Vladimir S. Bondar, Osamu Shimomura… Luminescence of Higher Mushrooms

Characteristics of cell-free bioluminescence. R L Airth, Light and Life, McElroy W.D., Glass B.1961Johns Hopkins PressBaltimore

The isolation of catalytic components required for cell-free fungal bioluminescence. R L Airth, G E Foerster, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 971962

Enzymes associated with bioluminescence of Panus stipticus luminescens and Panus stipticus nonluminescens. R L Airth, G E Foerster, J. Bacteriol. 881964

Light emission from extracts of luminous fungi. R L Airth, W D Mcelroy, J. Bacteriol. 771959

Bioluminescence as a possible auxiliary oxygen detoxifying mechanism in elaterid larvae. Free Radic. M P Barros, E J Bechara, Biol. Med. 241998

Effects of culture conditions on mycelial growth and luminescence in Panellus stipticus. D Bermudes, V L Gerlach, K H Nealson, Mycologia. 821990

Low-level bioluminescence detected in Mycena haematopus Basidiocarps. D Bermudes, R H Petersen, K H Nealson, Mycologia. 841992

Photoproteins as biological calcium indicators. J R Blinks, F G Prendergast, D G Allen, Pharmacol. Rev. 281976

Measurement of Ca++ concentrations in living cells. J R Blinks, W G Wier, P Hess, F G Prendergast, Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 401982

The luminescent system of the luminous fungus Neonothopanus nambi. V S Bondar, A P Puzyr, K V Purtov, S E Medvedeva, E K Rodicheva, J I Gitelson, Dokl. Biochem. Biophys. 4382011

A study of Neonothopanus nambi luminescent system. V S Bondar, A P Puzyr, K V Purtov, S E Medvedeva, E K Rodicheva, G S Kalacheva, J I Gitelson, Luminescence. 272012a

About mechanism of light emission the fungus Neonothopanus nambi. V S Bondar, E K Rodicheva, S E Medvedeva, N A Tyulkova, A B Tyaglik, B A Shpak, J I Gitelson, Dokl. Biochem. Biophys. 2012bin press

Experiments concerning the relation between light and air in shining wood and fish. R Boyle, Phil. Trans. 21668

Bioluminescent Aspergillus fumigatus, a new tool for drug efficiency testing and in vivo monitoring of invasive aspergillosis. M Brock, G Jouvion, S Droin-Bergère, O Dussurget, M A Nicola, O Ibrahim-Granet, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 742008

The bioluminescence of Panus stipticus. A H R Buller, Researches on Fungi. III.1924London: Longmans, Green and Company

Pilot culturing of a luminous mushroom Omphalotus af. illudent (Neonothopanus nambi). T V Dao, Biotechnology. 62009

Chemiluminescence of cultivated mushrooms of Vietnam. T V Dao, N S Manukovsky, J I Gitelson, Dokl. Biochem. Biophys. 2012in press

Fungi bioluminescence revisited. D E Desjardin, A G Oliveira, C V Stevani, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 72008

D E Desjardin, B A Perry, D J Lodge, C V Stevani, E Nagasawa, Luminescent Mycena: new and noteworthy species. 2010102

Note sur la fonction photog´enique chez la Pholas dactylus. R Dubois, C. R. Soc. Biol. 391887

Fluorescent constituents and cultivation of Lampteromyces japonicus. M Endo, M Kajiwara, K Nakanishi, J. Chem. Soc. D: Chem. Commun. 1970. 1970

Note on the phosphorescence of Agaricus (Pleurotus) candescens, Műll. Victorian Nat. J Ewart, 190623174

Chemiluminescent emission of tissues of fruit bodies of higher fungi. J I Gitelson, V S Bondar, S E Medvedeva, E K Rodicheva, G A Vydryakova, Dokl. Biochem. Biophys. 4432012a

Chemiluminescence of higher fungi. J Gitelson, V Bondar, E Rodicheva, S Medvedeva, G Vydryakova, Luminescence. 271182012b

. J I Gitelson, E K Rodicheva, S E Medvedeva, Luminous Bacteria, Kondrat'eva E.N.1984Nauka277Ed. Novosibirsk

Studies on bioluminescence. XIV. The specificity of luciferin and luciferase. E N Harvey, J. Gen. Physiol. 41922

. E N Harvey, 1952Academic Press649New York

A history of luminescence from the earliest times until 1900. E N Harvey, J.H. Furst Company1957768Baltimore, Maryland

. P J Herring, Luminous fungi. Mycologist. 81994

Construction and application of a luminescent eukaryotic biosensor. R P Hollis, 1999University of AberdeenPhD Thesis

Design and application of a biosensor for monitoring toxicity of compounds to eukaryotes. R P Hollis, K Killham, L A Glover, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 662000

Impact of heavy metal amended sewage sludge on forest soils as assessed by bacterial and fungal biosensors. J Horswell, H J Weitz, H J Percival, T W Speir, Biol. Fertil. Soils. 422005

Recombinant obelin: cloning and expression of cDNA, purification and characterization as a calcium indicator. B A Illarionov, L A Frank, V A Illarionova, V S Bondar, E S Vysotski, J R Blinks, Meth. Enzymol. 3052000

Lampteromyces bioluminescence. I. Identification of riboflavin as the light emitter in mushroom Lampteromyces japonicus. M Isobe, D Uyakul, T Goto, J. Biolum. Chemilum. 11987

Lampteromyces bioluminescence. II. Lampteroflavin, a light emitter in the luminous mushroom Lampteromyces japonicus. M Isobe, D Uyakul, T Goto, Tetrahedron Lett. 441988

. F H Johnson, Y Haneda, Bioluminescence in Progress. 6641966Princeton University Press

Extraction of the luciferin-luciferase system from the fungus Armillariella mellea. O V Kamzolkina, Z E Bekker, N S Egorov, Biologicheskie Nauki. 11984

Nature of luciferase from the bioluminescent fungus Armillariella mellea. O V Kamzolkina, V S Danilov, N S Egorov, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR. 2711983

Effects of hydrogen peroxide on light emission by various strains of marine luminescent bacteria. A M Katsev, G Wegrzyn, H Szpilewska, J. Basic Microbiol. 442004

Studies on the luminous fungi Pleurotus japonicus sp. S Kawamura, nov. J. Coll. Sci. Tokyo. 351915

Use of luminous bacteria in bioluminescent analysis. Uspekhi mikrobiologii. V A Kratasyuk, J I Gitelson, 198721

Purification and properties of the active substance of fungal luminescence. S Kuwabara, E C Wassink, Bioluminescence in Progress, Johnson F.H., Haneda Y.1966Princeton University PressPrinceton

Light and color of living organisms. Labas A Yu, A V Gordeeva, Priroda. 22003

. M M F Lavelle, P Durosay, A M Michelson, Bioluminescence. Luminescence des champignons lumineux. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris. 2751972Serie D

Effects of veratryl alcohol on growth and bioluminescence of Panellus stipticus. W L Lingle, Mycol. Soc. Am. Newslett. 40361989

Bioluminescence and ligninolysis during secondary metabolism in the fungus Panellus. W L Lingle, J. Biolum. Chemilum. 81001993

Mechanisms of bioluminescent reactions. W D Mcelroy, H H Seliger, Light and Life, McElroy W.D., Glass B.1961Johns Hopkins PressBaltimore

Origin and evolution of bioluminescence. W D Mcelroy, H H Seliger, Horizons in Biochemistry. Kasha M., Pullman B.1962Academic Press

Factors influencing the response of the bioluminescent reaction to adenosine triphosphate. W D Mcelroy, B L Strehler, Arch. Biochem. 221949

Evaluation of metal toxicity by a modified method based on the fungus Gerronema viridilucens bioluminescence in agar medium. L F Mendes, C V Stevani, Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 292010

Influence of culture conditions on mycelial growth and bioluminescence of Gerronema viridilucens. L F Mendes, E L Bastos, D E Desjardin, C V Stevani, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2822008

Purification and properties of Pholas dactylus luciferin and luciferase. A M Michelson, Meth. Enzymol. 571978

Bioluminescence is widespread within the Kingdom of fungi. J D Mihail, J N Bruhn, Opera Mycologica. 12007

Coelenterate bioluminescence. J G Morin, Coelenterate Biology: Reviews and Perspectives. Muscatine L., Lanhoff H.M.1974Academic Press

Panal: a possible precursor of fungal luciferin. H Nakamura, Y Kishi, O Shimomura, Tetrahedron. 441988

Polynoidin: a membrane photoprotein isolated from the bioluminescent system of scale-worms. M T Nicolas, J M Bassot, O Shimomura, Photocbem. Photobiol. 351982

Spectral studies of fungal bioluminescence. D J O'kane, B Fuhrer, W L Lingle, Bioluminescence and Chemiluminescence: Fundamentals and Applied Aspects. Campbell A.K. et al.1994John Wiley & Sons

Spectral analysis of the bioluminescence of Panellus stipticus. D J O'kane, W L Lingle, D Porter, J E Wampler, Mycologia. 821990

The enzymatic nature of fungal bioluminescence. A G Oliveira, C V Stevani, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 82009

On the purification of the fungal luciferin. A G Oliveira, R P Carvalho, C V Stevani, Luminescence. 271502012c

Evidence that a single bioluminescent system is shared by all known bioluminescent fungal lineages. A G Oliveira, D E Desjardin, B A Perry, C V Stevani, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 112012a

On the purification of the NAD(P)H-dependent reductase involved in fungal bioluminescence. A G Oliveira, R P Carvalho, H E Waldenmaier, V R Viviani, C V Stevani, Luminescence. 271512012b

Sources of light emission in a luminous mycelium of the fungus Panellus stipticus. A P Puzyr, A E Burov, V S Bondar, J. Microscopy. 2012bin press

Extracellular bioluminescence of mycelium metabolites of Panellus stipticus (IBSO 2301) luminous mushroom growing on agar medium. A P Puzyr, A E Burov, S E Medvedeva, Dokl. Biochem. Biophys. 2012ain press

Fungal Infections: Manual for Physicians. A Sergeev, Yu, Yu V Sergeev, 2003BINOM-Press440Moscow

Chemiluminescence of panal (a sesquiterpene) isolated from the luminous fungus Panellus stipticus. O Shimomura, Photochem. Photobiol. 491989

Superoxide-triggered chemiluminescence of the extract of luminous mushroom Panellus stipticus after treatment with methylamine. O Shimomura, J. Exp. Bot. 421991

The role of superoxide dismutase in regulating the light emission of luminescent fungi. O Shimomura, Exp. Botany. 431992

The role of superoxide anion in bioluminescence. O Shimomura, Frontiers of Photobiology. Shima A. et al.1993Elsevier Science Publishers

Bioluminescence: chemical principles and methods. O Shimomura, 2006World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd470Singapore

Partial purification and properties of the Chaetopterus luminescence system. O Shimomura, F H Johnson, Bioluminescence in progress. Johnson F.H., Haneda Y.1966Princeton University Press

Extraction, purification and properties of aequorin, a bioluminescent protein from References 437 the luminous hydromedusan. O Shimomura, F H Johnson, Y Saiga, Aequorea. J. Cell. Comp. Physiol. 591962

Structure and nonenzymatic light emission of two luciferin precursors isolated from the luminous mushroom Panellus stipticus. O Shimomura, S Satoh, Y Kishi, J. Biolum. Chemilum. 81993

Experimental evidence for the physiological role of bacterial luciferase in the protection of cells against oxidative stress. H Szpilewska, A Czyz, G Wegrzyn, Curr. Microbiol. 472003

Bioluminescence and bioluminescent analysis: methodological developments. N N Ugarova, L Brovko, Yu, 1981Moscow State University: Chemistry Department

Bioluminescence and bioluminescent analysis: recent development in the field. N N Ugarova, L Brovko, Yu, G D Kutuzova, Biochemistry (Moscow). 581993

Bioluminescent methods of analysis in microbiology. N N Ugarova, L Brovko, Yu, I A Trdatyan, E I Rainina, Appl. Biochem. Microbiol. 231987

. A Van Der Burg, 1943UtrechtUniversity of UtrechtSpektrale onderzoekingen over chemo-en bioluminescentie. Thesis

Luminous mushrooms and prospects of their use. G A Vydryakova, N V Psurtseva, N V Belova, N V Pashenova, J I Gitelson, Mikol. Fitopatol. 432009

Vladimir S Bondar, Osamu Shimomura… Luminescence of Higher Mushrooms. 

Luminescence in fungi. E C Wassink, Bioluminescence in Action. P.J. Ed1978Academic Press

Luminescence of a bacterial luciferase intermediate by reaction with H 2 O 2 : the evolutionary origin of luciferase and source of endogenous light emission. H Watanabe, T Nagoshi, H Inaba, Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 11411993

The effect of culture conditions on the mycelial growth and luminescence of naturally bioluminescent fungi. H J Weitz, A L Ballard, C D Campbell, K Killham, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2022001

Development of a novel, bioluminescencebased, fungal bioassay for toxicity testing. H J Weitz, D Colin, C D Campbell, K Killham, Environ. Microbiol. 42002

A A Yachevsky, Fundamentals of Mycology. Moscow-LeningradSelkhozgiz19331036

Ultra-weak Luminescence of Blood Serum and its Importance in the Complex Diagnosis. A I Zhuravlev, A I Zhuravleva, Medicine. 1281975