Prognostic value of brain natriuretic peptide vs history of heart failure hospitalization in a large real-world population


Michael R Zile zilem@musc.edu 
Veterans Administration Medical Center
Medical University of South Carolina
CharlestonSouth Carolina

| Akshay 
S Desai 
Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital
BostonMassachusetts

| Rahul Agarwal 
Abbott, Global Data Science and Analytics, Sylmar
California

| Rupinder Bharmi 
Abbott, Global Data Science and Analytics, Sylmar
California

| Nirav Dalal 
Abbott, Global Data Science and Analytics, Sylmar
California

| Philip 
B Adamson 
Abbott, Global Data Science and Analytics, Sylmar
California

Alan S Maisel 
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine
Professor of Medicine
Division of Cardiology
University of California
San DiegoCalifornia

Thurmond/Gazes Building
Medical University of South Carolina
Room 323, 30 Courtenay Drive29425CharlestonSCUSA

Ralph H Johnson 
Michael R Correspondence 
M.DZile 
Ezra Charles 
Daniel 
Prognostic value of brain natriuretic peptide vs history of heart failure hospitalization in a large real-world population
10.1002/clc.23468C L I N I C A L I N V E S T I G A T I O N S Funding information Abbott Laboratories
Background: In heart failure (HF) patients, both natriuretic peptides (NP) and previous HF hospitalization (pHFH) have been used to predict prognosis.Hypothesis: In a large real-world population, both NP levels and pHFH have independent and interdependent predictive value for clinical outcomes of HFH and all-cause mortality.Methods: Linked electronic health records and insurance claims data from DecisionResource Group were used to identify HF patients that had a BNP or NT-proBNP result between January 2012 and December 2016. NT-proBNP was converted into BNP equivalents by dividing by 4. Index event was defined as most recent NP on or after 1 January 2012. Patients with incomplete records or age < 18 years were excluded. During one-year follow up, HFH and mortality rates stratified by index BNP levels and pHFH are reported.Results: Of 64 355 patients (74 ± 12 years old, 49% female) with available values, median BNP was 259 [IQR 101-642] pg/ml. The risk of both HFH and mortality was higher with increasing BNP levels. At each level of BNP, mortality was only slightly higher in patients with pHFH vs those without pHFH (RR 1.2 [95%CI 1.2,1.3], P < .001); however, at each BNP, HFH was markedly increased in patients with pHFH vs those without pHFH (RR 2.0 [95%CI 1.9,2.1], P < .001).Conclusion:In this large real-world heart failure population, higher BNP levels were associated with increased risk for both HFH and mortality. At any given level of BNP, pHFH added greater prognostic value for prediction of future HFH than for mortality.K E Y W O R D SB-type natriuretic peptide, heart failure, hospitalization, mortality

ability to define disease phenotype, and define populations that are responsive to existing and novel management strategies.

Among the clinical and laboratory metrics that have been shown to predict morbidity and mortality in chronic heart failure patients (HF), two have demonstrated the most promise: previous HF hospitalizations (HFH) and natriuretic peptides (NP), particularly B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP). [1][2][3][4][5][6][7] To date, the experimental designs used to examine the utility of these metrics have had several limitations. For example, previous studies have had limited sample sizes, been constrained by exclusion of co-morbidities, had short follow-up periods, and not reflected a non-selected "real world" population. Furthermore, previous studies have examined binary cut-off values of BNP, above vs below median values, data division in tertiles or quartiles. They have not examined and compared HF with a reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) vs HF with a preserved EF (HFpEF). While both HFH and NP levels are consistently associated with greater risk for morbidity and mortality in patients with HF, the extent to which these two parameters in combination help to stratify risk compared with either parameter alone remains unclear.

Accordingly, the purpose of this study was to define the rate of HFH and all-cause mortality that occurs over a wide range of BNP in an unselected real world population of patients with HF and determine whether the addition of a previous HFH independently altered the morbidity and mortality rates predicted by BNP in this population.


| METHODS


| Data source

Data were extracted from a US wide, real world, data repository from the Decision Resources Group. This data links medical encounter claims, prescription claims, and electronic medical records (EMR) to provide longitudinal patient-level data covering the majority of the US healthcare system. The data were collected from the four largest clearing houses in US and covers over 1.8 million health care providers and 300 million patients. These data consist of records for tests ordered, test results, diagnoses, comorbidities, medications, therapies, patient demographics, healthcare encounters, and death. Encounters recorded in the insurance claims included in-patient/out-patient/ emergency/urgent-care healthcare provider visits, hospital admissions, and nursing home, rehabilitation facility, or hospice encounters.


| Cohort design and eligibility

HF patients were identified from the data repository that had at least one measurement of BNP or NT-proBNP test result available between 1 January 2012 and 31 December 2016. In these patients, the first BNP or NT-proBNP result on or after 1 January 2012 was used as index event. An individual was identified as being a HF patient based on their ICD-9-CM or ICD-10-CM diagnoses for HF (Table S5) in any field in the insurance claims or EMR data on or before index event. Those with age <18 years, discontinuous insurance enrollment or missing encounter types were excluded. The status of insurance enrollment was determined using encounters with the healthcare system that resulted in an insurance claim, which included medication refill, healthcare provider visits admissions, nursing home, rehabilitation, or hospice.  


| Demographics, comorbidities, and follow-up


| Outcomes

All-cause mortality and HFH rate were examined across seven differ-  (Table S7 for the list of codes used). The date of death was determined using last-updated-field in the EMR and from discharge date and status from healthcare encounters. Only when these two dates were not available, we needed to approximate using the last date in prescriptions, lab tests, or encounter data.

Hospitalizations of all types were categorized as being heart failure related (HFH) or not based on presence of comprehensive list of diagnosis codes reported in Table S5. The HFHs were determined using presence of primary or admission diagnosis of HF from inpatient hospital claims, or an MS-DRG of 291, 292, or 293. In instances wherein multiple claims were generated from a single in-patient hospitalization event, the claim from and claim through dates were used for consolidation of a hospitalization event. Any hospitalization spanning the index event was deemed to be a pre-index event and not counted toward the post-index follow-up period.


| Sub-group analysis

The impact of BNP on clinical outcomes was examined in patients with HFH in previous year vs those without and patients with heart failure and a reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) vs heart failure and a preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF). In a cohort in which BMI and HF type were known, we adjusted the BNP and examined the outcomes of HFH rate and mortality rate. This adjustment was based on the Guide-HF clinical trial, design, and rationale. BNP was adjusted by increasing it by 75 pg/ml for a HFpEF patient, and by 4.1% for every unit increase in BMI above 25 units. 8


| Patients with HFH in previous year vs those without

Hospitalizations of all types were adjudicated as being heart failure related or not. A count of the HFH in the 365 days preceding and including the index date was used to classify patients into two groups, "no previous year HFH" and "previous year HFH".


| HFrEF vs HFpEF

HFrEF was identified by the presence of ICD-9-CM code of 428.2 (systolic heart failure) or ICD-10-CM code I50.2 (systolic [congestive] heart failure) available in the healthcare encounters. HFpEF was identified by presence of ICD-9-CM code of 428.3 (diastolic heart failure) or ICD-10-CM code I50.3 (diastolic [congestive] heart failure). In cases where an echocardiographic test result was known and the ejection fraction was less than 40, the patient was characterized as HFrEF patient regardless of the diagnosis code.


| Statistics

Continuous variables are presented as mean ± sd and were compared using a Student t test unless otherwise stated. Categorical variables are presented as n (%) and were compared using chi-squared test.  Demographic data for the study cohort are presented in Table S1. 


| Correlations between BNP and heart failure hospitalization rate

The risk of HFH increased as the BNP level rose ( Figure 1A. Patients with BNP ≥1500 pg/ml had highest risk of HFH (RR: 3.3; 95% CI 3.0-3.5) followed by BNP 1000 to 1249, 1250 to 1499, 750 to 999, 500 to 749, 250 to 499 and 0 to 249 groups. Compared with BNP 0 to 249 pg/ml, the risk ratios incrementally increased with each subsequent BNP level, except group 1250 to 1499, which has nonsignificant difference with group 1000 to 1249. For example, as shown in Figure 1A, the RR for HFH is 1. 8 


| Correlations between BNP and all-cause mortality

The risk of all-cause death increased as the BNP level rose as shown in Figure 1B. Patients with BNP ≥1500 pg/ml had highest risk of death (RR: 3.9; 95%CI 3.7-4.2) followed by BNP 1250 to 1499, 1000 to 1249, 750 to 999, 500 to 749, 250 to 499 and 0 to 249 pg/ml groups. Compared with BNP 0 to 249 pg/ml, the hazard ratios incrementally increased with each subsequent BNP level. For example, as shown in Figure 1B,    However, these differences did not reach statistical significance in all of the BNP brackets (Table S2). By contrast, for any given range of BNP, the rate of all-cause mortality was similar in the HFpEF patients compared with the HFrEF patients ( Figure 5).


| Effect of previous year HFH on correlations between BNP and subsequent HFH


| Effect of HF phenotype on correlations between BNP, HFH and all-cause mortality


| Effect of age on BNP and correlations between BNP and HFH and all-cause mortality

Overall BNP levels increased with the increasing age brackets examined ( Figure S1). Additionally, at every age, the risk of HFH and allcause mortality increased as a function of increasing BNP brackets ( Figure S5 and S6).


| Outcomes for BNP adjusted for LVEF, BMI, and renal function

For any given level of heart failure severity, BNP was altered in the presence of Afib, LVEF and other factors. Risk ratios for HFH and mortality were assessed using BNP levels that were adjusted for BMI and LVEF in a subgroup of 3590 patients in whom both were known.  (Table S3) when compared to unadjusted BNP analyses.

In the current study, outcomes were adjusted for age, gender, comorbidities, and previous year HFH. Among 


| Outcomes according to BNP vs NT-proBNP

The index NP tests were a combination of BNP and NT-proBNP, such that 64.4% of index test results were from BNP, and the remaining 35.6% were from NT-proBNP. The relationship of NP levels and outcomes remained similar irrespective of the test type (BNP vs NT-proBNP) used in the analysis.


| DISCUSSION

In heart failure patients, both brain natriuretic peptide and previous HF hospitalization predict prognosis. [1][2][3][4][5][6][7] However, this association has not been reported over a wide range of BNP levels and analyzed in patients with and without prior HFH for both HFH and all-cause mortality in a large, real-world population. Data from the current study support several clinically relevant findings. Over a very wide range of BNP, subdivided into seven ranges, the risk of HFH increased nearly 26% for every doubling of the BNP value. These differences persisted over time, with risk in 6 to 12 months 20% higher. The same findings were true for all-cause mortality. The risk of all-cause mortality increased nearly 31% for every doubling of the BNP value. When a history of a previous HF hospitalization was added to the risk model, there was an important added value in predicting future HFH, but less added value in predicting all-cause mortality. These finding were consistent across HF phenotypes defined by EF and age. The risk of HFH and the risk of all-cause mortality increased in both HFrEF and HFpEF patients and at every age bracket as a function of increasing BNP. It is F I G U R E 4 Heart failure hospitalizations (HFH) stratified by heart failure phenotype and B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels using a Nelson-Aalen analysis. Panel A, HFH at each BNP range in patients with heart failure and a reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). Panel B, HFH at each BNP range in patients with heart failure and a preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) important to note that, these findings were obtained in a large, completely "unselected" (real-world) population with no exclusions for co-morbidities or any other factors that would routinely be done in RCTs.

This study represents the largest cohort report showing the association of natriuretic peptides (NP) and heart failure hospitalizations (HFH) as predictors of outcomes in HF patients. Very specifically, this study showed that higher BNP levels were associated with increased risk for both HFH and mortality. The unique observation from this study is at any given level of BNP, previous HF hospitalization added greater prognostic value for prediction of future HFH than for mortality. Similarly, regardless of whether the patient had HFH in previous year, the knowledge of BNP added greater prognostic value about future HF hospitalization and, most importantly, about mortality.


| Practical applications

The data and analysis provided by this study should help to facilitate assessment and management of health care resources for defined populations, play a pivotal role in planning sample size calculations for randomized clinical trials, enhance our ability to define disease phenotype, and define populations that are responsive to existing and novel management strategies.

For example, one of the most difficult decisions made in the design of clinical trials relates to the oppositional effects of using BNP to enhance specificity and increase event rates vs resultant effects on rates of recruitment. Within eligibility criteria, the higher the required BNP and the additional requirement of prior HFH usually results in a significant increase in the number of patients that will be "screened out" as a potential participant and will result in a slower recruitment rate for a study. A proper balance between estimated event rates and recruitment rate may be achieved by using the data in the current study. If the primary endpoint is all-cause mortality, the eligibility criteria may focus more heavily on BNP values because the requirement of prior HFH does not appear to predict mortality to as significant a degree. However, if HFH rate is the primary endpoint, adding the requirement of prior HFH will lower the needed BNP level for eligibility. In either circumstance, precise numbers may be useful from the data provided in this study. In addition, the current data suggest that BNP and prior HFH data are practical predictors of events in both HFrEF and HFpEF and at all age groups. These data also point to the facts that the rate of HFH is lower at any given BNP in patients with HFpEF and with increasing age. Uniquely, the rates of all-cause mortality at any given BNP are comparable for HFpEF vs HFrEF.


| Comparisons with RCT or epidemiology based data

The rates of HFH and all-cause mortality obtained in the current study are comparable to both the data bases published in RCTs and epidemiology studies. Examples of data from several recent clinical trials that have incorporated BNP and NT-proBNP in the inclusion criteria, are shown in Table S4. [10][11][12][13][14][15][16][17] 


| Limitations

Several limitations to the current data and analysis are noteworthy.

The data from this study cannot be used to predict response to therapies, particularly novel therapies. There is insufficient data to compare the relative value of BNP vs NT-proBNP. For any given level of heart failure severity, BNP is altered by the presence of Afib, BMI, and other factors. In a limited dataset, we have addressed the impact of LVEF and BMI via a BMI adjusted BNP analysis (Table S3), but are unable to assess the impact of atrial fibrillation. These co-morbid factors were not examined within the context of this study or placed into a multifactorial analysis to adjust or normalize for the HFH or mortality rates.

These analyses are beyond the scope of this study.

The influence of the number of prior HF hospitalizations on subsequent cardiovascular events in patients with reduced or preserved EF is important and has been studied in a number of clinical trials including CHARM, I-Preserve and others 18 Belle et al. demonstrated that history of an acute heart failure event is a powerful predictor of adverse cardiovascular outcomes, and the time between the last HFH and enrollment was a powerful predictor of subsequent event rates.

However, given the focus and methodological limitations of the current analysis, we are not able to perform this analysis. In the current study design, we were able to adjust for age, gender, co-morbidities, and previous year HFH as discrete variables and did not account for the number of events and time between the last HF hospitalization and the NP value. We acknowledge that this is a worthwhile analysis that will await further study.

While both BNP and NT-proBNP are widely used to aid diagnosis, assess the effect of therapy, and predict outcomes in heart failure, there is no clear consensus to guide the conversion between them. 19 However, there are examples of conversion factors chosen for recent randomized clinical trials that were used to choose and justify a conversion factor of 4 times BNP, NT-proBNP as used in the current analysis. For example, the eligibility criteria in PARADIGM-HF included elevated natriuretic peptides: BNP ≥150 pg/ml or NT-proBNP ≥600 pg/ml (for patients with HF hospitalization within 12 months, BNP ≥100 pg/ml or NT-proBNP ≥400 pg/ml), that is, a factor of 4. A similar conversion factor was chosen for the ongoing trial Guide-HF (Lindenfeld et al. 22 ). Because the conversion factor likely varies with disease states, with and without atrial fibrillation, with increasing age and decreasing renal function Rorth et al. 19 concluded that "there is no single, simple, conversion ratio of NTproBNP to BNP and factors, such as, atrial fibrillation, age, and renal function need to be taken into account." There are alternative conversion formulas proposed by Kasahara et al. 20 and Yeo et al. 21 that incorporate age, body mass index, hemoglobin, renal function, sex, and atrial fibrillation; however, these variables were not available in the context of the current study. The use of ICD codes to designate patients as having HFrEF vs HFpEF has significant limitations because it is not obligatorily linked to an objective measure of ejection fraction. It does; however, take advantage of the fact that the clinical provider who knows the patient the best is the one that can impact the choice the ICD code. For these reasons, our analysis reported in the manuscript used a conservative approached wherein we classified a patient as HFrEF, if either they had a diagnosis of systolic HF (ICD code) OR their EF was <40.

Where, a patient was classified as HFpEF when their claims carry a diagnosis of diastolic HF and their EF was not <40 if it was known.


| CONCLUSION

In a large real-world heart failure population, higher BNP levels were prognostic of both future HFH and mortality whereas at any given level of BNP, previous HFH added prognostic value to a greater degree for prediction of future HFH than for mortality. 


CONFLICT OF INTEREST


Age at the index event and gender were retrieved from the EMR and healthcare encounter claims. Additionally, elixhauser comorbidities at index event were computed [Quan 2005, Moore 2017] using presence of corresponding ICD-9-CM or ICD-10-CM codes anytime on or before index event. For details on the coding and comorbidity derivations


ent baseline BNP level (0-249, 250-499, 500-749, 750-999, 1000-1249, 1250-1499, and ≥ 1500 pg/ml at index event) over the follow-up period. The status and date of death were retrieved from the records in both EMR and medical claims data. First, the medical claims were searched for the discharge dates with discharge status code: 20 (expired), 40 (expired at home), 41 (expired in medical facility), 42 (expired-place unknown) [Ref: https://www.resdac.org/cmsdata/variables/patient-discharge-status-code]. The status of death was determined using records from both EMR (death status flag) and medical claims data, and no approximations were made on the status of death. The discharge dates with ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM codes for diagnosis of death


HFH are presented as 1-year Nelson-Aalen estimates (events/ patient); which are non-parametric estimator of the cumulative hazard function and were compared using the Anderson-Gill modification of the Cox-proportional hazard model for recurrent events with adjustment for age, gender, comorbidities, and previous year HFH. Mortality is presented as 1-year Kaplan-Meier survival estimates and were compared using Cox-proportional hazard models with adjustment for age, gender, comorbidities and previous year HFH. In addition, HFH or mortality rates are presented as events per patient-year, and are compared using nonparametric bootstrap methodology with replacement with 1000 iterations. The specific demographics and comorbidities used in the model are presented in Supplemental Table S1. Statistical analyses were performed in Jupyter Notebook version 4.2.1 running on Python version 3.5.3, and Anaconda version 4.1.1 (64-bit) (https:// jupyter.org/) and R Studio Version 0.99.486 running on R version 3.1.3 (https://www.rstudio.com/).

|
Sample size and demographics In the Decision Resource Group real-world data repository, 81 610 HF patients were identified that had a BNP or NTpro-BNP test performed between January 2012 and December 2016. Only 4.8% of the NP assays were performed during hospital admission (the time duration between a hospital-admission and discharge). The remaining 95.2% of the NP assay results were obtained outside of a hospital setting during periods of clinical stability. Of the 81 610 HF patients, 670 (<1%) patients were less than 18 years old, 15 949 (19.5%) did not have any follow up medical encounter either in the year before or after BNP test was done, and 636 (<1%) had missing information on medical encounter type and hence were excluded from the analysis (Figure S1). The final study cohort comprised of 64 355 patients.

PP
< .001 times higher risk of HFH in the subsequent year compared with those who did not have a HFH in the previous year after adjusting for age, gender, co-morbidities and BNP-levels. At every bracketed range of BNP, patients with a HFH in previous year had a statistically significant higher risk of HFH in the subsequent year (Figures 2 and Figure S2). For example, at a range of BNP between 0 and 249 pg/ml, the risk of HFH increased from 0.11 events/patient year in patients that had not had a previous HFH in the previous year to 0.35 events/ patient year (Figure S2) in patients that had a previous HFH in the previous year (RR = 2.7 [95%CI 2.5, 3.0], P < .001). Findings were similar at each bracketed range of BNP. < .001 times higher risk of all-cause mortality in the subsequent year compared with those who did not have a HFH in the previous year after adjusting for age, gender, co-morbidities, and BNP-levels. In general, at every bracketed range of BNP, patients with a HFH in previous year tended to have a higher risk of all-cause mortality in the subsequent year; however, this difference did not reach statistical difference in each case (Figure S2 and Figure 3). The differences between the effects of a previous HFH added to BNP did not have as extensive an impact on all-cause mortality as it did on subsequent HFH. For example, at a range of BNP between 0 and 249 pg/ml, the risk of all-cause mortality increased from 0.07 events/patient year in patients that had not had a previous HFH in the previous year to 0.11 events/patient year in patients that had a previous HFH in the previous year (RR = 1.6 [95%CI 1.5-1.8], P < .001), corrected for age, gender, and comorbidities. In contrast, at a range of BNP between F I G U R E 2 Affect of previous heart failure hospitalization (pHFH) in previous year on future HFH stratified by B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels using Nelson-Aalen analysis. Panel A, HFH at each BNP range in patients without a pHFH. Panel B, HFH at each BNP range in patients with a pHFH 650 and 999 pg/ml, the risk of all-cause mortality increased from 0.26 events/patient year in patients that had not had a previous HFH in the previous year to 0.27 events/patient year in patients that had a previous HFH in the previous year (RR = 1.0 [95% CI 0.9-1.2], P = .859), again corrected for age, gender, and comorbidities.


the 64 355 patients examined, 39 153 could not be HF determined, 14 104 were classified as HFrEF and 11 098 as HFpEF (Figure S3). The risk of HFH and the risk of all-cause mortality increased in both HFrEF and HFpEF patients as a function of increasing BNP (Figures 4 and 5). For any given range of BNP, the risk ratio of HFH was generally lower in the HFpEF patients compared with the HFrEF patients. For example, at a range of >1500 pg/ml, risk ratio for HFH was 3.1 (0.89 events per year) in HFrEF vs 2.3 (0.62 events per year) in HFpEF, P < .001 as compared with 0-249 pg/ml BNP range.

F
I G U R E 3 Kaplan-Meier survival curves stratified by history of HFH in previous year and BNP levels Panel A, survival at each B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) range in patients without a pHFH. Panel B, survival at each BNP range in patients with a pHFH BNP was increased by 75 pg/ml for a HFpEF patient, and increased by 4.1% for every unit increase in BMI above 25 units. The outcomes indicate the same trend across the adjusted BNP strata

F
I G U R E 5 Kaplan-Meier survival curves stratified by heart failure phenotype and B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels. Panel A, Survival at each BNP range in patients with heart failure and a reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). Panel B, Survival at each BNP range in patients with heart failure and a preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF)


Whether alternative conversions factors with different numerical values or with incorporation of additional variables would change the conclusions of this analysis must await further study.

Dr
Zile serves as a consultant to Abbott for Device Development and is a member of the executive steering committee for the Abbott funded clinical trial Guide-HF. Dr Desai has received research grant support from Novartis, AstraZeneca, and Alnylam as well as honoraria for consulting from Abbott, AstraZeneca, Alnylam, Boston Scientific, Boehringer Ingelheim, Biofourmis, Corvidia, DalCor Pharma, Merck, Novartis, Relypsa, and Regeneron. Rahul Agarwal, Rupinder Bharmi, Nirav Dalal and Philip B. Adamson are salaried employees of Abbott. Dr Maisel has received honoraria for consulting from Abbott, Quidel, and is co-founder of Brainstorm Medical. DATA SOURCE Note: Claims = Administrative claims data. For each healthcare encounter, the billing data are submitted as a claim, and consists of the admission date, discharge date, type of encounter (in-patient, outpatient), ICD-9-CM/ICD-10-CM Diagnoses codes and Procedure codes.

Table S6 .
S6After the index event, patient data were collected for 365 days, or until date of death, or 4 months after the last date in prescriptions/lab tests/health-care encounters, whichever length of follow up was shorter.The data in our analysis consisted of both electronic medical records (EMR) and insurance claims; hence, we believe that healthcare utilization data are well represented in this manuscript. We limited the history to 1 year because of the following reason. The prognostic value of a previous HFH changes over time after hospital discharge.The chances of a repeat HFH occurring after each HFH decreases the farther away you get from the discharge date. Multiple studies have demonstrated that the highest chance of a repeat HFH occurs within 1 year after discharge. It is for this reason that we limited the assessment of previous year HFH to 1 year. We only included a HFH event that occurred in the 365 days prior to the NP testing to classify a patient as having previous-HFH or not. Making this choice allowed the HFH to have the highest possible effect on outcomes. 2.4 | Retrieval of lab values (NT-proBNP or BNP) BNP and NT-proBNP values were retrieved from EMR records. Lab values were identified as being NP related by looking for LOINC code (Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes), test name and/or panel name representing NP. A total of 1049 unique combinations of test name and panel names were used to identify BNP or NT-proBNP test. Table S8 lists top 30 combination of test and panel names alongwith frequency of their occurrence. All tests that were ordered but not performed were removed from the analysis. NT-proBNP readings were converted into BNP equivalents by dividing by 4.


Mean age was 74.3 ± 11.7 years, 49.3% were female, 47.6% had diabetes, and 88.1% had a history of hypertension. The median BNP (or equivalent) level was 259 [IQR 101-642] pg/ml. Compared with patients in the lowest BNP group (0-249 pg/ml), all higher BNP groups were older and had higher prevalence of comorbidities, such as, renal failure, cardiac arrhythmias, coronary artery disease, pulmonary circulation disorders, deficiency anemia, fluid and electrolyte disorder, valvular disease and weight loss, whereas obesity, drug, and alcohol abuse were less prevalent. Diseases, such as, hypertension, COPD, AIDS, and cancer were similarly prevalent across all BNP groups.


for BNP 250-499 vs 2.4 for BNP 500-749. The P-value corresponding to this comparison is <.001. The RR for HFH is 3.0 for BNP 1000-1249 vs 2.8 for BNP 1250-1499. The P-value corresponding to this comparison is .323. The statistical comparison of the risk of HFH between each incremental BNP group is listed in Table S2. The overall RR for HFH was 1.26 for every 2 times increase in BNP.


the RR for mortality was 1.7 for BNP 250-499 vs 2.2 for BNP 500-749 pg/ml. The P-value corresponding to this comparison was <.001. The RR for mortality was 2.9 for BNP 1000-1249 vs 3.2 for BNP 1250-1499 pg/ml. The P-value corresponding to this comparison was 0.217. The statistical comparison of the risk of mortality between each incremental BNP group is listed in Table S2. The overall RR for mortality F I G U R E 1 Heart failure hospitalizations (HFH) and survival stratified by B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels. Panel A, nelson aalen estimate of HFHs stratified by BNP levels. Panel B, Kaplan-Meier estimate of survival stratified by BNP levels was 1.31 for every 2 times increase in BNP (This overall RR was derived using multivariate analysis using BNP as a continuous variable).


the comorbidities examined was renal failure status. Relative risk for death was 1.17 [1.11-1.22], P < .05 in patients with history of renal disease, and was 1.20 [1.15-1.25], P < .05 for HFH. These data are similar to previous publications. 9
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENTResearch data are not shared.ORCIDMichael R. Zilehttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7076-221X
Rehospitalization for heart failure: problems and perspectives. M Gheorghiade, M Vaduganathan, G C Fonarow, R O Bonow, J Am Coll Cardiol. 61Gheorghiade M, Vaduganathan M, Fonarow GC, Bonow RO. Rehospitalization for heart failure: problems and perspectives. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:391-403.

The relationship between hospital admission rates and rehospitalizations. A M Epstein, A K Jha, E J Orav, N Engl J Med. 365Epstein AM, Jha AK, Orav EJ. The relationship between hospital admission rates and rehospitalizations. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:2287- 2295.

Relationship between hospital readmission and mortality rates for patients hospitalized with acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, or pneumonia. H M Krumholz, Z Lin, P S Keenan, JAMA. 309Krumholz HM, Lin Z, Keenan PS, et al. Relationship between hospital readmission and mortality rates for patients hospitalized with acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, or pneumonia. JAMA. 2013;309: 587-593.

How well does B-type natriuretic peptide predict death and cardiac events in patients with heart failure: systematic review. J A Doust, E Pietrzak, A Dobson, P Glasziou, BMJ. 330625Doust JA, Pietrzak E, Dobson A, Glasziou P. How well does B-type natriuretic peptide predict death and cardiac events in patients with heart failure: systematic review. BMJ. 2005;330:625.

Plasma concentration of amino-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide in chronic heartfailure: prediction of cardiovascular events and interaction with the effects of rosuvastatin: a report from CORONA (controlled Rosuvastatin multinational trial in heart failure). J G Cleland, J J Mcmurray, J Kjekshus, J Am Coll Cardiol. 54Cleland JG, McMurray JJ, Kjekshus J, et al. Plasma concentration of amino-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide in chronic heartfailure: prediction of cardiovascular events and interaction with the effects of rosuvastatin: a report from CORONA (controlled Rosuvastatin multi- national trial in heart failure). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:1850-1859.

Prognostic value of changes in Nterminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide in Val-HeFT (valsartan heart failure trial). S Masson, R Latini, I S Anand, J Am Coll Cardiol. 52Masson S, Latini R, Anand IS, et al. Prognostic value of changes in N- terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide in Val-HeFT (valsartan heart failure trial). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:997-1003.

Changes in brain natriuretic peptide and norepinephrine over time and mortality and morbidity in the valsartan heart failure trial (Val-HeFT). I S Anand, L D Fisher, Y T Chiang, Circulation. 107Anand IS, Fisher LD, Chiang YT, et al. Changes in brain natriuretic peptide and norepinephrine over time and mortality and morbidity in the valsartan heart failure trial (Val-HeFT). Circulation. 2003;107: 1278-1283.

Relation of Nterminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide levels and their prognostic power in chronic stable heart failure to obesity status. Anm Remppis, B Schaelling, D Schellberg, H Katus, Eur Heart J. 2921Remppis ANM, Schaelling B, Schellberg D, Katus H, et al. Relation of Nterminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide levels and their prognostic power in chronic stable heart failure to obesity status. Eur Heart J. 2008;29(21):2634-2640.

Prognostic value of B-type natriuretic peptide and its amino-terminal proBNP fragment for cardiovascular events with stratification by renal function. M Horii, T Matsumoto, S Uemura, J Cardiol. 616Horii M, Matsumoto T, Uemura S, et al. Prognostic value of B-type natriuretic peptide and its amino-terminal proBNP fragment for car- diovascular events with stratification by renal function. J Cardiol. 2013;61(6):410-416.

Sustained efficacy of pulmonary artery pressure to guide adjustment of chronic heart failure therapy: complete follow-up results from the CHAMPION randomised trial. W T Abraham, L W Stevenson, R C Bourge, J A Lindenfeld, J G Bauman, P B Adamson, Lancet. 387Abraham WT, Stevenson LW, Bourge RC, Lindenfeld JA, Bauman JG, Adamson PB. Sustained efficacy of pulmonary artery pressure to guide adjustment of chronic heart failure therapy: complete follow-up results from the CHAMPION randomised trial. Lancet. 2016;387 (10017):453-461.

angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibition compared with Enalapril on the risk of clinical progression in surviving patients with heart failure. Jjv Mcmurray, M Packer, A S Desai, N Engl J med. 37111Circulation.McMurray JJV, Packer M, Desai AS, et al. AngiotensinNeprilysin inhi- bition versus Enalapril in heart failure. N Engl J med. 2014;371(11): 993-1004. 23. Packer M, McMurray JJ, Desai AS, Gong J, Lefkowitz MP, Rizkala AR, et al. angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibition com- pared with Enalapril on the risk of clinical progression in surviving patients with heart failure. Circulation. 2015;131(1):54-61.

Effect of vericiguat, a soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator, on natriuretic peptide levels in patients with worsening chronic heart failure and reduced ejection fraction: the socrates-reduced randomized trial. M Gheorghiade, S J Greene, J Butler, JAMA. 31421Gheorghiade M, Greene SJ, Butler J, et al. Effect of vericiguat, a solu- ble guanylate cyclase stimulator, on natriuretic peptide levels in patients with worsening chronic heart failure and reduced ejection fraction: the socrates-reduced randomized trial. JAMA. 2015;314(21): 2251-2262.

Primary results of the rapid emergency department heart failure outpatient trial (REDHOT). A Maisel, J E Hollander, D Guss, J Am Coll Cardiol. 446Maisel A, Hollander JE, Guss D, et al. Primary results of the rapid emergency department heart failure outpatient trial (REDHOT). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44(6):1328-1333.

Rationale and design of the Eplerenone in mild patients hospitalization and SurvIval study in heart failure (EMPHASIS-HF). F Zannad, J J Mcmurray, H Drexler, Eur J Heart Fail. 12Zannad F, McMurray JJ, Drexler H, et al. Rationale and design of the Eplerenone in mild patients hospitalization and SurvIval study in heart failure (EMPHASIS-HF). Eur J Heart Fail. 2010;12:617-622.

Enalapril, or Aliskiren and Enalapril in heart failure. Jjv Mcmurray, H Krum, W T Abraham, N Engl J Med. 37416McMurray JJV, Krum H, Abraham WT, et al. Aliskiren, Enalapril, or Aliskiren and Enalapril in heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2016;374(16): 1521-1532.

Serelaxin in acute heart failure patients with preserved left ventricular ejection fraction: results from the RELAX-AHF trial. G Filippatos, J R Teerlink, D Farmakis, Eur Heart J. 3516Filippatos G, Teerlink JR, Farmakis D, et al. Serelaxin in acute heart failure patients with preserved left ventricular ejection fraction: results from the RELAX-AHF trial. Eur Heart J. 2014;35(16):1041- 1050.

Effect of natriuretic peptide-guided therapy on hospitalization or cardiovascular mortality in high-risk patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction: a randomized clinical trial. G M Felker, K J Anstrom, K F Adams, JAMA. 318871320Felker GM, Anstrom KJ, Adams KF, et al. Effect of natriuretic peptide-guided therapy on hospitalization or cardiovascular mortality in high-risk patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2017;318(8):71320.

Influence of prior heart failure hospitalization on cardiovascular events in patients with reduced and preserved ejection fraction. N A Belle, Circ Heart Fail. 74Belle NA et al. Influence of prior heart failure hospitalization on car- diovascular events in patients with reduced and preserved ejection fraction. Circ Heart Fail. 2014;7(4):590-595.

Comparison of BNP and NT-proBNP in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction. Rørth Rasmus, 10.1161/circheartfailure.119.006541Circ Heart Fail. 132Rørth Rasmus et al. Comparison of BNP and NT-proBNP in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction. Circ Heart Fail. 2020; 13(2). http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/circheartfailure.119.006541.

Conversion formula from Btype natriuretic peptide to N-terminal proBNP values in patients with cardiovascular diseases. S Kasahara, Y Sakata, K Nochioka, 10.1016/j.ijcard.2018.12.069Int J Cardiol. 280Kasahara S, Sakata Y, Nochioka K, et al. Conversion formula from B- type natriuretic peptide to N-terminal proBNP values in patients with cardiovascular diseases. Int J Cardiol. 2019;280:184-189. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2018.12.069.

Multicenter evaluation of the Roche NT-proBNP assay and comparison to the biosite triage BNP assay. K T Yeo, A H Wu, F S Apple, 10.1016/j.cccn.2003.08.016Clin Chim Acta. 3381-2Yeo KT, Wu AH, Apple FS, et al. Multicenter evaluation of the Roche NT-proBNP assay and comparison to the biosite triage BNP assay. Clin Chim Acta. 2003;338(1-2):107-115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. cccn.2003.08.016.

Hemodynamic-GUIDEd management of heart failure (GUIDE-HF). J Lindenfeld, W T Abraham, A Maisel, 10.1016/j.ahj.2019.04.014Am Heart J. 214Lindenfeld J, Abraham WT, Maisel A, et al. Hemodynamic-GUIDEd management of heart failure (GUIDE-HF). Am Heart J. 2019;214:18- 27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ahj.2019.04.014.

Prognostic value of brain natriuretic peptide vs history of heart failure hospitalization in a large real-world population. M R Zile, A S Desai, R Agarwal, How to cite this article: Zile MR, Desai AS, Agarwal R, et al. Prognostic value of brain natriuretic peptide vs history of heart failure hospitalization in a large real-world population.

. 10.1002/clc.23468Clin Cardiol. 43Clin Cardiol. 2020;43:1501-1510. https://doi.org/10.1002/ clc.23468