Conclusion


Conclusion
10.1007/978-981-15-6363-8_5CHAPTER 5Coronavirus · War memories · Sinophobia
Subsequent to the examination of the writings of trauma and war memories about Asian American communities in previous chapters, the concluding chapter discusses the critical insights the textual analysis can offer. Putting these texts all together raises the awareness with the shared sense of marginalization, powerlessness, and exclusion felt across various Asian minorities. The reading also shows that these cross-cultural paradigms are primed for precarity, as precarity along with its associative insecurity and anxiety is in line with the "norms" of Asian minorities' experiences. To come to terms with the ever extensive challenges, one has to make sense of the "new normal" condition.

In spring of 2020, the unexpected outbreak of pandemic coronavirus has caused worldwide doom within a few weeks-200 thousands of deaths, 100 millions of lives affected or isolated, social normality disrupted and suspended. Media Coverage (BBC) quotes United Nation Chief and claims that coronavirus is the most serious test since World War II. In fact, this virus outbreak is considered by many countries as "the third world war," a border-free war the world has never fought ever since. Humans are reduced to cases and deaths become tolls. Altogether, humans are waging war against an invisible, elusive enemy. Wartime imagery is repeatedly invoked by politicians and practitioners to curb global crisis. Worldwide orders for quarantine of confirmed cases, isolation of suspected cases, shut-down of territories, schools, businesses, public spaces and gatherings, events, and subsequent social distancing. The most severe postwar public health crisis again proves that humans are vulnerable in the precarious conditions.

As Coronavirus spreads, so does xenophobia and anti-Asian sentiment. As is widely believed, the coronavirus pandemic is an echo of the surge of Sinophobia, or anti-Chinese, sentiments in response to the rising power of China. The virus is prevalently called "Chinese virus" or "Wuhan virus" where believably its birthplace. The labeling not only stigmatizes China and people of Chinese descent, but also fosters discriminations against people of Asian ancestry. In Europe and the United States, Chinese and other yellow-skin minorities become the target of a growing number of racially motivated assaults and hate crimes. In an article dated March 6, 2020 in Time, Jonathan Mok, a 23-year-old Singaporean student was allegedly attacked while walking down the Oxford Street by four teenagers who yelled "We don't want your coronavirus in our country." A Vietnamese art curator Nguyen was forced to be dismissed from an exhibition as she was told by a dealer that her presence would cause anxiety because "fairly or not, Asians are being seen as carriers of virus." This anti-Asian sentiment, a rekindled hostility toward Asian immigrants, recalls the Exclusion of Chinese in the late nineteenth century, the Japanese-American Relocation Camp, the opposition to Vietnamese refugees. One has borne witness to the vicious cycle of the repeated hatred and animosity toward the minority. In the time of crisis, the minority group is often scapegoated. Perhaps, we all have to learn how to make peace with "enemies," the stranger in ourselves. The scapegoating and witch hunt reflect our deepest fears when confronting an overwhelming power beyond our control. * * * Perhaps, what makes trauma fearsome and troubling is the sense of endless helplessness and despair. What makes Fear fearsome is the unknown uncertainty, like walking down in a dark tunnel where one is unable to see the end, the deadline undue, and the darkness seems endless. Waiting for an end of the suffering, but waiting in vain makes us tired, physically and emotionally. The fatigue of feeling painful and anguished makes it even more challenging and difficult as no one knows when the woe will come to end. When things are out of our control, we feel disoriented and distressed.

Seen in a new light, trauma and the precarity condition give us a chance to redefine ourselves, check our life inventory, and to reconsider our values, missions, and responsibilities. The trying times prompt us to find a better self, to find the inner strength to deal with a situation that is almost unmanageable on every level and unconceivable by any senses. To cope with precarity, one has to make sense of current disorder and wrestle with the existential dread of our times. To know who we are and what we really appreciate.