Department of Orthopaedics
Department of orthopaedics
Max Super Speciality Hospital
PatparganjDelhiIndia


Max Super Speciality Hospital
PatparganjDelhiIndia
10.13107/jocr.2023.v13.i05.3666


Under tourniquet control, the transfibular approach for the left ankle in prone, with feet supported over a boulder, was used ( Fig. 5). We removed the implant and resection of the distal tibial and talus non-union parts with denuded abnormal cartilage and bony debris to bleeding surfaces. A fibular osteotomy at the mid-third and lower third junction of the fibula allowed a realignment of the ankle joint. A supplementary anteromedial incision to remove the implant from the medial malleolus was made with additional preparation of the bony surfaces along the malleolus and talus. We made an entry point at the desired end on the calcaneum. An intramedullary guide wire is placed under fluoroscopic guidance, and graduated reaming is done. We put an appropriately sized intramedullary nail, and fixation with calcaneum, talus, and tibial locking bolts were done and postoperatively kept in a below-knee wellpadded cast. Prophylactic thromboprophylaxis avoided deep vein thrombosis. An early superficial infection was managed with monitored wound inspection without any secondary procedures. The cast was continued for 6 weeks with nonweight-bear ing ambulation. After 6 week s, par tial weightbearing was allowed on the synthetic cast for another 4 weeks.      The self-assessment for the clinical and functional recovery was graded well. Three months follow-up showed sound wound healing with no infection. The postoperative radiograph showed a good alignment with a sound union (Fig. 6). A 6month recovery showed pain-free mobilization with a plantigrade foot without support. The AOFAS ankle score at 1year follow-up was 80.


Case 2

A 56-year-old female presented with a painful right ankle and considerable difficulty walking without pain and support for 3 months. Her right lower limb was affected by post-polio residual paralysis. She has a history of ankle fixation around 8 years back for a compound injury involving the talus and medial malleolus. She had an uneventful recovery and was ambulatory post-recovery without support. Her discomfort has increased gradually to incapacitate her to do daily routine activities without pain. She has healed scar marks along the right ankle region on the medial aspect with mild cavus deformity of the right foot. Radiographs show secondary arthritic changes with an implant in situ (Fig. 7). The acute phase reactants were normal. Poor healing potential with poor muscle mass posed challenges in the management. The surgical management included removing the implant, TTCA with RIMN, and below-knee cast application. Her postoperative period was uneventful, and no complications were noted. She progressed to the union in 14 weeks (Fig. 8). At the last follow-up of 1 year, the AOFAS ankle score improved from a preoperative score of 62-78 postoperatively. Her heel valgus was satisfactory, and she had no heel pain. She was graded as good with the clinical and functional improvement with radiological sound fusion ( Fig. 9).

Discussion TTCA aims to provide a pain-free ankle with a stable hindfoot in a deformed foot [2,6,7]. TTCA has been used as a salvage procedure for failed ankle fixation, failed ankle arthroplasty, failed ankle arthrodesis with subtalar arthritis, tuberculous arthropathy, and neuropathic joints [1,4,5,6,7,8]. Few contraindications to RIMN for TTCA include an intact subtalar joint, severe distal tibial angular deformity, and significant calcaneal height loss [6]. TTCA can be achieved with intramedullary nailing, crossed cancellous screw fixation, external fixators, and angle blade plate fixation [1,5,7,8,9]. RIMN and other fixation techniques have been compared in biomechanical studies with inconclusive superiority between a plate or a nail construct [10]. RIMN was earlier done with a straight nail. However, a straight RIMN was associated with high complication rates of lateral plantar nerve damage and tibial stress fractures [1,9]. The curved RIMN provides more physiological hindfoot valgus [1,8,9]. The complication rate reported with a curved nail fixation compared to a straight nail are low [8,11]. For a successful hindfoot arthrodesis with a nail, the technique requires to realign the deformed ankle with the adequate preparation of cancellous surfaces of bone to place the intramedullary nail in proper alignment to achieve a sound union [7]. An improper placement predisposes to malunion, non-union, implant breakage, compromised wound healing, and neurovascular deficits [12]. The recommendations for an ideal entry point have been proposed for an uneventful outcome [12]. The perfect position described for optimal positioning of the hindfoot is 0° dorsiflexion and approximately 5° heel valgus, with external rotation of the foot about the tibia comparable to that of the normal contralateral side, or around 5°-10° [5,10]. The RIMN had the advantage of providing immediate rigid internal fixation with compression at the arthrodesis site allowing load-sharing capacity with increased rotational stability [7]. It was also valuable for osteoporotic bone, in which Tomar L, et al    achieving solid screw fixation can be complex. TTCA has majorly been reported as retrospective case series in the available literature ( Table 1). The literature has few systematic reviews, and it lacks a meta-analysis study. The studies on TTCA commonly present heterogeneous groups with mixed etiology with posttraumatic SA ankle accounting for approximately 30-50% cases in the retrospective series. The union rates reported are high (86-95%); however, complication rates noted are high too (27-56%) ( Table 1). TTCA for primary trauma management has been rarely presented [13,14]. An expandable nail was used as a primary stabilization device in elderly fragility fractures with good functional outcomes allowing weight-bearing ability [13]. The primary TTCA has been rarely advocated for limb salvage reconstruction for a non-reconstructable fracture involving distal tibia, pilon, and talus with associated compounding and soft-tissue injury [14]. They concluded to suggest a primary TTCA consideration in an elderly with coexistent DM and osteoporosis for fractures involving distal tibia articular surface [14]. The comorbid association of DM, neuropathy, and rheumatoid arthritis in a failed ankle surgery contributes to poor outcomes and high complication rates in the management of posttraumatic SA [4,6,15,16]. There are only a few comparative studies for TTCA evaluation among predominant DM versus non-diabetics [11,17,18]  fractures in non-compliant diabetic patients with severe peripheral neuropathy, uninfected mechanical ulcers, and insensate feet have been managed with good outcomes [19,20]. Overall, the outcomes were comparable with a slight predominance of superficial infections among DM; however, the eventual results for limb salvage had no significant difference [17]. The association of DM has been identified as the most critical risk for amputation following TTCA by RIMN. Other factors identified with a high probability of amputation are the elderly, previous ulceration, and revision surgery [3]. Our case presenting with DM was compounded by a superficial infection that responded to local measures without a secondary procedure. The satisfactory outcomes in posttraumatic ankles with SA managed with TTCA highlight its usefulness. The second case in our series of posttraumatic SA presented in a post-polio residual paralysis patient affected by trauma. Her progression to a painful ankle prevented her from ambulating without support. The high rates of poor or delayed healing with the additional need for support devices in a post-polio residual paralysis limb are frequent occurrences. TTCA using RIMN allowed us to obtain sound union and pain-free unaided ambulation in our case. To our knowledge, this is the first case described in this complex scenario. The presentation of a homogenous group of posttraumatic SA in the elderly with compounding risk factors will allow the treating surgeons to base their decision judiciously in planning for the management of a failed complex trauma.


Conclusion

Surgeons can salvage a complex failed ankle injury with a sound ankle arthrodesis and stable fixation principles to allow an early return to pain-free walking ability with the advanced nailing procedure. The patient satisfaction rates are high with the achieved functional and clinical outcomes, and it further justifies the use of this procedure in the osteoporotic elderly.

Figure 3 :
3Radiograph of left ankle with leg 3 months postoperative anterior posterior view (a), oblique view (b) and lateral view ©.

Figure 5 :
5Clinical photograph with prone positioning.

Figure 4 :
4Radiograph of left ankle with leg postoperative anterior posterior view (a) and lateral view (b) following nail fixation.

Figure 6 :
6Radiograph of left ankle with leg postoperative anterior posterior view (a) and lateral view (b) at three months follow-up.

Figure 1 :
1Radiograph of left ankle with leg shows subluxation with medial and posterior malleolus fracture along with proximal fibula fracture preoperative anterior posterior view (a) and lateral view (b).

Figure 2 :
2Radiograph of left ankle with leg immediate postoperative anterior posterior view (a) and lateral view (

Figure 7 :
7Radiograph of right ankle with leg preoperative anterior posterior view (a) and lateral view (b).

Figure 9 :
9Radiograph of right ankle postoperative anterior posterior view (a) and lateral view (b) at 1 year.

Figure 8 :
8Radiograph of right ankle postoperative anterior posterior view (a) and lateral view (b) at 14 weeks.


. Traumatic ankle TTCA: Tibial talocalcaneal arthrodesis, RIMN: Retrograde intramedullary nailingJournal of Orthopaedic Case Reports Volume 13 Issue 5 May 2023 Page 105-110 
| 
| 
| 
| 

Tomar L, et al 

Study 
Study type 
Number 
Patient group 
Union 
Complication 

Mendicino et al. 
2004 [18] 
Randomised Control Trial 
19 (20) 
Diabetics 
95% 

Infection 2 
Non-union 1 

Hardware removal 2 
80% in diabetics 
60% minor in nondiabetics 

Anderson et al. 2005 
[15] 
Retrospective 
25 
Rheumatoid 
100% 

Infection 4 
Hardware removal 2 
Neurologic pain 7 

Paola et al. [16] 
Retrospective 
18 

Charcot's 
Arthropathy and 
diabetes (14) 

14 united 
No major complication 

Niinimäki et al. 2007 
[4] 
Retrospective 
34 
Mixed (post-
traumatic 10) 
76% 

Overall 15% 
Infection-4 cases 
Repeat surgery 20% 

Budnar et al. 2010 
[1] 
Retrospective 
42 (45) 
Mixed 
89% 

Infection 1 
Non-union 5 
Delayed union 4 

Jehan et al. 2011 [6] 

Systematic review (33 
studies-30 case series with 8 
prospective,15 
retrospective, 7 unclear; 2 
case reports;1 technical 
note 

631 (659) 
Mixed 
86.70% 

Overall (55.7%) 

Metalwork related (16.7%) 
Non-union (13.3%) 
Revision arthrodesis (3%) 
Amputation (1.5%) 

Dominic et al. 2014 
[11] 
Retrospective 
28 
Mixed 
92% 

Overall (53%) 
Superficial infection-3 
Tibial stress reactions-2 
Brodsky et al. 2014 
[7] 
Retrospective 
30 
Mixed (post-
traumatic 14) 
96.60% 
Non-union 1 (diabetic) 
Tibial stress reaction 3 cases 

Franceschetti et al. 
2015 [5] 

Systematic review (31 
studies-1 RCT, 20 
prospective,10 retrospective 

865 
Mixed 
Between 52-
96.6% 

Metalwork related (8.9%) 
Infection (13.8%) 
Non-union (7.51%) 
Revision arthrodesis (3%) 
Amputation (3.2 %) 

Thomas et al. 2015 
[2] 
Retrospective 
58 (59) 
Mixed 
93% 

Overall (34%) 
Superficial infection-8.8% 
Painful ankle-8.8% 
Non-union 7 
Deep infection 2 
Amputation 2 
Wukich et al. 2015 
[17] 
Retrospective 
61 (DM) 
Mixed (post-
traumatic 18) 
High union rates 
Overall (45.2%) 
56 (non-DM) 
Fang et al. 2015 [9] 
Retrospective 
22 
Mixed 
100% 
Delayed wound healing 1 

Klaue et al. 2019 [8] Prospective observational 
30 
Mixed 
(posttraumatic 14) 
93% 

Overall (27%) 
Infection-3 
Painful ankle-3 
Nonunion-2 
Amputation-nil 

El-tantawy et al. 
2021 [19] 
Retrospective 
46 

Diabetics with 
severe peripheral 
neuropathy 

86.96% 

Loose calcaneal screws + superficial infection at 
posterior incision-4 
Early Charcot changes-1 



Table 1 :
1Systematic reviews and case studies (diabetic cases) on TTCA managed by RIMN along with the union rates and complicationsTTCA with RIMN achieve sound fusion with a reliable satisfactory clinical and functional outcome in a failed posttraumatic arthritic ankle.Journal of Orthopaedic Case Reports Volume 13 Issue 5 May 2023 Page 105-110 
| 
| 
| 
| 


ReferencesDeclaration of patient consent: The authors certify that they have obtained all appropriate patient consent forms. In the form, the patient has given the consent for his/ her images and other clinical information to be reported in the journal. The patient understands that his/ her names and initials will not be published and due efforts will be made to conceal their identity, but anonymity cannot be guaranteed.Conflict of interest: Nil Source of support: NoneConflict of Interest: Nil Source of Support: Nil ______________________________________________ Consent: The authors confirm that informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report
Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis with a curved, interlocking , intramedul lar y nai l. V M Budnar, S Hepple, W G Harries, J A Livingstone, I Winson, Foot Ankle Int. 31Budnar VM, Hepple S, Harries WG, Livingstone JA, Winson I. Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis with a curved, interlocking , intramedul lar y nai l. Foot Ankle Int 2010;31:1085-92.

Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis with a compressive retrograde nail: A retrospective study of 59 nails. A E Thomas, P M Guyver, J M Taylor, M Czipri, N J Talbot, I T Sharpe, Foot Ankle Surg. 21Thomas AE, Guyver PM, Taylor JM, Czipri M, Talbot NJ, Sharpe IT. Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis with a compressive retrograde nail: A retrospective study of 59 nails. Foot Ankle Surg 2015;21:202-5.

Predictive risk assessment for major amputation after tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis. J G Devries, G C Berlet, C F Hyer, Foot Ankle Int. 34DeVries JG, Berlet GC, Hyer CF. Predictive risk assessment for major amputation after tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis. Foot Ankle Int 2013;34:846-50.

Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis with a compressive retrograde intramedullary nail: A report of 34 consecutive patients. N I I N I M Ä K I T T, Foot Ankle Int. 28J I .N i i n i m ä k i T T, K l e m o l a T M , L e p p i l a h t i J I . Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis with a compressive retrograde intramedullary nail: A report of 34 consecutive patients. Foot Ankle Int 2007;28:431-4.

Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis using an intramedullary nail: A systematic review. F Franceschi, E Franceschetti, Torre G Papalia, R Samuelsson, K Karlsson, J , Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 24Franceschi F, Franceschetti E, Torre G, Papalia R, Samuelsson K, Karlsson J, et al. Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis using an intramedullary nail: A systematic review. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2016;24:1316-25.

The success of tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis with intramedullary nailing--a systematic review of the literature. S Jehan, M Shakeel, A J Bing, S O Hill, Acta Orthop Belg. 77Jehan S, Shakeel M, Bing AJ, Hill SO. The success of tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis with intramedullary nailing--a systematic review of the literature. Acta Orthop Belg 2011;77:644-51.

Surgical correction of severe deformity of the ankle and hindfoot by arthrodesis using a compressing retrograde intramedullary nail. J W Brodsky, G Verschae, S Tenenbaum, Foot Ankle Int. 35Brodsky JW, Verschae G, Tenenbaum S. Surgical correction of severe deformity of the ankle and hindfoot by arthrodesis using a compressing retrograde intramedullary nail. Foot Ankle Int 2014;35:360-7.

The circular arc shaped nail for fixing the tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis. After clinical results. K Klaue, A Wichelhaus, P Maik, T Mittlmeier, Injury. 50Klaue K, Wichelhaus A, Maik P, Mittlmeier T. The circular arc shaped nail for fixing the tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis. After clinical results. Injury 2019;50:23-31.

Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis using a retrograde intramedullary nail with a valgus curve. Z Fang, L Claaßen, H Windhagen, K Daniilidis, C Stukenborg-Colsman, H Waizy, Orthop Surg. 7Fang Z, Claaßen L, Windhagen H, Daniilidis K , Stukenborg-Colsman C, Waizy H. Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis using a retrograde intramedullary nail with a valgus curve. Orthop Surg 2015;7:125-31.

A 2 n d . Co m par i. R P Mulligan, Adams SbJr, M E Easley, J K Deorio, J Nunley, t h How to Cite this ArticleMulligan RP, Adams SB Jr., Easley ME, DeOrio JK, Nunley J A 2 n d . Co m par i so n o f p o ster i o r ap p roac h w i t h How to Cite this Article

Salvage Tibial-Talocalcaneal Arthrodesis with Retrograde Intramedullary Nail Fixation in Elderly with Posttraumatic Secondary Arthritis: Limb Salvage Reconstruction in Two Cases with Review of Literature. L Tomar, G Govil, P Dhawan, Journal of Orthopaedic Case Reports. 135Foot Ankle IntTomar L, Govil G, Dhawan P. Salvage Tibial-Talocalcaneal Arthrodesis with Retrograde Intramedullary Nail Fixation in Elderly with Posttraumatic Secondary Arthritis: Limb Salvage Reconstruction in Two Cases with Review of Literature. Journal of Orthopaedic Case Reports 2023 May;13(5):105-110. intramedullary nailing versus lateral transfibular approach with fixed-angle plating for tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis. Foot Ankle Int 2017;38:1343-151.

Prerequisites for optimum centering of a tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis nail. W D Marley, A Tucker, S Mckenna, J Wong-Chung, Foot Ankle Surg. 20Marley WD, Tucker A, McKenna S, Wong-Chung J. Pre- requisites for optimum centering of a tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis nail. Foot Ankle Surg 2014;20:215-20.

Technical tip: A simple method for proper placement of an intramedullary nail entry point for tibiotalocalcaneal or tibiocalcaneal arthrodesis. R Belczyk, W Sung, D Wukich, Foot Ankle J. 194Belczyk R, Sung W, Wukich D. Technical tip: A simple method for proper placement of an intramedullary nail entry point for tibiotalocalcaneal or tibiocalcaneal arthrodesis. Foot Ankle J 2008;1(9):4.

Fragility fractures of the ankle: Stabilisation with an expandable calcaneotalotibial nail. M Lemon, H S Somayaji, A Khaleel, D S Elliott, J Bone Joint Surg Br. 87Lemon M, Somayaji HS, Khaleel A, Elliott DS. Fragility fractures of the ankle: Stabilisation with an expandable calcaneotalotibial nail. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2005;87:809-13.

Retrograde nail for tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis as a limb salvage procedure for open distal tibia and talus fractures with severe bone loss. S Ochman, J Evers, M J Raschke, T Vordemvenne, J Foot Ankle Surg. 51Ochman S, Evers J, Raschke MJ, Vordemvenne T. Retrograde nail for tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis as a limb salvage procedure for open distal tibia and talus fractures with severe bone loss. J Foot Ankle Surg 2012;51:675-9.

Tibio-talocalcaneal arthrodesis as a primary procedure using a retrograde intramedullary nail: A retrospective study of 26 patients with rheumatoid arthritis. T Anderson, L Linder, U Rydholm, F Montgomery, J Besjakov, A Carlsson, Acta Orthop. 76Anderson T, Linder L, Rydholm U, Montgomery F, Besjakov J, Carlsson A. Tibio-talocalcaneal arthrodesis as a primary procedure using a retrograde intramedullary nail: A retrospective study of 26 patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Acta Orthop 2005;76:580-7.

Use of a retrograde nail for ankle arthrodesis in Charcot neuroarthropathy: A limb salvage procedure. L D Paola, A Volpe, D Varotto, A Postorino, E Brocco, A Senesi, Foot Ankle Int. 28Paola LD, Volpe A, Varotto D, Postorino A, Brocco E, Senesi A, et al. Use of a retrograde nail for ankle arthrodesis in Charcot neuroarthropathy: A limb salvage procedure. Foot Ankle Int 2007;28:967-70.

Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis using retrograde intramedullary nail fixation: Comparison of patients with and without diabetes mellitus. D K Wukich, B R Mallory, N C Suder, B L Rosario, J Foot Ankle Surg. 54Wukich DK, Mallory BR , Suder NC, Rosario BL. Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis using retrograde intramedullary nail fixation: Comparison of patients with and without diabetes mellitus. J Foot Ankle Surg 2015;54:876-82.

Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis with retrograde intramedullary nailing. R W Mendicino, A R Catanzariti, K R Saltrick, M F Dombek, B L Tullis, T K Statler, J Foot Ankle Surg. 43Mendicino RW, Catanzariti AR, Saltrick KR, Dombek MF, Tullis BL, Statler TK, et al. Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis with retrograde intramedullary nailing. J Foot Ankle Surg 2004;43:82-6.

Trans-calcaneal retrograde nailing for secondary-displaced traumatic ankle fractures in diabetics with insensate feet: A less-invasive salvage-arthrodesis technique. A El-Tantawy, A Atef, A Samy, N Gougoulias, H Oshba, A Dimitroulias, A Sakellariou, A Wee, Eur J Orthop Surg Traumatol. 32EFORT Open RevEl-Tantawy A, Atef A, Samy A. Trans-calcaneal retrograde nailing for secondary-displaced traumatic ankle fractures in diabetics with insensate feet: A less-invasive salvage-arthrodesis technique. Eur J Orthop Surg Traumatol 2022;32:37-46. 20. Gougoulias N, Oshba H, Dimitroulias A, Sakellariou A, Wee A. Ankle fractures in diabetic patients. EFORT Open Rev 2020;5:457-63.