Graphene Growth via Plasma-Enhanced Hybrid Physical−Chemical Vapor Deposition: A Catalyst-Free Approach
September 26, 2025

Ali Mahjoory 
Somayeh Mohammadi 
Mehdi Akbari 
Shams Mohajerzadeh 
Graphene Growth via Plasma-Enhanced Hybrid Physical−Chemical Vapor Deposition: A Catalyst-Free Approach
September 26, 202550AFAE7E1DEB773D0A2DA07A6263DCDC10.1021/acsomega.5c04078Received: May 3, 2025 Revised: August 30, 2025 Accepted: September 19, 2025
Graphene, with its prominent electrical properties, holds promise as an ideal material for a diverse range of applications, from electronics to optics.Yet, the feasibility of large-area integration in graphene remains constrained by its reliance on metal-based synthesis methods.Integrating graphene onto dielectric substrates is vital for microelectronic device fabrication.Hence, the catalyst-free fabrication of graphene emerges as a crucial pursuit for the future of microelectronic devices, aligning with the demands of integrated electronic technology.Here, we propose a plasma-enhanced hybrid physical−chemical vapor deposition (PE-HPCVD) method as a novel technique for the catalyst-free synthesis of graphene.Although the work is at its initial stages, it provides promising results of achieving large-area graphene sheets directly on silicon or SiO 2 /Si substrates with desired thicknesses.Scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, atomic force microscopy, and Raman spectroscopy have been exploited to investigate the layer formation and their state of crystallization.In addition, we have realized field-effect transistors on graphene sheets with a promising electrical response.

INTRODUCTION

The era of two-dimensional (2D) materials dawned with the discovery of graphene in 2004.Graphene, a monatomic plane composed of sp 2 -hybridized carbon atoms, stands as a pioneering and fundamental demonstration of a material distinguished by its reduced dimensionality. 1−17 The feasibility of graphene to meet commercial demands relies on its reproducible large-scale production in a controlled manner, offering promise for the next leap in large-scale integrated circuit technology.−23 This method employs metal substrates such as Cu or Ni as catalysts to produce few-layer graphene (FLG).Despite its potential for large-area production, two primary drawbacks limit its applicability in integrated applications.First, the self-limiting phenomenon hinders precise control of multilayer growth to attain FLG. 24Second, when considering the necessity of dielectric substrates for device demonstration, postsynthesis transfer becomes inevitable.This transfer process inherently introduces defects and contamination due to its stochastic nature.

To address this limitation, the strategies employed can be categorized into two main categories.The first group involves pseudodirect or semicatalyst CVD strategies.−28 The existence of this catalyst can potentially lead to its transfer to the dielectric substrate through an evaporation mechanism, facilitating graphene growth on the dielectric substrate.However, this approach, despite its success in achieving uniform graphene growth, has some inherent drawbacks.It is important to note that all of the reported procedures were carried out in the gas phase.First, the use of a catalyst still remains, incurring additional expenses in the process.Additionally, the growth process is typically conducted at high temperatures, approximately around 1000 °C, limiting its compatibility with other materials.Furthermore, the self-limiting growth in the gas phase inhibits the precise control of multilayer growth.

The second group encompasses direct or catalyst-free CVD techniques aimed at circumventing prior limitations and meeting commercial demands.Numerous successful reports on catalyst-free graphene synthesis have spurred interest in its commercial application within integrated silicon processing technologies.Pioneering efforts led by Liu's team introduced a range of methods for SiO 2 /Si substrates, operating at temperatures between 1000 and 1100 °C. 29These methods facilitated the wafer-scale synthesis of graphene on insulating substrates like SiO 2 /Si.Despite their valuable success, their techniques are constrained by high temperatures, limiting compatibility with intricate device fabrication.Additionally, achieving large, uniform graphene areas poses a challenge due to the extended growth duration, approximately 8 h.Subsequently, a novel approach employing a sandwiching technique for SiO 2 /Si substrates achieved homogeneous, largearea single-layer graphene. 30This method capitalizes on selfterminating phenomena that induce growth passivation, restricting growth to a single layer.Notably, this growth process operates at an elevated temperature of approximately 1150 °C, with a reduced growth time of 5 h, still relatively high.Furthermore, the research group led by Xiaolong Li successfully lowered operating temperatures to 900−930 °C with a total growth time of 1 h. 31However, challenges akin to previous reports exist, notably the high-temperature regime and the prevalence of dominant concave surfaces, posing obstacles to uniformity in graphene growth.

In the pursuit of advancing graphene synthesis methodologies, the integration of plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PE-CVD) emerges as a transformative avenue, commencing a paradigm shift in addressing inherent challenges.The energy imparted via plasma offers an avenue for low-temperature crystallization processes, leading to a significant departure from conventional methods. 32,33A critical review of the literature reveals noteworthy achievements for the low-temperature growth of graphene on insulating substrates.Pioneering methodologies have successfully reduced growth temperatures to 550 °C, yielding monolayer graphene films with typical grain sizes surpassing 300 nm within a short duration of 150 min. 34Furthermore, by extension of the growth time, these methods have successfully achieved the formation of interconnected large-area layers.Intriguingly, another approach has been documented, showcasing the synthesis of monolayer nitrogen-doped graphene on dielectric substrates. 35This method, leveraging temperatures of 700 °C for 8 min and 650 °C for 100 min, has established a notable record in the realm of reduced-temperature growth techniques.This methodology proposes the feasibility of decreasing growth temperatures to as low as 435 °C, a considerable achievement in the realm of graphene synthesis.It is imperative to underscore that all of these remarkable achievements have been accomplished within the gas phase.In parallel with the increasing demand for direct graphene growth on dielectrics to meet commercial requirements, there is also a growing need for cost-effective, low-waste, and highly efficient material utilization in manufacturing processes. 36To address this concern, digital lithography technology (DLT) and inkjet printing (IJP) methods have drawn significant attention from researchers as promising solutions for fabricating distinct devices. 36,37Due to the unique properties of graphene, it can be integrated into these technologies to achieve more efficient solutions.For instance, Lu et al. introduced an effective methodology for improving IJP efficiency by using graphene to passivate and reduce the resistivity of the Cu ink. 38This study employed a low-temperature method for the direct growth of graphene on the deposited Cu ink by using plasma-enhanced CVD.

In this article, we present a highly controlled, metal-free process to realize graphene layers directly on silicon or SiO 2 /Si substrates within the solid phase.This advancement has been possible through the introduction of a plasma enhanced hybrid physical-chemical vapor deposition (PE-HPCVD) method.In this technique, we proposed a novel double electrode structure, which gives a new degree of freedom during the growth process engineering.This process is essentialy a sequential procedure in which different gases such as H 2 , He, and O 2 are used at various stages of the deposition and growth steps, further enabling one to control the thickness and quality of the graphene films on silicon or Si/SiO 2 substrates.This methodology not only enables the controlled growth of graphene but also empowers the formation of a continuous layer of this material on dielectric substrates, exemplified by SiO 2 /Si, with precise control over the number of layers.Apart from material investigation using electron and atomic force microscopy, we have realized field-effect transistors to demonstrate the electrical performance of the grown films.


MATERIALS AND METHODS


Synthesis and Device Fabrication of Graphene.

The homemade PE-HPCVD system was employed to synthesize wafer-scale graphene on an insulating SiO 2 /Si substrate.Our PE-HPCVD system, depicted schematically in Figure S1, is equipped with three depletion valves.The primary valve, the largest, evacuates the chamber to 20 mTorr to purge undesired gases, while two auxiliary small valves deplete input gases during growth and regulate pressure levels, facilitating mode processing.As shown in Figure S1, there are two small valves that are referred to as bypass valves.These valves are responsible for maintaining the desired pressure during the evaporation and crystallization process steps.These bypass valves should remain in an ON state during the process.The chamber features a centrally located heating system, and our system leverages a double electrode structure to generate controllable and localized plasma using two DC power supplies.During processing, a pure graphite tablet is situated on extended electrodes within the heated zone, while a 1 × 1 cm 2 SiO 2 /Si wafer is positioned on shorter electrodes within the colder section of the chamber.After chamber evacuation, purging with high-purity H 2 gas precedes temperature adjustment to 550 °C.Upon reaching the set temperature, the gas is switched to high-purity He gas (18 sccm) for a 2 min substrate surface treatment through plasma application to the shorter electrode.Subsequently, the gas reverts to H 2 (18  sccm) and O 2 (10 sccm), initiating deposition by plasma for 10 s via a single bypass valve.Notably, both processing electrodes concurrently apply plasma.Following the short electrode plasma quenching after 2 min, O 2 (10 sccm) is activated for a 2 s shock, iterating this plasma application for up to 10 min.As shown in Figure S1, the small valves are termed bypass valves, which are responsible for preventing gas trapping during the process by maintaining a consistent flow and pressure of the incoming gas.These valves should remain in the ON state during the process.It is important to note that, according to the proposed procedure, plasma must be applied independently to each electrode.To achieve this condition, two DC power supplies were employed, as shown in Figure S2.Supply #1 is connected to the first electrode located in the hot zone of the reactor to control the evaporation process, while supply #2 is connected to the other electrode to participate in the crystallization process.This single-sequence iteration drives the growth mechanism to obtain thicker samples.Upon completion, both DC power supplies are deactivated, and the temperature is gradually reduced to zero in an inert atmosphere to cool samples.A detailed process flow schematic is presented in Figure S2.Subsequently, the synthesized graphene on SiO 2 /Si (300 nm) substrates is utilized to fabricate back-gate field-effect transistor (FET) devices.Initial steps entail sputtering Cr/Au metal layers onto synthesized graphene, followed by standard photolithography to form interdigitated source and drain contacts with a 10 μm separation.Although the size of the wafer is 1 × 1 cm 2 at this investigation, the size of the silicon wafers can be increased to larger sizes, and the process can be modified to achieve wafer-scale growth.Moreover, the thickness of the graphene sheets can be increased by introducing growth sequences, as stated before.Through proper control of the growth conditions, monolayers of graphene can also be grown on larger-scale silicon wafers.

2.2.Characterization of Graphene Nanosheets.The morphological investigation of the time-dependent growth procedure and transferred graphene sheets was conducted by using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) with a Hitachi 4160 field-emission SEM (FE-SEM).Raman spectroscopy analyses were performed using a Teksan-Opus Raman spectroscope equipped with a Nd:YAG laser doubled to 532 nm operating at a low power (5 mW) to minimize damage to the graphene layer.In addition, a long working distance ×60 (LWD ×60) objective lens was utilized to enhance the Raman signal.Microscopic morphological and crystallinity investigations were carried out using two transmission electron microscopes (TEMs): a Philips CM300 TEM operating at 200 kV and an FEI Tecnai G2 F20 SuperTwin TEM, also operating at 200 kV.The TEM samples were prepared using conventional sonication methods.Thickness measurements were characterized using an atomic force microscopy apparatus (NT-MDT AFM) in the noncontact mode with an NSG10 tip having a resonance frequency of 190 kHz.Electrical characterizations were performed using a Keithley K361 sourcemeasurement unit at room temperature in ambient air.


RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Figure 1 illustrates the growth procedure schematically and provides a precise process flow.Figure 1a provides a graphical overview of the proposed procedure, considering deposition, growth, and plasma application using a double electrode structure.Figure 1b depicts the step-by-step crystallization trend within a single sequence, showing the iteration process to synthesize graphene layers with the desired thickness.The process introduced in this paper employs hydrogen and helium gases to improve the crystallization and growth process.From our previous findings on the growth of phosphorene sheets on silicon, hydrogen was found to be important to impart energy to the growing layer. 39The interaction of hydrogen with the growing species on the surface of the substrate could be both chemical and physical.While the energy imparted from hydrogen ions enhances the chance of placing recently added atoms on the surface to energetically favorable sites, its chemical interaction with the carbon species on the surface could lead to the re-evaporation of improperly placed atoms.On the other hand, helium plasma is found to be critical to create nanolevel sites on the surface to enhance the nucleation step.Due to the inert nature of helium, it does not participate The amorphous deposition and crystallization steps are presented schematically for a single sequence, illustrating a step-by-step trend.By iterating the single sequence, it results in the formation of a graphene layer with the desired thickness.(c) A flowchart illustrating the process flow for graphene growth, considering primary preparation steps including heating, and surface treatment and growth process steps.In this process, helium helps to initiate nucleation for layer formation.Oxygen is important to evaporate carbon from the graphite source, and most importantly, hydrogen completes the crystallization.chemically in the process.However, the application of H 2 and O 2 plasma on the graphite source breaks the carbon bonds, initiating the deposition of an amorphous carbon layer on the substrate.By contrast, hydrogen plays a chemical role during the process by forming carbon compounds after the C−C bonds are broken, which leads to evaporation and deposition.Finally, the controlled application of H 2 and O 2 plasma completes the sequence by crystallizing the amorphous carbon.As shown in the detailed timing process in Figure S2, oxygen exposure lasts only a few seconds, followed by some shocks.It is believed that a sufficient hydrogen plasma processing period follows, which effectively removes any oxygen species that could remain on the grown sample.

To achieve thicker layers, each sequence is repeated, and the iteration of such sequences results in the growth of graphene with the desired thickness, as demonstrated in the second part of Figure 1b. Figure S1 displays the PE-HPCVD setup consisting of a double electrode structure for quick plasma switching.The application of plasma is important to impart energy to the previously deposited carbon atoms and, if needed, break the existing C−C bonds within the amorphous phase and form a highly crystalline layer.The use of the special double electrode structure allows the possibility of applying local plasma to the desired electrodes at different stages of growth or crystallization.So, it confers a unique degree of freedom in both the deposition and crystallization stages, resulting in a controllable procedure.Based on the electrode structure, a long rod, positioned in the hot zone, houses the source tablet for controlled evaporation, and a short rod, placed in the colder zone, houses the substrate wafer for deposition.It should be noted that through the introduced system, the deposition is in the reverse direction of the gas flow.So, only the ultrasmall-sized clusters could be deposited.This backflow processing avoids the formation of undesirable cluster transfers, paving the way for a uniform deposition of graphene.A flowchart overviews all of the graphene growth procedure steps, as shown in Figure 1c.For a better understanding of the process, a time-line schematic delineating the detailed process flow for graphene growth is presented in Figure S2, showing important steps including heating, surface treatment, growth sequences, and cooling phases.Moreover, the details of the gas flow rate, pressure levels, and plasma conditions with respect to each stage are presented to provide a comprehensive insight into the synthesis process.A clean SiO 2 /Si substrate was placed in the short electrode.The hot section of the reactor was diligently heated to 550 °C, a temperature maintained throughout the entire process.The sequence commences with a 2 min application of helium plasma, followed by the introduction of hydrogen and oxygen gas plasma in the reactor for a limited period of 10 s of deposition time.Concurrently, the plasma applied to the short electrodes for two min initiates the breaking of the C−C bonds within amorphous islands which have been previously deposited on the substrate.The subsequent step entails the rapid exposure of O 2 plasma for 2 s to rectify any undesired bonds, thereby completing the crystallization process.This sequential procedure constitutes a single sequence, which can be iterated to attain the desired graphene thickness.

The samples are then cooled and unloaded for subsequent material characterization.Initial investigation via scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Raman spectroscopy suggests the potential for achieving large scale surface coverage during the growth process.To understand this phenomenon, our primary approach involved investigating the evolution of graphene growth through SEM analysis at various time intervals as collected in Figure 2a.The process initiated with the deposition of an amorphous carbon phase through plasma treatment of the source under low-pressure conditions (initial deposition mode).Subsequently, the reactor is switched to the plasma application mode (process mode), to impart energy to the previously deposited layer to break the carbon−carbon bonds of the amorphous phase and to expedite the phase transition toward a crystalline graphene.In the following section, it is evident that small grains have been nucleated.With the application of adequate energy and time, the small islands will converge to create a uniform layer.As stated, the use of helium plasma at the beginning of the deposition serves to create nucleation sites on the surface of the substrate.These nucleation sites might act as catalysts to enhance the lateral growth and eventual merging of these grains and form a continuous film.Figure 2a-ii−a-iv displays this growth process at distinct time intervals: 2, 4, and 8 min, respectively.The illustrated SEM images reveal that the initial stage forms separate nanoscale grains, which are distributed across the wafer.Using image processing, the size distribution of these grains was calculated to provide a more quantitative observation of the initial stage.Based on this calculation, the minimum and maximum grain sizes are 28.84 and 81.13 nm, respectively (Figure S3).Additionally, the majority of grains have a size of 52.25 nm.The SEM images provide a comparative morphological study of the growth process in different stages.As shown, detached grains and cracks observed initially consolidate in Figure 2a-iv, where no apparent cracks or grains are visible, which can be interpreted as the formation of a continuous film.These findings will be further confirmed through more detailed morphological studies using AFM, which are presented in subsequent steps.Based on the literature, the primary drawback hindering the possibility of multilayer growth of graphene in gas-phase methods is the selfterminating phenomenon.In our procedure, due to a solidphase amorphous carbon deposition and subsequent crystallization, it seems to be possible to grow multilayer structures.To further substantiate this observation, we conducted SEM imaging of randomly cleaved multilayer samples, as shown in Figure S4a−c.Evidently, the SEM images depict the growth of stacked and multilayer graphene structures.It is worth noting that unlike previous tests with a single sequence, these thick samples were considered to facilitate a more detailed morphological study via SEM.Also, the height measurements obtained using Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), shown in Figure S4d,e, provide quantitative data.Figure 2b displays a representative Raman spectrum of graphene grown on a Si substrate.The Raman spectroscopy confirms the presence of characteristic G and 2D peaks, substantiating graphene growth.As shown in this figure, Raman spectroscopy was conducted at different stages of the growth.The black line corresponds to the initial amorphous deposition, where, without adequate energy or temperature, no signal is observed.After imparting energy, the deposited layer begins to undergo a phase transformation, as indicated by the orange line, which represents the partial amorphous layer.Upon completion of the sequence, sufficient energy is supplied for growth, as shown by the blue line corresponding to the initially crystallized layer.Finally, the green line represents the large-area crystal formation achieved by applying an excessive amount of time.Notably, the presence of D peaks denotes the presence of defects and disorder density.Moreover, as shown in the figure, the D' band is evident as a shoulder on the right side of the G peak.This peak corresponds to defects, which may originate from the intravalley scattering process. 40Such defects are undesirable, and their presence could be due to the boundary lines between neighboring grains.The ratio of G to D lines serves as evidence to minimize such defects through controlling the growth process, although further optimization is still needed to arrive at defect-free layers.To examine the spatial distribution and consistency of the grown graphene, a Raman mapping analysis was conducted, depicted in Figure 2d,e.The outcome of this mapping analysis revealed a consistent intensity ratio of I G /I D and I 2D /I G , averaging around 2.2 and 0.25 across the mapped region, respectively.This observation demonstrates the uniformity of the graphene film over the entire studied area.

Apart from the crystallization of graphene layers at different stages of growth, Raman spectroscopy does not support the evolution of undesired species such as SiC formation.It should be kept in mind that during this growth process, the deposition/evaporation step takes only a few seconds (less than 10 s), and during this short step, the oxygen plasma is confined between top and bottom electrodes in the hot zone of the reactor.So, the discharged gas remains mostly between two electrodes and does not make contact with the quartz holder.

In addition, the evaporation of the graphite source takes place in the hot zone of the reactor, where a high temperature of 550 °C is practiced, whereas the film formation is accomplished on the substrate, placed in the less hot zone.It is then deduced that the process temperature is significantly lower than that required to reduce SiO 2 and form SiC, a conclusion that is supported by similar catalyst-free procedures reported in the literature. 30,35After the confirmation of the feasibility of graphene growth, the influence of temperature on the growth process was further examined.The intensity ratio of I G /I D from Raman spectroscopy at various growth temperatures is illustrated in Figure 2c.An increase in the growth temperature leads to a higher I G /I D ratio, indicating a lower level of defects and an improved crystalline structure.The Raman analysis validated the subsequent crystallization achieved in our process.Additionally, the amorphous nature of the initial deposition step is evidenced by the broad Raman spectrum observed at this stage, as illustrated in Figure S5.This finding further underscores the feasibility of direct growth, as opposed to transferring small-sized sheets.

To further investigate the growth of multilayer graphene films on silicon substrates and observe the crystallinity of the layers, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and the corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns have been exploited.These findings are collectively illustrated in Figure 3a−g.The progression from amorphous carbon into highly crystalline graphene sheets is clearly observed and is correlated with the important stages of the growth procedure.Figure 3a−g displays different stages of the growth process, capturing the transformation from amorphous carbon to crystalline graphene with varying thicknesses.Notably, the electron diffraction patterns confirm the phase transition and provide deeper insights into the structural alterations.The initial results validate amorphous carbon deposition, consistent with the results obtained from the SEM analysis.Through optimization of growth parameters, the formation of few-layer graphene films is confirmed, as observed in Figure 3b, and multilayer graphene (MLG) in Figure 3c.Significantly, the SAED patterns confirm the crystallinity of the samples, marking a complete transformation from an amorphous layer to a singlecrystal structure with no discernible amorphous inclusions.Figure 3b, with its corresponding SAED patterns, reveals the formation of single and double hexagonal patterns, substantiating the existence of few and bilayer graphene structures.For thicker specimens, a variety of hexagonal SAED patterns is observed, indicative of a multilayered structure.To gain a deeper understanding of the graphene layers, cross-sectional TEM imaging was conducted, and the resulting image and its corresponding SAED pattern are illustrated in Figure 3d.For the fabrication of cross-sectional TEM specimens, a cleavage technique was employed.Consistent with previous results, the absence of defects and uniformity is evident in the image, while the crystallinity is confirmed by the SAED pattern.Additional cross-sectional TEM results show the tunability of growth thickness, as depicted in Figure S6.

Figure 3(e−g) provide high-resolution images of the carbon films grown directly on silicon substrates.The depiction of the energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) for the crosssectional view is presented in Figures S7.The cumulative point analysis illustrates the presence of C atoms throughout the layer.It should be borne in mind that in TEM, essentially a small region is examined, and the information does not belong to a large area.SEM and Raman spectroscopy tools are believed to be more suitable for examination over a large area.In other words, the information obtained from both TEM and SEM is necessary to grasp a clear image of the uniformity and crystallinity of the sample over larger regions.

The crystallinity and phase transformation processes of the samples were comprehensively investigated.To further demonstrate the large-area properties of the grown graphene layers, we proposed an etching exfoliation method.This etching process is achieved by immersing the grown graphene sheets on silicon-oxide/Si substrates in hydrofluoric acid for an extended time to remove the oxide layer and release the carbon sheet.In this way, we have been able to remove larger sheets from the substrate without the need for sonication or mechanical exfoliation.It must be kept in mind that the etching process proposed in this section is just for the sake of exfoliation of a large-area sheet and its electron microscopy through transferring onto a TEM grid.It is well-known that long exposure to HF could damage the graphene sheets and form carbon−fluorine species, which are not desirable for electronic applications. 41However, as stated before, the exposure to such a harsh acidic environment is just for the sake of TEM specimen preparation, and other fabrication steps or characterizations have been carried out on pristine graphene on Si or graphene on SiO 2 /Si substrates.Notably, all other characterizations were conducted on the main sample, where graphene was directly grown on a SiO 2 substrate.We have realized that conventional sonication-based exfoliation methods are unsuitable for preparing large samples, as they are destructive and result in small-sized sheets.Figure 4a−d illustrates the schematic of the proposed procedure for the large-area exfoliation of graphene from a SiO 2 /Si substrate using hydrofluoric acid (HF).HF, being chemically inert to both graphene and silicon, selectively etches the SiO 2 layer.When the grown graphene sample is immersed in an HF solution, the etchant diffuses laterally and progressively etches the SiO 2 layer.Due to the surface coverage of the oxide film by the graphene sheet, the etching process progresses through lateral under-etching, which requires sufficient time. 42Allowing sufficient time, approximately 24−48 h, ensures the complete removal of the underlying SiO 2 layer, enabling the graphene layers to float in the solution.To separate the graphene layers, the sample is centrifuged at 4500 rpm for 10 min.This process detaches the graphene layers, while the denser silicon fragments settle.The detached graphene layers are subsequently transferred onto a TEM grid via drop-casting for analysis.The resulting TEM images are shown in Figure 4e−g, where the dimensions of the exfoliated graphene sheets are annotated.The provided images further demonstrate the feasibility of preparing large sheets at the micro-level for TEM analysis.Consistent with earlier results, these sheets do not exhibit a nanocrystalline structure, and their morphology aligns with the desired sheet structure.The crystallinity and few-layer nature of the sample were further verified through SAED patterns, as depicted in Figure S8.Other examples of similar large-area sheets with annotated dimensions are presented in Figure S9.

As anticipated, oxygen plays a key role in our procedure, exhibiting both constructive and destructive effects.It is wellestablished that the uncontrolled presence of oxygen near carbon samples can lead to their complete destruction, a property utilized in carbon evaporation and deposition processes at low temperatures.However, the precise optimization and control of oxygen exposure are essential for successful growth.To investigate the oxygen-dependent growth evolution, the morphology of the layers was analyzed under varying oxygen exposure durations relative to the total period.So, the oxygen exposure time was quantified as a percentage of the total exposure within a single period.As depicted in Figure S10, the surface morphology is highly sensitive to oxygen exposure.Increasing oxygen exposure from 2% to 20% demonstrates its destructive effects, with higher concentrations causing surface damage, including the formation of hollow structures and agglomerated grains.The most homogeneous and continuous graphene layers were achieved under 2% oxygen exposure.Furthermore, TEM analysis of samples with nonoptimized oxygen exposure revealed a high density of agglomerated nanoislands within   the layer Figure S11, highlighting the critical importance of controlled oxygen exposure in achieving high-quality graphene growth.

Following the previous steps, which thoroughly investigated the growth procedure using SEM and TEM, Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) characterization was employed to precisely examine the surface morphology at distinct stages of growth.Figure 5 illustrates the AFM surface morphology at three successive growth stages: amorphous deposition, small grain nucleation, and continuous film formation, as previously described.As expected from prior observations, the initial stage corresponds to the deposition of an amorphous carbon layer, as is clearly evident in the AFM images.This finding is consistent with the TEM results for this early stage.After confirming the nucleation of small grains, the AFM data further support the possibility of these grains converging, leading to the formation of a continuous film.Additionally, the root-mean-square (RMS) values of the surface for each image were calculated to facilitate a more quantitative comparison between the stages.The RMS values were found to be 2.7, 1.28, and 0.23 nm for the amorphous deposition, small grain nucleation, and continuous film formation stages, respectively.This indicates that the process distributes the deposited material, leading to the growth of a homogeneous, continuous film.Moreover, further AFM investigation was conducted to examine the thickness of the layers and to correlate the growth conditions with the number of layers, which is formed on the substrate, as shown in Figure 6.In the first attempt, we used a drop-casting method to prepare samples for AFM analysis.Part (a) in this figure demonstrates the evolution of thin sheets of graphene, exfoliated from the original substrate using ultrasonication.In addition, we utilized a shadow masking technique to form stepwise deposition of the graphene in the corresponding region to measure the thickness of synthesized layers using AFM. Figure 6b illustrates graphene growth within a 20 μm × 20 μm area, with growth passivation achieved through shadow masking.The shadow-masked region is indicated in the figure and is shown as a black area due to its lower height.The black line on the right side of the image is due to the border with a region where another sample has been placed (shadow masked).The corresponding layer, formed by 8 sequences, presents a 20 nm thickness, as shown in Figure 6a.Moreover, the almost flat height profile over a 20 μm length presents a uniform layer.To further study the surface morphology, we focused on the specified region (white square) in Figure 6b.As shown in Figure 6c, there is no deformation, and it is reasonably smooth.The root-mean-square (RMS) of the surface is 0.274 nm, as calculated from the corresponding height profile.Therefore, it is suitable for electronic device fabrication approaches.Additionally, we repeated the thickness calculations for different numbers of sequences to reveal the possibility of desired thickness growth ranging from few-layer to multilayer structures.More AFM data from randomly prepared graphene sheets are presented in Figure S12.

To assess the electrical properties of the synthesized graphene sheets, we fabricated a back-gate graphene fieldeffect transistor (G-FET) on SiO 2 /Si substrates.Additionally, an infrared (IR) lamp was employed to optically excite the graphene, to obtain its photoresponsivity.Figure 7a illustrates the manipulation of G-FET drain current by gate voltage, known as transfer characteristics, with a fixed drain-source voltage of −1 V. Also, Figure 7(a-1,a-2) shows a schematic representation of the fabricated interdigitated G-FET under both dark and photothermal illumination modes, with a separation between digits of 10 μm in all directions.Based on transfer characteristics of the proposed transistors, the ON/ OFF ratios are 2.97 and 3.53 for dark and photothermal modes, respectively, with the ON state assumed at 2 V.This result highlights the switching performance of the device, where the relatively low ON/OFF ratio of the graphene transistor can be attributed to its inherent zero bandgap property.As demonstrated in the figure, by applying IR illumination, the channel current increases, leading to an enhanced ON/OFF ratio.The optical and SEM images of the fabricated interdigital device were presented in Figure S13.Since the device is fabricated directly on the substrate used in the growth process, ensuring the integrity of the SiO 2 layer is critical.Any breakdown in this layer would create a direct connection between the source and drain and the gate through the bulk silicon.However, the gate current shows a nanoscale magnitude with a noisy nature (Figure S14).Therefore, the current−voltage behavior of the gate confirms the insulating nature of the gate oxide and its field-effect on the drain-source current.This behavior corroborates a promising electronic characteristic of GFET devices and proper current flow through the graphene channel.The transfer characteristics reveal symmetrical behavior for electron and hole carriers, indicating balanced carrier injection, consistent with the neutrality of graphene.−46 As depicted in the figure, the drain current exhibits amplification in response to 980 nm IR illumination.This phenomenon can be assigned to photoexcited carriers, enhancing current injection.Notably, infrared wavelengths are less absorbed and penetrate more deeply into silicon than visible wavelengths.This reduced absorption and deeper penetration make it unlikely to observe the photogating effect at these wavelengths, as supported by existing literature. 47Furthermore, as shown in Figure 7b the device's equivalent band diagram for both operational modes plotted based on the transfer curves to elucidate the carrier transfer mechanism across three operational regimes, offering deeper insight into device behavior.A comparison table (Table S1) has been included to summarize the key parameters of previously reported FET devices.The key electrical performance parameters, such as field-effect mobility, were calculated using the formula provided in the Supporting Information.The ON/OFF ratio for graphene-based channels typically falls within the range of 1−8, which is consistent with the performance observed in our proposed device, primarily due to graphene's zero band gap property.Additionally, there are reports suggesting that the ON/OFF ratio can be enhanced by introducing excessive dopants, which can significantly influence the electrical behavior of graphene.The mobility of our device was calculated to be 116 cm 2 /V•s, which is consistent with the values reported for similar graphene-based FET devices.As noted in the literature, mobility is predominantly influenced by several factors, including defects, processing conditions, and the overall device configuration.Notably, the table highlights those devices with top-gate configurations that tend to exhibit higher carrier mobility.To provide a more detailed quantitative comparison, we have included a discussion of Table S1.


CONCLUSION

In summary, our study presents a PE-HPCVD technique for the direct fabrication of graphene on silicon substrates.This innovative method exploits a unique double electrode structure, affording enhanced control over plasma localization.This method ensures precise single-step deposition and crystallization and achieves the desired graphene thickness through iterations.To the best of our knowledge, the utilization of a solid-state source and phase transition crystallization represents an unexplored frontier in graphene growth.Our optimized growth temperature of 550 °C enhances compatibility with diverse processes and materials.We envision that this procedure holds significant potential for large-scale production in graphene electronics.Furthermore, our findings regarding the catalytic-free procedure may extend benefits to the growth of other types of 2D materials.

Although the process reported in this work is based on experimental findings, a deeper understanding of the growth dynamics and important physical parameters such as pressure, ion concentration and species, temperature, and plasma power is yet to be obtained.A theoretical molecular dynamics modeling of the growth reaction is being pursued to substantiate our knowledge of the growth mechanism.


■ ASSOCIATED CONTENT


* sı Supporting Information

The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.5c04078Schematic representation of plasma-enhanced hybrid physical−chemical vapor deposition; schematic process flow, including gas flows and timing of each step; nucleation of small-size grains with an average size of 52 nm; SEM and AFM images of sonication-prepared graphene sheets; Raman spectroscopy results of the initial amorphous carbon layer; cross-sectional TEM images of graphene on silicon substrates; EDAX results of the graphene layer on silicon, indicating carbon from the layer and silicon from the substrate; exfoliation of graphene out of SiO 2 /Si substrates by means of acid immersion; further TEM images of large-area graphene sheets on SiO 2 /Si substrates; effect of oxygen on the growth of graphene sheets or islands; the TEM image of graphene islands under improper growth conditions; AFM images and height profile of few-layer graphene flakes; optical and SEM images of interdigital transistor configuration; the gate current of graphene-gated fieldeffect transistor; the electrical response of the G-FET transistor on a linear scale; calculation of effective carrier mobility in our G-FET devices and a comparison table; a comparative discussion on the carrier mobility extracted in our devices and the data in the previous table; and TEM and selected area diffraction pattern of various samples prepared on silicon substrates in a crosssectional view (PDF)

■

Figure 1 .
1
Figure 1.(a) Schematic overview of the procedure utilizing a double electrode structure.(b)The amorphous deposition and crystallization steps are presented schematically for a single sequence, illustrating a step-by-step trend.By iterating the single sequence, it results in the formation of a graphene layer with the desired thickness.(c) A flowchart illustrating the process flow for graphene growth, considering primary preparation steps including heating, and surface treatment and growth process steps.In this process, helium helps to initiate nucleation for layer formation.Oxygen is important to evaporate carbon from the graphite source, and most importantly, hydrogen completes the crystallization.


Figure 2 .
2
Figure 2. (a) SEM images depict the growth evolution of graphene from amorphous phase deposition to grain nucleation and the subsequent expansion, leading to the formation of a continuous film.The scale bars are 500 nm.(b) Raman spectrum of synthesized graphene.The black line corresponds to the initial amorphous deposition, the orange line represents the partial amorphous layer, the blue line indicates the initially crystallized layer, and the green line represents the large-area crystal formation.(c) Intensity ratio of I G /I D from Raman spectroscopy for distinct growth temperatures, highlighting the effect of temperature on the growth process.(d and e) Raman spectral mapping of graphene layers acquired over a 100 μm × 100 μm area, illustrating intensity ratios of I 2D /I G and I G /I D , respectively.


Figure 3 .
3
Figure 3. TEM images of different growth procedure stages, accompanied by corresponding SAED patterns, and a cross-sectional TEM image.(a) Primary first step commences by initial amorphous deposition and (b and c) bilayer, monolayer, and multilayer crystalline graphene sheet formation, respectively.(d) Cross-sectional TEM image of synthesized graphene layers on a Si substrate and the corresponding SAED pattern.(e− g) HR-TEM images of graphene sheets, followed by magnified views revealing observable Moiréfringes and crystalline graphene lattice spacing.The scale bars are 10 nm.


Figure 4 .
4
Figure 4. (a−d) Large-area graphene exfoliation from a SiO 2 /Si substrate using hydrofluoric acid (HF).The process involves immersing the asgrown graphene sample in HF for 24−48 h, followed by centrifugation and subsequent drop-casting of the exfoliated graphene onto a TEM grid.(e−g) TEM images of the exfoliated large-area graphene sheets, with measurements of their corresponding dimensions indicated.It should be borne in mind that the use of HF solution and immersion of graphene on SiO 2 samples in this acidic solution would lead to a lateral under-etching of the silicon-oxide film and the final release of the graphene layer.


Figure 5 .
5
Figure 5. AFM surface morphology characterization across various growth phases: (a) initial amorphous deposition, (b) progression to small-grain nucleation under sufficient energy and time, and (c) culmination in the formation of a continuous graphene film.The units of the color bars are indicated in nanometers (nm).


Figure 6 .
6
Figure 6.(a) Graphene flake with corresponding height profiling.The scale bars are 500 nm.(b) AFM imaging of shadow-masked graphene reveals the thickness of the layer through height profiling.(c) A magnified area, delineated by a white dashed square in the previous image, demonstrates a uniform layer in its AFM image and height profile along the specified dashed line.The inset shows Fourier transform processing of the AFM image, and (d) thickness measurements are correlated with the number of growth sequences.The units of the color bars are indicated in nanometers (nm).


Figure 7 .
7
Figure 7. (a) Transfer characteristics (with a source−drain voltage of −1 V) of the fabricated G-FET device in two operational modes, considering both dark and photothermal conditions.The schematic of the interdigitated back-gate G-FET device in the two operational modes is presented.(b) Schematic representation of the electrical behavior of a fabricated G-FET and its photoresponse in three operational regions, elucidating charge transfer dynamics through an equivalent band diagram of the fabricated electrical device.


AUTHOR INFORMATION Corresponding Author Shams

Mohajerzadeh − School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Tehran, Tehran 1439957131, Iran; orcid.org/0000-0002-7698-9383;Email: mohajer@ut.ac.ir

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c04078ACS Omega 2025, 10, 45132−45143
ACS Omega
AuthorsAli Mahjoory − School of Electrical
Electric Field Effect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films. K S Novoselov, A K Geim, S V Morozov, D E Jiang, Y Zhang, S V Dubonos, I V Grigorieva, A A Firsov, 10.1126/science.1102896Science. 3062000

The Electronic Thermal Conductivity of Graphene. T Y Kim, C.-H Park, N Marzari, 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b05288?urlappend=%3Fref%3DPDF&jav=VoR&rel=cite-asNano Lett. 162016. 2439−2443

. S K Srivastav, M R Sahu, K Watanabe, T Taniguchi, S Banerjee, A Das, 10.1126/sciadv.aaw5798Universal Quantized Thermal Conductance in Graphene. Sci. Adv. 5eaaw57982019

Dujardin, E. Production, properties and potential of graphene. C Soldano, A Mahmood, 10.1016/j.carbon.2010.01.058Carbon. 482010. 2127−2150

Properties of graphene: A theoretical perspective. D S L Abergel, V Apalkov, J Berashevich, K Ziegler, T Chakraborty, 10.1080/00018732.2010.487978Adv. Phys. 592010

Electrochemical Transparency of Graphene. D W Jeong, 10.1021/acsnano.2c01786?urlappend=%3Fref%3DPDF&jav=VoR&rel=cite-asACS Nano. 162022

Mechanical properties of graphene and graphene-based nanocomposites. D G Papageorgiou, I A Kinloch, R J Young, 10.1016/j.pmatsci.2017.07.004Prog. Mater. Sci. 902017

Lithium Demand and Cyclability Trade-Off in Conductive Nanostructure Scaffolds in Terms of Different Tortuosity Parameters. Ali Hoseini, S Mohajerzadeh, S Sanaee, Z , 10.1002/celc.202400428No. e202400428ChemElectrochem. 202421

Graphene Based Strain Sensors: A Comparative Study on Graphene and Its Derivatives. A Hosseinzadeh, S Bidmeshkipour, Y Abdi, E Arzi, S Mohajerzadeh, 10.1016/j.apsusc.2018.04.099Appl. Surf. Sci. 4482018

Integrated arrays of air-dielectric graphene transistors as transparent active-matrix pressure sensors for wide pressure ranges. S.-H Shin, S Ji, S Choi, K.-H Pyo, B Wan An, J Park, J Kim, J.-Y Kim, K.-S Lee, S.-Y Kwon, 10.1038/ncomms14950Nat. Commun. 2017114950

Free radical sensors based on inner-cutting graphene field-effect transistors. Z Wang, K Yi, Q Lin, L Yang, X Chen, H Chen, Y Liu, D Wei, 10.1038/s41467-019-09573-4Nat. Commun. 15442019

Biomedical application of graphene: From drug delivery, tumor therapy, to theranostics. S Song, 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2019.110596Colloids Surf. 1105962020

Destructive extraction of phospholipids from Escherichia coli membranes by graphene nanosheets. Y Tu, M Lv, P Xiu, T Huynh, M Zhang, M Castelli, Z Liu, Q Huang, C Fan, H Fang, 10.1038/nnano.2013.125Nat. Nanotechnol. 82013

Discrimination of single-point mutations in unamplified genomic DNA via Cas9 immobilized on a graphene fieldeffect transistor. S Balderston, 10.1038/s41551-021-00706-zNat. Biomed. Eng. 52021

A Soft Implantable Energy Supply System That Integrates Wireless Charging and Biodegradable Zn-Ion Hybrid Supercapacitors. H Sheng, L Jiang, Q Wang, Z Zhang, Y Lv, H Ma, H Bi, J Yuan, M Shao, F Li, 10.1016/j.nanoen.2018.02.047Nano Energy. 2023462018Sci. Adv.

Graphene in perovskite solar cells: Device design, characterization and implementation. M Acik, S B Darling, 10.1039/C5TA09911KJ.Mater. Chem. 42016

Growth of Single-Layer and Multilayer Graphene on Cu/Ni Alloy Substrates. M Huang, R S Ruoff, 10.1021/acs.accounts.9b00643?urlappend=%3Fref%3DPDF&jav=VoR&rel=cite-asAcc. Chem. Res. 532020

Gas-flow-driven aligned growth of graphene on liquid copper. X Xue, 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b03998?urlappend=%3Fref%3DPDF&jav=VoR&rel=cite-asChem. Mater. 312019

Highly Oriented Monolayer Graphene Grown on a Cu/Ni(111) Alloy Foil. M Huang, 10.1021/acsnano.8b02444?urlappend=%3Fref%3DPDF&jav=VoR&rel=cite-asACS Nano. 122018

Copper-Vapor-Assisted Growth and Defect-Healing of Graphene on Copper Surfaces. H C Lee, H Bong, M S Yoo, M Jo, K Cho, 10.1002/smll.201801181Small. 143018011812018

Real-Time Multiscale Monitoring and Tailoring of Graphene Growth on Liquid Copper. M Jankowski, 10.1021/acsnano.0c10377?urlappend=%3Fref%3DPDF&jav=VoR&rel=cite-asACS Nano. 152021

Real-Time Imaging of Adatom-Promoted Graphene Growth on Nickel. L L Patera, F Bianchini, C Africh, C Dri, G Soldano, M M Mariscal, M Peressi, G Comelli, 10.1126/science.aan8782Science. 35963812018

Direct synthesis of graphene on SiO2 substrates by chemical vapor deposition. S C Xu, 10.1039/c3ce27029gCrystEngcomm. 152013. 1840−1844

Asymmetric carrier transport and weak localization in few layer graphene grown directly on a dielectric substrate. M S Abbas, P K Srivastava, Y Hassan, C Lee, 10.1039/D1CP03225APhys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 232021. 25284−25290

Remote catalyzation for direct formation of graphene layers on oxides. P Y Teng, 10.1021/nl204024k?urlappend=%3Fref%3DPDF&jav=VoR&rel=cite-asNano Lett. 122012

Direct chemical vapor deposition of graphene on dielectric surfaces. A Ismach, 10.1021/nl9037714?urlappend=%3Fref%3DPDF&jav=VoR&rel=cite-asNano Lett. 102010. 1542−1548

Size dependence of compressive strain in graphene flakes directly grown on SiO2/Si substrate. Y Song, 10.1021/jp501897a?urlappend=%3Fref%3DPDF&jav=VoR&rel=cite-asJ. Phys. Chem. C. 1182014. 12526−12531

Near-equilibrium chemical vapor deposition of high-quality single-crystal graphene directly on various dielectric substrates. J Chen, 10.1002/adma.201304872Adv. Mater. 262014. 1348−1353

Self-Terminating Confinement Approach for Large-Area Uniform Monolayer Graphene Directly over Si/SiOx by Chemical Vapor Deposition. J Pang, 10.1021/acsnano.6b08069?urlappend=%3Fref%3DPDF&jav=VoR&rel=cite-asACS Nano. 112017. 1946−1956

Direct Growth of Graphene on Silicon by Metal-Free Chemical Vapor Deposition. L Tai, D Zhu, X Liu, T Yang, L Wang, R Wang, S Jiang, Z Chen, Z Xu, X Li, 10.1007/s40820-017-0173-1Nano-Micro Lett. 202018

A review of graphene synthesis at low temperatures by CVD methods. J B Wang, 10.1016/S1872-5805(20)60484-XNew Carbon Mater. 352020. 193− 208

A catalytic, catalyst-free, and roll-to-roll production of graphene via chemical vapor deposition: Low temperature growth. S Naghdi, K Y Rhee, S J Park, 10.1016/j.carbon.2017.10.065Carbon. 1272018

Direct synthesis of graphene on silicon oxide by low temperature plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition. R Munõz, 10.1039/C8NR03210FNanoscale. 102018

Low temperature critical growth of high quality nitrogen doped graphene on dielectrics by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition. D Wei, 10.1021/nn505214f?urlappend=%3Fref%3DPDF&jav=VoR&rel=cite-asACS Nano. 92015

A perspective of recent advances in PECVD-grown graphene thin films for scientific research and technological applications. C.-H Lu, D Hao, N.-C Yeh, 10.1016/j.matchemphys.2024.129318Mater. Chem. Phys. 2024319129318

A New Frontier of Printed Electronics: Flexible Hybrid Electronics. Y Khan, A Thielens, S Muin, J Ting, C Baumbauer, A C Arias, 10.1002/adma.201905279Adv. Mater. 321519052792020

Single-Step Direct Growth of Graphene on Cu Ink toward Flexible Hybrid Electronic Applications by Plasma-Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition. C H Lu, C M Leu, N C Yeh, 10.1021/acsami.0c22207?urlappend=%3Fref%3DPDF&jav=VoR&rel=cite-asACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 132021

Experimental and molecular dynamics studies of an ultra-fast sequential hydrogen plasma process for fabricating phosphorene-based sensors. M Rajabali, H Asgharyan, V F Naeini, A Boudaghi, B Zabihi, M Foroutan, S Mohajerzadeh, 10.1038/s41598-021-95463-zSci. Rep. 2021116076

Growing Uniform Graphene Disks and Films on Molten Glass for Heating Devices and Cell Culture. Y Chen, 10.1002/adma.201504229Adv. Mater. 272015

N A Nebogatikova, I V Antonova, V Y Prinz, 10.1109/EDM.2011.6006900Hydrofluoric acid modifications of graphene films2011 International Conference And Seminar On micro/Nanotechnologies And Electron Devices Proceeding-sIEEEErlagol. Russia201180−82

Studies on SiO2-SiO2 bonding with hydrofluoric acid. Room temperature and low stress bonding technique for MEMS. H Nakanishi, 10.1016/S0924-4247(99)00246-0Sens Actuators A Phys. 792000

High mobility flexible graphene field-effect transistors with selfhealing gate dielectrics. C C Lu, Y C Lin, C H Yeh, J C Huang, P W Chiu, 10.1021/nn301199j?urlappend=%3Fref%3DPDF&jav=VoR&rel=cite-asACS Nano. 62012

Resonant terahertz detection using graphene plasmons. D A Bandurin, D Svintsov, I Gayduchenko, S G Xu, A Principi, M Moskotin, I Tretyakov, D Yagodkin, S Zhukov, T Taniguchi, 10.1038/s41467-018-07848-wNat. Commun. 53922018

Highly sensitive solution-gated graphene transistors for label-free DNA detection. S Li, 10.1016/j.bios.2019.04.034Biosens. Bioelectron. 1362019

Application of organic-graphene hybrids in high performance photodetectors. J Liu, Q Liang, R Zhao, S Lei, W Hu, 10.1039/C9QM00517JMater. Chem. Front. 42020

Plasmonic Silicon Quantum Dots Enabled High-Sensitivity Ultrabroadband Photodetection of Graphene-Based Hybrid Phototransistors. Z Ni, 10.1021/acsnano.7b03569?urlappend=%3Fref%3DPDF&jav=VoR&rel=cite-asACS Nano. 112017