PEER REVIEW HISTORY


PEER REVIEW HISTORY



1. Can the authors provide some background information on the healthcare payment models in Netherland? Is there a single payor model or private insurance companies? This will help the readers unfamiliar with the Netherland's payment models better appreciate the manuscript. 2. Are the hospitals not participating in the PSI have a similar healthcare payment model as the university hospitals participating in the PSI? If yes, the results of the study are broadly applicable but if not, then this should be listed as a limitation. 3. Are family members of patients with severe strokes allowed to give consent for the PSI database? If not, this would prevent patients with more deficits (aphasia, altered level of alertness) to be excluded from the analysis and under-represent the cost burden of in-hospital expenditures. 4. Figure 3: consider formatting the graphs so there is some space between different subgroups. This will allow for easier reading. 5. Table S1: Consider using the term "Implantable cardiac monitor" instead of "Reveal" for those unfamiliar with the brand name of the monitor. 6. Table 3a is interesting because it reveals a much longer mean LOS across different subgroups. The average LOS for stroke patients is much shorter in the US. To make this manuscript more interesting for the international audience, do the authors have some reasons to explain why LOS is much longer in the Netherlands? them to look in detail at the drivers of hospital costs for these stroke patients. The analysis, results and discussion are very well presented, but there are two main areas in which I think the paper falls short in making the best use of the available datanamely, there is a need for multivariate analysis, and a lack of precision around the type of costs included.

Major revisions: 1. Multivariate analysis -The descriptive subgroup analysis is very informative and shows interesting and valuable results, particularly in terms of identifying the contribution of length of stay to the total hospital admission cost. However, the paper is limited by not including formal multivariate analysis to determine the key factors driving the hospital admission costs.

-For example, two key findings include: higher costs associated with poor clinical condition at time of admission and nursing home discharge. These two factors could be highly correlated and it would be useful to determine what is the key driver of costs, while controlling for each of the factors examined in the subgroups (age, functional outcome at discharge, etc.) plus other factors available in the data (e.g., co-morbidities, smoking history etc.).

-Perhaps I am missing something but it looks to me that there is micro data on 500+ patients incorporating rich demographic, diagnostic and healthcare use data and it would be very valuable to incorporate these into a multivariate model. The extent to which costs for patients who die are different to those for survivors could also be examined in a multivariate model. 2. Post-discharge costs From my understanding of treatment for stroke patients following discharge from hospital, they can require substantial rehabilitation input in a non-hospital setting. This paper focuses only on hospitalbased costs and thus gives a skewed picture of the post-discharge costs because community-based rehabilitation services are excluded. A brief description of how stroke care is delivered in the Netherlands could help to clarify if this is an important drawback. I think it would be worth focusing on the costs associated with the predischarge phase separately from the anla including analysis of the post-discharge costs separately. This would also allow for greater comparability of costs with other studies.

Minor revisions: 1. The range of total costs from € 967,10 -€76.530,35 looks very largethe high upper cost could probably be commented on. 2. Please clarify what 'mutual service' means for the international audience. 3. It is not clear why the denominator is 455 for the mortality rate in the post-discharge period -I didn't follow. 4. Do the statistical tests in Table 2 only comparing lowest with highest groups? Another motivation for multivariate analysis. 5. Figure 1 what do AH and IH refer to? 6. Figure 2a is hard to read but essentially shows that admitted days accounts for majority of costs regardless of age, type of stroke, NIHSS score, discharge destination, mRS -not sure this figure adds much other than that.


VERSION 1 -AUTHOR RESPONSE


Reviewer: 1 Dr. Tarun Girotra, University of New Mexico Hospital

Comments to the Author: Congratulations to the authors on producing an interesting manuscript. I have a few questions/comments with the hope that they can help the authors improve the quality of the manuscript.

1. Can the authors provide some background information on the healthcare payment models in Netherland? Is there a single payor model or private insurance companies? This will help the readers unfamiliar with the Netherland's payment models better appreciate the manuscript. We thank the reviewer for this valuable remark. In the Introduction we added the following sentence (Page 5): "In The Netherlands, all residents are entitled to a basic health insurance offered by private insurance companies and regulated by the government." Also, we included the following reference: Dutch National Healthcare Institute. The Dutch Healthcare system. https://english.zorginstituutnederland.nl/about-us/healthcare-in-the-netherlands (31-1-2016, accessed 21 October 2022)(reference number 6).


Are the hospitals not participating in the PSI have a similar healthcare payment model as the university hospitals participating in the PSI? If yes, the results of the study are broadly applicable but if not, then this should be listed as a limitation.

Indeed, the Dutch hospitals not participating in the PSI have the same healthcare payment model. To further clarify this, we added a sentence in the Introduction of our manuscript (Page 5): "The healthcare payment model is the same for all the different Dutch hospitals, including university hospitals."


Are family members of patients with severe strokes allowed to give consent for the PSI database? If not, this would prevent patients with more deficits (aphasia, altered level of alertness) to be excluded from the analysis and under-represent the cost burden of in-hospital expenditures.

Yes, a legal representative was allowed to give informed consent for the patient to participate in the PSI study in case the patient was not able to do this him/herself. We added the following sentence in the Methods section (Page 7): "If patients were not able to give informed consent because of aphasia or decreased consciousness, informed consent was obtained from their legal representative." 4. Figure 3: consider formatting the graphs so there is some space between different subgroups. This will allow for easier reading. We agree with the reviewer and adjusted the Figure: 5. Table S1: Consider using the term "Implantable cardiac monitor" instead of "Reveal" for those unfamiliar with the brand name of the monitor.


Table 3a is interesting because it reveals a much longer mean LOS across different subgroups. The average LOS for stroke patients is much shorter in the US. To make this manuscript more interesting for the international audience, do the authors have some reasons to explain why LOS is much longer in the Netherlands?

We thank the reviewer for this remark. Table S3-S6 in the Online Supplement shows the number of admitted days per predefined subgroup. OECD data on 2020 show length of hospital stay (LOS) in acute care patients to be 5.2 days in The Netherlands compared with 5.4 days in the United States (Health care use -Length of hospital stay -OECD Data). In The Netherlands, LOS is longer for stroke patients compared with other in-hospital patients. We hypothesize this is mainly caused by the waiting list for the discharge destination, since stroke-patients freqently need to be discharged to specialized rehabilitation centres or nursing homes. We added this explanation in the Discussion section of the manuscript (Page 13): "We found mean length of hospital stay for ischaemic stroke patients to be longer compared with other in-hospital patients or length of hospital stay for ischaemic stroke patients in the United States, and hypothesized that this is mainly caused by the waiting list for the discharge destination since stroke patients frequently need to be discharged to specialized rehabilitation centres or nursing homes." (reference: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Length of hospital stay. https://data.oecd.org/healthcare/length-of-hospital-stay.htm. (2020, accessed 23-10-2022))


Reviewer: 2 Dr. Samantha Smith, Economic and Social Research Institute, Dublin

Comments to the Author: General comments: This is a very well-written paper making use of a very rich dataset. As the authors point out, combining clinical and cost data enables them to look in detail at the drivers of hospital costs for these stroke patients. The analysis, results and discussion are very well presented, but there are two main areas in which I think the paper falls short in making the best use of the available datanamely, there is a need for multivariate analysis, and a lack of precision around the type of costs included.


Major revisions: 1. Multivariate analysis -The descriptive subgroup analysis is very informative and shows interesting and valuable results, particularly in terms of identifying the contribution of length of stay to the total hospital admission cost. However, the paper is limited by not including formal multivariate analysis to determine the key factors driving the hospital admission costs. -For example, two key findings include: higher costs associated with poor clinical condition at time of admission and nursing home discharge. These two factors could be highly correlated and it would be useful to determine what is the key driver of costs, while controlling for each of the factors examined in the subgroups (age, functional outcome at discharge, etc.) plus

other factors available in the data (e.g., co-morbidities, smoking history etc.). -Perhaps I am missing something but it looks to me that there is micro data on 500+ patients incorporating rich demographic, diagnostic and healthcare use data and it would be very valuable to incorporate these into a multivariate model. The extent to which costs for patients who die are different to those for survivors could also be examined in a multivariate model. We would like to thank the reviewer for this relevant suggestion. When we designed the study, our main objective was not to solely analyze factors driving costs for patients with ischaemic stroke in the hospital setting, but to do this by developing a method to link cost registration with data registered for clinical and research purposes. Therefore, we initially decided not to perform a multivariate analysis. However, in response to your suggestion, we did add multivariate analysis to determine key factors driving hospital costs for patients with ischaemic stroke.

We added this additional analysis in the Methods section of the manuscript (Page 8): "Multivariate analysis of patient characteristics was performed to determine the main drivers of hospital costs for patients with ischaemic stroke." In the Results section of the manuscript we added the following (Page 11): "Multivariate analysis showed that age at time of ischaemic stroke, mRS at time of discharge and discharge to a nursing home were significantly associated with total hospital costs (Table 3)  Last, in the Discussion section of the manuscript (Page 13) we incorporated the results shown above in the following sentence: "The highest costs were observed in patients with a younger age at time of stroke, a worse mRS score at time of discharge, and patients who were discharged to a nursing home."


Post-discharge costs

From my understanding of treatment for stroke patients following discharge from hospital, they can require substantial rehabilitation input in a non-hospital setting. This paper focuses only on hospital-based costs and thus gives a skewed picture of the post-discharge costs because community-based rehabilitation services are excluded. A brief description of how stroke care is delivered in the Netherlands could help to clarify if this is an important drawback. I think it would be worth focusing on the costs associated with the pre-discharge phase separately from the anla including analysis of the post-discharge costs separately. This would also allow for greater comparability of costs with other studies. We thank the reviewer for this important observation. It is correct that hospital costs only account for a minority of post-discharge costs in stroke patients. However, as the aim of our study was to evaluate the main drivers of costs spent on the care of patients with ischaemic stroke by specifically linking cost registration with clinical data from integrated registration in the hospital setting, we were not able to include other sources of costs outside the hospital setting. We already described this limitation of our study in the Discussion on page 13 and 14 of the manuscript: "by focussing on the hospital setting, we only included costs related to registered healthcare activities based on mutual service rates in the hospital and not included societal costs such as loss of productivity of stroke patients or costs of unpaid care for stroke patients by their relatives, or costs from primary care after discharge. This perspective will result in an underestimation of the total healthcare costs for ischaemic stroke patients". To these sentences we added the following sentence to describe why the decision to study hospital costs mainly influences the post-discharge costs: "This is especially true for the costs after hospital discharge since a substantial part of stroke patients are discharged to a rehabilitation centre or nursing home which costs are not included in our study."

Minor revisions: 1. The range of total costs from € 967,10 -€76.530,35 looks very largethe high upper cost could probably be commented on. We thank the reviewer for this suggestion. The patient with the highest costs of €76.530,35 was admitted at the Intensive Care Unit during 26 days, which resulted in relatively high costs during admission. All patients with in-hospital costs in the upper range, were admitted to the Intensive Care Unit. We included the following sentence in the Results section of the manuscript (Page 9) to comment on the high upper cost: "The high upper range of in-hospital costs are attributable to patients who were admitted 10 days or more at the ICU."


Please clarify what 'mutual service' means for the international audience.

In the Methods section on Page 7 we added the following sentence to clarify this: "An example of mutual service is the service of the Radiology department to the Neurology department to make a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scan."


It is not clear why the denominator is 455 for the mortality rate in the post-discharge period -I didn't follow.

We thank the reviewer for this remark. The denominator for the mortality rate in the post-discharge period is 455 instead of the total number of 555 included patients in our study, because patients who died during hospital admission were excluded (n=20) and also patients with missing data on survival three months after discharge. We decided only to report on patients of whom it was noted in the registration system if they died or were alive three months after discharge. Table 2 only comparing lowest with highest groups? Another motivation for multivariate analysis. Yes, the univariate test in Table 2 compares the group with lowest mean costs (reference) with the other groups. Please see our response above at comment #1 on multivariate analysis at major revisions.


Do the statistical tests in


Figure 1what do AH and IH refer to?

AH refers to "after hospital" and IH to "in hospital". In addition to explaining this abbreviation in the legend of Figure 1, we added the following sentence to the caption of Figure 1: "comparing in hospital (IH) and after hospital (AH) costs". Figure 2a is hard to read but essentially shows that admitted days accounts for majority of costs regardless of age, type of stroke, NIHSS score, discharge destination, mRS -not sure this figure adds much other than that. We agree with the reviewer that the main message of Figure 2A is that the vast majority of costs during hospital admission was determined by the number of admitted days. However, we believe the added value of the Figure is also to show the number of admitted days in proportion to other drivers of in hospital costs such as Radiology diagnostics or consultation of other specialists. We moved Figures 2A and 2B to the Online Supplement.


6.


".

Table 3 .
3Multivariate analysis of patient characteristics to determine potential drivers of total hospital costs for patients with ischaemic strokeFactor 
Coefficient (95% CI) 
Age 
-132 
(-178 --86) 
TOAST 
LVD 
923 
(-805 -
2651) 
CE 
774 
(-1128 -
2676) 
SVD 
Reference 
OD 
-296 
(-2536 -
1943) 
UD 
754 
(-947 -
2456) 
NIHSS at admission 
15 
(-106 -135) 
Discharge destination 
Home 
Reference 
High intensity rehabilitation 
608 
(-1119 -
2334) 
Low intensity rehabilitation 
1916 
(-85 -3917) 
Nursing home 
6146 
(2661 -
9632) 
mRS at discharge 
1902 
(1298 -
2507) 
Female sex 
-645 
(-1776 -
487) 
Current smoking 
-1117 
(-2449 -
215) 
Current alcohol consumption 
310 
(-876 -
1496) 
Current drug use 
-3541 
(-8840 -
1758) 
Hypertension 
241 
(-968 -
1449) 
Diabetes 
-516 
(-2149 -
1116) 
History of cerebral ischaemia 
546 
(-811 -
1904) 
CE = cardiac embolism; CI = confidence interval; LVD = large vessel disease; mRS = modified 
Rankin Scale; NIHSS = National Institute of Health Stroke Scale; OD = other determined; TOAST = 
Trial of Org 10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment; UD = undetermined