PCI in a case of dual (type IV) LAD with anomalous origin of the LCx from RCA


Harinder K Bali 
Dept. of Cardiology
Fortis Hospital
Mohali

Kapil Chattree 
Dept. of Cardiology
Fortis Hospital
Mohali

Surinder K Bali 
Dept. of Medicine
Medical College
Jammub India

Hiteshi K C Chauhan 
Dept. of Cardiology
Fortis Hospital
Mohali

C P Shukla 
Dept. of Cardiology
Fortis Hospital
Mohali

PCI in a case of dual (type IV) LAD with anomalous origin of the LCx from RCA
10.1016/j.jsha.2013.07.003Anomalous coronariesDual LADRadial PCI
Dual left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) originating from the left main stem and the right coronary artery (type IV LAD) is a rare congenital anomaly. Its association with an anomalous origin of the left circumflex (LCx) from RCA is even rarer.We describe a patient presenting with acute inferior wall myocardial infarction, who was subsequently found to have this coronary anomaly. He underwent staged PCI of the dominant RCA and anomalous LCx successfully through the radial route.We conclude that anomalous coronaries can be safely and successfully treated through the radial route after careful evaluation of origin and course of the anomalous vessels. CT coronary angiography is extremely useful in delineating the vessel course and particularly their relation to great arteries.Ó 2013 Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.Disclosure: Authors have nothing to disclose with regard to commercial support.

Introduction

A dual left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery originating from the left main stem and the right coronary artery (type IV LAD) in association with an anomalous left circumflex (LCx) from the right coronary artery (RCA) is an extremely rare coronary anomaly.


Case

A 60-year-old male was admitted with complaint of crescendo angina over a period of ten days. He had one episode of prolonged rest pain associated with diaphoresis lasting for 30 min. The electrocardiogram (EKG) revealed ST-segment elevation in the inferior leads. Echocardiography revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 55% with mild hypokinesia of inferior wall.

The patient was taken up for urgent coronary angiography (CAG) from the right radial artery with the intention of primary angioplasty. CAG revealed left main artery giving rise to a diminutive left anterior descending artery (LAD), which terminated in the proximal part of the interventricular groove after giving rise to a diagonal branch (D1) [ Fig. 1]. A small proximal left circumflex artery (LCx) was also arising from the left main. A large dominant right coronary artery (RCA) was seen arising normally from the right coronary sinus. This RCA was critically diseased in mid-portion with 95% ulcerated type C lesion. There was another 90% tubular lesion at the ostium of posterior descending artery (PDA) and a 95% tubular lesion in mid PDA [ Fig. 2]. Both the LCx and the 'second' LAD originated from the proximal right coronary artery. After origin, this LAD passed between aorta and the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) [ Fig. 3] and reached the proximal interventricular groove before traveling its entire length to reach the left ventricular apex. A small diagonal and all the septal branches were arising from this anomalous LAD. This vessel was free of any disease. A large circumflex was arising from the proximal RCA. After its origin from the posterior aspect, it traversed posterior to aorta (retro aortic) to reach its normal position on the lateral aspect of the left ventricle. Anomalous LCx was diffusely diseased [ Fig. 4] along the entire length of its proximal and mid part with maximum severity of 90%. Distally, both obtuse marginals OM1and OM2 showed tubular 75% stenosis at origin.

The patient underwent primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) of RCA during the same sitting from the right radial route using 6F sheath. An Amplatz right 1 (AR1), 6F guide catheter was used to engage the RCA. Lesion was crossed with BMW 0.014 coronary wire (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, California, USA). Mid RCA and the PDA ostial lesions were predilated with 2.     heparin. TIMI III flow was established and there was no residual stenosis. The patient recovered normally after the primary PCI. To delineate the anatomical relations of the anomalous coronaries, he underwent computed tomography (CT) coronary angiography [ Fig. 5] a day after PCI. This confirmed the findings of the CAG. Two days later, the patient was taken up for staged PCI to LCx from the right radial route. RCA was engaged with AR 1, 6F guide catheter. Lesion was crossed with BMW 0.014 coronary wire (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, California, USA). After pre-dilatation with 2.5 Â 15 mm Sprinter (Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA) semi-compliant balloon, two overlapping Xience Prime stents (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, California, USA) -2.5 Â 38 mm distally and 2.75 Â 33 mm proximally -were deployed from the proximal to mid LCx. Stents were post dilated with 2.75 Â 15 mm NC Mercury balloon (Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA) at 20 atm. TIMI III flow was achieved and there was no residual stenosis [ Fig. 6]. The RCA in right anterior oblique (RAO) 30 ⁄ cranial view for stenting revealed TIMI III flow in both the stented RCA and anomalous LCx [ Fig. 7]. The patient was discharged a day later on aspirin 150 mg, clopidogrel 75 mg two times a day and atorvastatin 80 mg per day. He made an uneventful recovery and is presently symptom free with excellent effort tolerance at six months' follow-up.


Discussion

Coronary artery anomalies are observed in 0.3-1.3% of the patients undergoing diagnostic coronary angiography, in approximately 1% of routine autopsy examinations, and in 4-15% of young people experiencing sudden cardiac death [1].

Anomalous origin of the LCx from the right coronary sinus (RCS) or the proximal RCA, one of the most common forms of coronary artery anomalies, is seen in 0.17-0.45% of patients undergoing selective coronary angiography [2,3]. In contrast, although variants of the dual LAD pattern are found in around 0.13-1% of patients undergoing selective coronary angiography, a type IV dual LAD is a very rarely seen anomaly [4,5]. In the study by Spindola-Franco et al. in 1983 which lead to the dual LAD classification, only two patients out of the 2,140 studied had a type IV dual LAD [6].

Our patient's coronary anatomy is an extremely rare one as it features two distinct coronary anomalies: a type IV dual LAD along with the left circumflex arising from a right coronary artery.

There are very few case reports of this rare combination of coronary anomalies [7][8][9][10].

The first case in which the occluded artery of a patient with similar combination of coronary anomalies was opened up by PCI was reported by Turkoglu et al. in 2008. The patient presented   with acute lateral wall MI and the infarct-related artery LCx was successfully stented [11]. Recently, Masuda et al. have reported a similar case report in which successful transradial intervention was done for two lesions with dual anomalous origins of coronary arteries [12].


Conclusion

We conclude that anomalous coronaries can be safely and successfully treated through the radial route after careful evaluation of the origin and course of the anomalous vessels. CT coronary angiography is extremely useful in delineating the vessel course and particularly its relation to great arteries.


5 Â 15 mm Sprinter semi compliant balloon (Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA). A 4 Â 18 mm bare metal stent Zeta (Abbot Vascular, Santa Clara, California, USA) was deployed at nominal pressure in the mid RCA and subsequently post dilated with 4 Â 15 mm NC mercury balloon (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, California, USA) at 20 atm. The distal lesion was stented with a 2.5 Â 28 mm Xience V drug eluting stent (Abbot vascular, Santa Clara, California, USA).This stent was post dilated with 2.75 mm NC Mercury (non-complaint) balloon (Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA) at 20 atm. During the procedure, patient received bolus and infusion of Inj. eptifibatide and 70 IU/kg of unfractionated

Figure 1 .
1Left coronary angio in LAO cranial 60 ⁄ showing left main, small LAD, D1 and proximal LCx.

Figure 2 .
2RCA angio in RAO cranial 30 ⁄ view showing anomalous LAD (Dual type VI) and critical disease of mid RCA origin of PDA and PDA (arrows).

Figure 3 .
3Right coronary angio in RAO cranial 30 ⁄ showing dominant diseased RCA, anomalous LAD passing between aorta & RVOT and anomalous LCx with its retroaortic course.

Figure 4 .
4RA cranial view showing diffuse left cicumflex artery disease.

Figure 5 .
5CT angio VRT reconstruction showing dominant RCA, anomalous LAD and LCx from RCA and left main with diminutive LAD, D1 and proximal LCx.

Figure 6 .
6RA cranial view showing left cicumflex artery post angioplasty.

Figure 7 .
7Right coronary artery in RAO 30 ⁄ cranial view for stenting showing stented RCA and anomalous LCx.
J Saudi Heart Assoc 2014;26:43-46

Coronary anomalies: incidence, pathophysiology, and clinical relevance. P Angelini, J A Velasco, S Flamm, Circulation. 10520Angelini P, Velasco JA, Flamm S. Coronary anomalies: incidence, pathophysiology, and clinical relevance. Circulation 2002;105(20):2449-54.

Coronary artery anomalies: assessment with free-breathing three-dimensional coronary MR angiography. N H Bunce, C H Lorenz, J Keegan, J Lesser, E M Reyes, D M Firmin, Radiology. 2271Bunce NH, Lorenz CH, Keegan J, Lesser J, Reyes EM, Firmin DM, et al.. Coronary artery anomalies: assessment with free-breathing three-dimensional coronary MR angiography. Radiology 2003;227(1):201-8.

Anomalous origin of the left circumflex coronary artery. Recognition, angiographic demonstration and clinical significance. Page Jr, H L Engel, H J Campbell, W B , Thomas Jr, C S , Circulation. 504Page Jr HL, Engel HJ, Campbell WB, Thomas Jr CS. Anomalous origin of the left circumflex coronary artery. Recognition, angiographic demonstration and clinical significance. Circulation 1974;50(4):768-73.

The incidence of congenital anomalies of the coronary arteries in the adult population. H A Baltaxe, D Wixson, Radiology. 1221Baltaxe HA, Wixson D. The incidence of congenital anomalies of the coronary arteries in the adult population. Radiology 1977;122(1):47-52.

Dual left anterior descending coronary artery: surgical revascularization in 4 patients. L R Sajja, A Farooqi, M S Shaik, R B Yarlagadda, D K Baruah, R B Pothineni, Tex Heart Inst J. 273Sajja LR, Farooqi A, Shaik MS, Yarlagadda RB, Baruah DK, Pothineni RB. Dual left anterior descending coronary artery: surgical revascularization in 4 patients. Tex Heart Inst J 2000;27(3):292-6.

Dual left anterior descending coronary artery: angiographic description of important variants and surgical implications. H Spindola-Franco, R Grose, N Solomon, Am Heart J. 1053Spindola-Franco H, Grose R, Solomon N. Dual left anterior descending coronary artery: angiographic description of important variants and surgical implications. Am Heart J 1983;105(3):445-55.

A very rare case of single coronary artery anomaly, with left anterior descending and left circumflex arteries originating separately from the proximal right coronary artery. H R Taghipour, Y Dadjou, A R Mafi, Y Moharamzad, J Card Surg. 231Taghipour HR, Dadjou Y, Mafi AR, Moharamzad Y. A very rare case of single coronary artery anomaly, with left anterior descending and left circumflex arteries originating separately from the proximal right coronary artery. J Card Surg 2008;23(1):67-9.

Anomalous origin of the left anterior descending and circumflex coronary arteries by two separate ostia from the right sinus of Valsalva. A L Bartorelli, V Capacchione, P Ravagnani, M Pepi, Int J Cardiol. 443Bartorelli AL, Capacchione V, Ravagnani P, Pepi M. Anomalous origin of the left anterior descending and circumflex coronary arteries by two separate ostia from the right sinus of Valsalva. Int J Cardiol 1994;44(3):294-8.

A double left anterior descending coronary artery emerging from the right Valsalva sinus: a case report and brief literature review. G Talanas, A Delpini, G Casu, F Bilotta, R Pes, P Terrosu, J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 101Talanas G, Delpini A, Casu G, Bilotta F, Pes R, Terrosu P. A double left anterior descending coronary artery emerging from the right Valsalva sinus: a case report and brief literature review. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown) 2009;10(1):64-7.

Anomalous origin of the left main coronary artery from the right sinus of Valsalva. D Kimbiris, Am J Cardiol. 556Kimbiris D. Anomalous origin of the left main coronary artery from the right sinus of Valsalva. Am J Cardiol 1985;55(6):765-9.

Type IV dual left anterior descending artery associated with anomalous origin of the left circumflex coronary artery from the right coronary artery: a case report. S Turkoglu, S Balcioglu, M Ozdemir, J Invasive Cardiol. 2012Turkoglu S, Balcioglu S, Ozdemir M. Type IV dual left anterior descending artery associated with anomalous origin of the left circumflex coronary artery from the right coronary artery: a case report. J Invasive Cardiol 2008;20(12):669-70.

Successful transradial intervention for two lesions with dual anomalous origins of coronary arteries. N Masuda, T Matsukage, Y Ikari, J Invasive Cardiol. 235Masuda N, Matsukage T, Ikari Y. Successful transradial intervention for two lesions with dual anomalous origins of coronary arteries. J Invasive Cardiol 2011;23(5). E117-20.