VII International Forum on Teacher Education Scientific Interpretation of Films about School as a means of Overcoming Challenges for Teachers in Their Work with Gifted Children


Irina А Мushkina 
1156 Irina А. Mushkina, Marina А. Maznichenko, Victoria P. Erdakova, Snezhana V. Brevnova / Proceedings IFTE-2021
Sochi State University
94 Plastunskaya354000b), (с), Sochi (Russia

Marina А Maznichenko 
1156 Irina А. Mushkina, Marina А. Maznichenko, Victoria P. Erdakova, Snezhana V. Brevnova / Proceedings IFTE-2021
Sochi State University
94 Plastunskaya354000b), (с), Sochi (Russia

Victoria P Erdakova 
1156 Irina А. Mushkina, Marina А. Maznichenko, Victoria P. Erdakova, Snezhana V. Brevnova / Proceedings IFTE-2021
Sochi State University
94 Plastunskaya354000b), (с), Sochi (Russia

Snezhana V Brevnova 
1156 Irina А. Mushkina, Marina А. Maznichenko, Victoria P. Erdakova, Snezhana V. Brevnova / Proceedings IFTE-2021
Sochi State University
94 Plastunskaya354000b), (с), Sochi (Russia

VII International Forum on Teacher Education Scientific Interpretation of Films about School as a means of Overcoming Challenges for Teachers in Their Work with Gifted Children
10.3897/ap.5.e1155* Corresponding author. International Forum on Teacher Education)gifted childrengifted educationchallenges for teacherssupporting of teachersnon-formal educationfilm classes
Feature films about gifted children have a significant potential for resolving challenges the teachers face in their work with gifted children. Such films portray various types of gifted children, show models of their upbringing and education in school and family, demonstrate the challenges of their socialization and education. However, teachers rarely use the potential of such feature films in their work with gifted children due to the lack of methods of their scientific interpretation. Based on the above, we set the goal of the studyto analyse the practical aspects of using films about school by teachers in solving challenges they experience while working with gifted children, to identify the pedagogical conditions and methods of scientific interpretation of feature films about school by teachers. Research methods: generalization of Russian and foreign research on the problems of organizing of work with gifted children, the use of feature films in such work; selection and systematization of films that can be used by teachers in solving problems and difficulties that they go through while working with gifted children; teacher surveys; design of pedagogical conditions for teachers to scientifically interpret films about school in the process of resolving difficulties arising in their work with gifted children. The results we arrived at demonstrate that the scientific interpretation of feature films about school by teachers can be a means of resolving of a number of challenges that teachers experience in their work with gifted children. The pedagogical conditions for such an interpretation are the selection of films according to the criteria of "high cultural level; positive content; relevance of the content to the existing difficulties; the presence of a valid pedagogical idea; problematic aspects; humanistic orientation"; mastering the experience of scientific and pedagogical interpretation of films in the form of a film training masterclass; exchange of experience with colleagues; creation of a film library on the school website.

International Forum on Teacher Education)


Introduction

The context for modus operandi of a teacher is constantly becoming more complicated nowadays: a teacher has to work in conditions of high workload and psychological stress, expansion of professional functions; decline in the social status of the teacher in society, high competition with other sources of knowledge and agents of socialization; growing social and cultural variety and special educational needs of students; constant modernization of education, changing norms and requirements for teaching activities, methods of their assessment, to build pedagogical interaction with generation Z, many of which are characterized by hyperactivity, impressionability, pragmatism (Gavrilova, 2016).

One of the difficult areas of pedagogical activity is work with gifted children, which is connected with the pronounced individuality of such children, the presence of special educational needs that require the creation of special pedagogical conditions, the high responsibility of the teacher for the education and upbringing of such children, the creative nature of working with them, necessity of a constant search for new ways of teachers' cooperation and support.

Problems and difficulties arise often in the practice of teachers working with gifted children, for the solution of them scientific knowledge obtained in refresher courses and as a result of acquaintance with scientific and methodological literature is not enough, and it is necessary to attract knowledge from nontraditional sources, such as personal experience and intuition, the experience of colleagues, folk pedagogics and folklore, canonical texts, art books and films about the school. These problems can be associated with the value self-determination of the teacher, understanding the individual characteristics and special needs of gifted children, predicting their behavior, building pedagogical interaction with "difficult" gifted children, conflicting parents of such children, resolving unusual, psychologically difficult situations, searching for new pedagogical means, not described in pedagogical science, with a long-term presence of the teacher in a state of mental stress, overwork, which becomes the cause of impulsive actions based on emotions; with the need to make non-standard pedagogical decisions in conditions of lack of time. One of the ways to solve such problems can be the scientific understanding of films about the school, the heroes of which are children with demonstration of giftedness, their teachers and parents. Both in domestic and foreign cinema there are many feature films about gifted children. They present the images-types of such children, their experiences, successes and difficulties, models of their upbringing and education in school and family, outlined the actual problems of their socialization and education.

However, nowadays, science has not studied whether teachers are familiar with such films, whether they are used in their work with gifted children, whether they are interpreted from the standpoint of scientific theories, under what conditions such an understanding is possible.


Purpose and objectives of the study

The purpose of the research is to analyze the practice of using films about school by teachers to solve challenges that they face while working with gifted children, to determine the pedagogical conditions for the scientific interpretation of such films by teachers.

Research objectives: (1) to identify what difficulties and problems are most often encountered by teachers when they work with gifted children, which sources of knowledge about pedagogical reality they refer in the process of resolving them; (2) to study the interest of teachers in Russian and foreign films about gifted children, assess the capacity of use of such film in their work with gifted children; (3) to determine the pedagogical conditions and methods of scientific interpretation by the teacher of feature films in order to solve problems and difficulties they face while working with gifted children.


Literature review

Currently, research has been carried out on the evolution of the public image of school and gifted children in Russian and foreign cinematography and mass media (Arcus, 2010;Dennis & LaMay, 1993;Maeroff, 1998).

The possibilities of using feature films in both their work with gifted children and in preparing teachers for such work are being studied by psychology and pedagogy.

The following areas of research were identified: Cinema art is studied as a means of upbringing and educating children and youth (Baranov & Penzin, 2005;Zhmyrova & Monastyrsky, 2012;Penzin, 1987;Marcus, Metzger, Paxton & Stoddard, 2018). Within this direction, the theory and practice of media education has recently been actively developing (Maximova, 2005;Plotnikova, 2019;Ryzhikh, 2011). It is proposed to use films created by professional directors for the purpose of teaching and upbringing of gifted children, as well as films and videos created by gifted children themselves (Jafarova & Mikhailova, 2017). The singularity of teenagers' perception of some feature films (for example, the film "Scarecrow") have been studied (Sobkin & Markina, 2010).

Opportunities are considered, methods of using feature films in psycho-correctional work with children are being developed: helping them in self-education and self-development, disclosing internal reserves and personal potential (Deryabina, 2020), in actualization and living through some emotions (Lavrent'ieva, 2020), developing reflexive abilities (Bakakina, 2019). Cinema therapy techniques have been developed to solve these problems (Berezin, 2003;Karpova, Danina, Kiselnikova & Shuvikov, 2011), animation film therapy (Ashitko, 2015), film training (Pleskachevskaya, 1998;Trus', 2011), onto-psychological cinemalogy (Meneghetti, 2001). The features of their application in the work of a school psychologist are revealed (Bakakina, 2019), class teacher (Schmidt, 2007) to solve the problems of various categories of childrenwith disabilities (Ashitko, 2015), drugs addiction (Berezin, 2008), stuttering (Karpova, Danina, Kiselnikova & Shuvikov, 2011) and others.

Methods of using feature films in the training of future teachers and psychologists are proposed in order to illustrate theoretical knowledge (Kon'kina & Shavrygina, 2017), establishing interdisciplinary connections (Kuznetsova, 2018), organizing students' independent work (Berezin, 2005).

The potential is being investigated and methods are being developed for the use of feature films as a means of psychological and methodological assistance to practicing teachers in their work with gifted children and children with disabilities. Bystritskiy (2007) substantiated cinema therapy as an effective means of increasing the psychological competence of teachers in working with gifted children. It shows its capabilities in the development of teachers' personal qualities, intellectual and observation skills, the ability to analyze the logic of students' actions, to see their hidden motivations, to explain behavior based on their characteristics, and not on their projections, in expanding the set of stereotypes in teachers that are relevant for their work with gifted children, mastering social and cultural values and moral norms. Ertanova and Mikhailova (2011) presented the film library as an additional methodological resource for teachers of inclusive education. The described studies create preconditions for studying the existing practice and pedagogical conditions of scientific interpretation by teachers of films about school in order to resolve difficulties and challenges that they face while working with gifted children.


Methodology

The methodological basis of the study was made by ideas about the diversity of knowledge about pedagogical reality (D'yachenko, 2006;Kraevsky, 2009;Lyz', 2014); research revealing the possibilities of feature films in resolving the problems of teachers in working with gifted children (Bystritsky, 2007); approaches to the teacher's scientific understanding of extra-scientific knowledge about pedagogical reality (Belukhin, 2006;Ovchenkova, 2006;Robotova, 2008;Shurukhina, 2000).

To achieve this goal, the following methods were used: generalization of Russian and foreign research on the problems of organizing work with gifted children, the use of feature films in such work; selection and systematization of films that can be used by teachers in solving problems and difficulties that arise in their work with gifted children; anonymous surveys of teachers from different regions of the Russian Federation using a questionnaire posted in Google form (https://forms.gle/MaMNKyQPqnhEFrSS9). 46 teachers took part in the survey. The sample was formed according to the principle of representation in it of all categories of teachers working with gifted children (table 1); designing pedagogical conditions and methods of scientific understanding by teachers of films about school in the process of resolving difficulties that they have while working with gifted children. 


Results

Difficulties in working with gifted children arise in 71,1% of teachers, of whom 5,3% constant, and 65,8%

sometimes.

The share of teachers who experience difficulties in pedagogical activity (69,8%) and experience difficulties working with gifted children (71,1%) is approximately the same, meaning, work with gifted children is not perceived by them as more difficult.

The difficulties of teachers in working with gifted children are often associated with solving design and prognostic problems: with an understanding of the individual characteristics and special educational needs of such children (42,4% of teachers), with the search for new ways of pedagogical influence and interaction with a gifted child (36,4 %).

A complete list of problems and difficulties encountered by teachers in working with gifted children is presented in Table 2.

The main source of pedagogical information about work with gifted children for teachers is the experience of colleagues (64,1%), as well as reflection on their own pedagogical experience (38,5%), in comparison with which reading scientific and methodological literature and refresher courses to some extent lose (46,2% and 33,3%, respectively). When asked about the sufficiency of scientific knowledge obtained from formalized sources (additional education, forms of advanced training, scientific and pedagogical texts) in working with gifted children:

82,9% answered that such knowledge is not enough. 17,1% spoke in favor of the sufficiency of scientific knowledge to resolve the difficulties and problems that arise in their work with gifted children.

Non-traditional approaches and methods in working with gifted children are used by 35,9% of teachers.

When working with gifted children, 20,5% of teachers turn to the analysis of their own children's experience, 17,9%to the author's pedagogical ideas and systems, the experience of innovative teachers, 15,4%to the pedagogical comprehension of literary works and films about gifted children, 10,3%to folk pedagogy, folklore (2,6% use anecdotes).

Despite the fact that only 15,4% of teachers turn to pedagogical interpretation of films about gifted children in their work with gifted children, 70% believe that watching and pedagogical analysis of such films can help a teacher in building interaction with gifted children, 22,5% found it difficult to answer and only 7,5%

do not see such an opportunity.

We found out which of the famous films, the heroes of which are gifted children, the teachers are familiar with. It turned out that the most popular is the film "Scarecrow" (Russia, 1983) -76,9% of respondents watched it. The second place was shared by the picture "Schedule for the Day After Tomorrow" (Russia, 1978) Table 3 presents the comparative data of the share of teachers who are familiar with films about gifted children and the percentage of teachers who discover the capacity of these films in resolving difficulties that teachers face while working with gifted children. The significance of differences was assessed using the statistical method "one proportion Z-test". In most cases, the differences are insignificant. Significant differences were found in three films: "Scarecrow" (Russia, 1983), "The Little Prince" (France, 2015), "When I Become a Giant" (Russia, 1978). Probably, in these films it is more difficult for teachers to find meanings, images, information that are useful in working with gifted children and resolving problems that arise.

Additionally, as films that can help in resolving difficulties in working with gifted children, teachers named "Ballad of a Soldier", "Hot Snow", "Son of the Regiment" (2,9% each). 2,9% of respondents indicated that not films, but fiction books can help in solving problems in working with gifted children.

The tasks of working with gifted children, in the solution of which, in the opinion of teachers, pedagogical comprehension of feature films can help, were distributed as follows (table 4).  dialectical: problematizes of pedagogical reality, presentation of alternative pedagogical ideas and concepts.

The information contained in the films has characteristics that are relevant for overcoming difficulties that scientific knowledge does not possess: imagery, expressiveness, emotionality, sensuality, semantic capacity (polysemy), problematizes of pedagogical reality. Watching films involves teachers in a dialogue with their creators, problematizes the understanding of pedagogical reality, provides its figurative, emotional perception.

The authors of feature films address the problems of the modern school and the school of the past and "offer not only new facts, situations and images, but also a typology of pedagogical phenomena reflecting this or that fragment of pedagogical reality in its variability, dialectics, and conflicts" (Ovchenkova, 2006).

However, the appeal of teachers to feature films in resolving problems that they have in their work with gifted children also has the risks of a destructive influence, reducing the effectiveness of such work. Risks are associated with such characteristics of pedagogical information presented in films as convention, subjectivity of the reflection of pedagogical reality, fiction in its depiction, and idealization. It should also be noted the tendency of the commercialization of the film industry characteristic of recent years, the propaganda in some films of destructive images of the teacher (the "Fizruk" TV series) and students (the "School" of Gai-Germanicus TV series). This indicates the need for scientific understanding and selection of films about school by the teacher for their use in work with gifted children.

It is advisable to select films according to the following criteria:

high cultural level (director's work, musical arrangement, video sequence, etc.); positive content (achievement by the heroes of the film of significant results in teaching and upbringing of a gifted child, asserting faith in the possibility of positive results in working with gifted children, in "the initial goodness of such children" (Serikov, 2018);

correspondence of the content of the film to the teacher's difficulties, the pedagogical and psychological content of his work with gifted children;

availability of an up-to-date pedagogical idea;

problematic (the film should contain a problematic question; for example, "what is more correct for a teacher in working with a gifted child: listen to your heart or keep your reputation?"); humanistic orientation, propaganda of spiritual and moral values, compliance with the principles of humanistic pedagogy and psychology.

The scientific understanding of the film is that the teacher:

differentiates the understanding of the situation by the heroes of the film and their own understanding;

compares himself\herself to the hero: in what ways is the hero similar to him\her as a teacher, and in what way they differ;

evaluates the actions of the hero from the standpoint of scientific theories;

carries out a pedagogical reflection of events taking place on the screen;

pre-configured to detect in the film certain problems, situations, meanings associated with working with gifted children, overcoming difficulties that arise.

Teachers' scientific interpretation of films about school in order to overcome difficulties in their work with gifted children is based on the following logic: (1) creation of a film library on the school website (filing files for solving specific problems and difficulties with links to a resource where they can be viewed); (2) independent viewing and analysis of films by teachers;

(3) organization of group discussions of the films watched in the form of film training; (4) application of the information extracted from the analysis of films in work with gifted children.

An example of a film library is shown in table 5.  The teacher lacks certain competencies, qualities for productive work with gifted children "Schedule for the day after tomorrow" (Russia, 1978, director Igor Dobrolyubov) "Jester" (Russia, 1988, director Andrei Eshpai) Group discussion of the films can be organized around the following topics: What was this film about for you? What pedagogical idea did you find most significant in the film? From the standpoint of your chosen idea, make a short announcement of the film (What was the movie about?). If you were a director, what would you change in the presentation of the main idea of the film? If you were a screenwriter, what continuation of the script could you think of? (Bystritsky, 2007).


Conclusion

The results of the survey of teachers showed that the significant potential of feature films in overcoming difficulties that arise while working with gifted children is recognized by teachers, but is not used sufficiently. This suggests the necessity to identify the pedagogical conditions for the scientific interpretation of films about school by teachers. Such conditions are: selection of films according to the criteria of high cultural level; positive content; relevance of the content to the current difficulties; the presence of an actual pedagogical idea; problem statement; humanistic orientation; mastering the methods of scientific and pedagogical comprehension of films in the form of film training; exchange of experience with colleagues; creation of a film library on the school website.


and the animated film "The Little Prince" (France, 2015) with a large margin from the first film -35,9% of teachers are familiar with them. In third place is the film "Certificate of Maturity" (Russia, 1954) -28,2%. On the fourth -"When I Become a Giant" (Russia, 1978) -25,6%. The fifth place was taken by the picture "Indigo" (Russia, 2008)it was watched by 17,9% of respondents. Sixththe film "Corrections Class" (Russia, 2014) -12, 8%. As you can see, Russian films of the 1950s -1980s are the most popular among teachers. A number of interesting foreign films that raise urgent problems of working with gifted children, which can be used in overcoming difficulties that arise, are not known to most teachers: "Searching for Bobby Fischer" (USA, 1998) -10,3%, "The Jester" ( Russia, 1988), "Gifted" (USA, 2017), "Little Stars on Earth" (India, 2007), "The Young and Prodigious T.S. Spivet" (France, Australia, Canada, 2013) -7,7%; "Billy Elliot" (UK, France, 2000), "Little Man Tate" (USA, 1991) -5,1%; "Vitus" (Switzerland, 2006), "The Act" (France, 2006) -2,6%.

4 .
4Tasks of working with gifted children, the achievement of which can help the pedagogical interpretation of feature films, in the opinion of teachers Tasks of working with gifted children Percentage of teachers, % Understanding the individual characteristics and special educational needs of value and foundation of pedagogical work with a gifted child 30,8 Search for new ways of pedagogical influence and interaction with a gifted child, not described in pedagogical science 30,8 Design and implementation of pedagogical interaction with a gifted child 25about the school have significant potential in resolving the problems and difficulties that teachers face in working with gifted children, which lies in the ability to perform the following functions: adaptation: the adaptation of scientific and theoretical knowledge to specific conditions and situations of pedagogical activitythe films show specific situations of application of such knowledge, with which the teacher can relate his experience; therapeutic: overcoming negative psychological states associated with emerging difficulties (the teacher sees that the heroes of the films have the same difficulties and problems as he does, and they successfully solve them); value-semantic: the comprehension of scientific and theoretical knowledge from the standpoint of moral norms and values, the extraction of personal meanings; innovative: the presentation of new methods of pedagogical actions, new pedagogical experience;

"
Forest Gump" (USA, 1994, directed by R. Zemeckis) "Correction class" (Russia, 2014, director I. Tverdovsky)the character of Lena Chekhova Inadequate understanding of the values and goals of working with gifted children "Gifted" (USA, 2017, director Mark Webb) "Certificate of Maturity" (Russia, 1954, director Tatiana Lukashevich) "Jester" (Russia, 1988, director Andrei Eshpai) Manipulating a gifted child, imagining him only as a carrier of enhanced abilities "Vitus" (Switzerland, 2006, directed by Fredy M. Muhrer) "In Search of Bobby Fischer" (USA, 1993, directed by Steven Zaillian) Little Tate (USA, 1991, directed by Jodie Foster) The Little Prince (France, 2015, directed by Marc Osborne) Lack of understanding of the problems of gifted children "When I Become a Giant" (Russia, 1978, director Inna Tumanyan) "Gifted" (USA, 2017, director Mark Webb) "Mr. Spivet's Incredible Journey" (France, Australia, Canada, 2013, directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet) "All Stars on Earth" (India, 2007, directed by Aamir Khan) "Correction class" (Russia, 2014, director I. Tverdovsky) "Pawn Sacrifice" (USA, 2014, directed by Edward Zwick) "Queen's Move" (UK, 2020, directed by Scott Frank) "Scarecrow" (Russia, 1983, director Rolan Bykov) "Correction class" (Russia, 2014, director I. Tverdovsky) The well-known methods of work do not work "All Stars on Earth" (India, 2007, directed by Aamir Khan) "Night School" (Malcolm D. Lee, 2018) "Triumph: The Story of Ron Clarke" (USA, 2006, directed by Randa Haynes) The lack of empathy "Billy Elliott" (UK, France, 2000, directed by Stephen Daldry) Lack of positive thinking, pedagogical optimism in working with gifted children "Billy Elliott" (UK, France, 2000, directed by Stephen Daldry) "All Stars on Earth" (India, 2007, directed by Aamir Khan) "Before the Class" (UK, 2008, directed by Peter Werner) "Triumph: The Story of Ron Clarke" (USA, 2006, directed by Randa Haynes) "Republic SHKID" (Russia, 1966, director Gennady Poloka)

Table 1 .
1Survey representation of the general population of teachers working with gifted childrenAge of 
respondents 

Proportion, 
% 

Pedagogical 
experience 

Proportion, 
% 

Position 
Proportion, 
% 
from 20 to 30 
years old 

5 
from 1 to 3 
years 

7,3 
subject teacher 
26,8 

from 30 to 40 
years old 

12,5 
from 4 to 10 
years 

7,3 
primary 
school 
teacher 

7,3 

from 40 to 50 
years old 

45 
from 10 to 20 
years 

24,4 
additional education 
teacher 

19,5 

over 50 years 
old 

37,5 
more than 20 
years 

61 
teacher-psychologist 
2,4 



Table 2 .
2Problems and difficulties that teachers face in their work with gifted children Selection of educational content that is interesting for gifted children 18,2 Adaptation of teaching methods and methods, educational content, standards to the special educational necessities of a gifted childContent of problems and difficulties 
Proportion of 
teachers, % 
Understanding the individual characteristics and special educational needs of gifted 
children 

42,4 

Search for new ways of pedagogical influence and interaction with a gifted child 
36,4 
Building pedagogical interaction with parents of gifted children 
24,2 
Designing and organizing group interaction of a gifted child with peers 
21,2 
18,2 

Building cooperation with gifted children themselves 
15,2 
Predicting the behavior of gifted children 
15,2 
Resolving conflicts with gifted children or their parents 
12,1 



Table 3 .
3Teachers' assessment of the capacity of feature films in overcoming difficulties arising in theirwork with gifted children 

Movie title 
Percentage of 
teachers, who 
know these films 
% 

Percentage of teachers, who think 
that pedagogical reflection of the 
film can help resolve difficulties 
in their work with gifted children 
% 
Scarecrow (Russia, 1983) 
76,9 
52,9 
Schedule for the Day After Tomorrow 
(Russia, 1978) 

35,9 
23,5 

The Little Prince (France and Italy, 2015) 
35,9 
20,6 


Table


Table 5 .
5Film library for scientific interpretation and application while working with gifted children Problems and difficulties Films for scientific interpretation Misunderstanding the characteristics of a gifted child by teacher "Schedule for the day after tomorrow" (Russia, 1978, director Igor Dobrolyubov) "Certificate of Maturity" (Russia, 1954, director Tatiana Lukashevich) "Jester" (Russia, 1988, director Andrei Eshpai) "When I Become a Giant" (Russia, 1978, director Inna Tumanyan) Little Tate (USA, 1991, directed by Jodie Foster) Mr. Spivet's Incredible Journey (France, Australia, Canada, 2013, directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet) "Indigo" (Russia, 2008, director Roman Prygunov) Diagnostics and development of special types of giftedness (moral, emotional, etc.)
AcknowledgementsThe research was carried out with the financial support of the Kuban science Foundation in the framework of the scientific project № «МFI-20.1/112».
The Adventures of a White Crow: The Evolution of the. L Arcus, School Film" in Soviet Cinema. Arcus, L. (2010). The Adventures of a White Crow: The Evolution of the "School Film" in Soviet Cinema. Retrieved from: http://seance.ru/blog/whitecrow/

Animated film therapy in the system of psychological and pedagogical process of inclusive education of disabled children. E L Ashitko, E.L. AshitkoProblems of the implementation of informative education with disabilities in the educational space of the Kaluga regionAshitko, E. L. (2015). Animated film therapy in the system of psychological and pedagogical process of inclusive education of disabled children. In E.L. Ashitko (Ed.), Problems of the implementation of informative education with disabilities in the educational space of the Kaluga region (pp. 256-265).

Film training as a means of developing adolescents' reflection. Organization of work with youth. Yu D Bakakina, 5Bakakina, Yu. D. (2019). Film training as a means of developing adolescents' reflection. Organization of work with youth, 5, 1-8.

Film in educational work with youth. O A Baranov, S N Penzin, Tver': PublishingHouse of Tver' State UniversityBaranov, O. A., & Penzin, S. N. (2005). Film in educational work with youth. Tver': Publishing House of Tver' State University.

Teacher, love your neighbor as yourself: pedagogical reflection on the essence and content of the concepts of love and neighbor in religion and pedagogy. D A Belukhin, MODEKVoronezhBelukhin, D. A. (2006). Teacher, love your neighbor as yourself: pedagogical reflection on the essence and content of the concepts of love and neighbor in religion and pedagogy. Moscow: Publishing House of the Moscow Psychological and Social, Voronezh: MODEK.

Film therapy. A practical guide for psychologists and social workers. S V Berezin, Samara: Publishing house "Insoma-pressBerezin, S. V. (2003). Film therapy. A practical guide for psychologists and social workers. Samara: Publishing house "Insoma-press".

Film therapy as a method of secondary prevention of drug addiction in the family. S V Berezin, SamaraPublishing House of the Samara State Economic UniversityBerezin, S. V. (2008). Film therapy as a method of secondary prevention of drug addiction in the family. Samara: Publishing House of the Samara State Economic University.

Analysis of a feature film as a method of student's independent work. S V Berezin, Council of the Samara State University. Samara: Publishing house "Univers-groupBerezin, S.V. (2005). Analysis of a feature film as a method of student's independent work. Bulletin of the Educational and Methodological Council of the Samara State University. Samara: Publishing house "Univers-group".

Cinema therapy. Methods for increasing the psychological competence of teachers. O A Bystritsky, School psychologist. 3Bystritsky, O. A. (2007). Cinema therapy. Methods for increasing the psychological competence of teachers. School psychologist, 3, 18-21.

American's schools and the mass media. E E Dennis, C L Lamay, Transaction PublishersNew Brunswick and LondonDennis, E. E., & LaMay, C. L. (1993). American's schools and the mass media. New Brunswick and London: Transaction Publishers.

Cinema training as a method of psychological correction of personality. K A Deryabina, Alley of Science. 140Deryabina, K.A. (2020). Cinema training as a method of psychological correction of personality. Alley of Science, 1(40), 212-217.

Scientific and non-scientific pedagogical knowledge: comparison of concepts. Actual problems of theory and history of pedagogy. L S D&apos;yachenko, VSU named after P. M. Masherov. VitebskD'yachenko, L. S. (2006). Scientific and non-scientific pedagogical knowledge: comparison of concepts. Actual problems of theory and history of pedagogy. Vitebsk: VSU named after P. M. Masherov.

Conference of students, graduate students and young scientists dedicated to the year of Russian cinema. G D Jafarova, D S Mikhailova, Saint Petersburg: Saint Petersburg State University of Cinema and TelevisionExpress course "Film studio in your pocket" at the educational centerJafarova, G. D., & Mikhailova, D. S. (2017). Express course "Film studio in your pocket" at the educational center "Sirius" (Sochi). Conference of students, graduate students and young scientists dedicated to the year of Russian cinema. Saint Petersburg: Saint Petersburg State University of Cinema and Television.

Inclusive education: methodology, practice, technology. International scientific and practical conference. O N Ertanova, N N S V Mikhailova, Alekhina, MoscowPublishing house of the Moscow State Psychological and Pedagogical UniversityFilm library as a resource for inclusive educationErtanova, O. N., & Mikhailova, N. N. (2011). Film library as a resource for inclusive education. In: S.V. Alekhina et al., Inclusive education: methodology, practice, technology. International scientific and practical conference. Moscow: Publishing house of the Moscow State Psychological and Pedagogical University.

Socio-psychological characteristics of the mentality of the new generation. A V Gavrilova, Bulletin of the Udmurt University. Philosophy, Psychology, Pedagogy Series. 262Gavrilova, A.V. (2016). Socio-psychological characteristics of the mentality of the new generation. Bulletin of the Udmurt University. Philosophy, Psychology, Pedagogy Series, 26 (2), 58-63.

Film therapy as a means of psychological rehabilitation and correction. N L Karpova, M M Danina, N V Kiselnikova, A I Shuvikov, Bulletin of the Russian Foundation for the Humanities. 3Karpova, N. L., Danina, M. M., Kiselnikova, N. V., & Shuvikov, A. I. (2011). Film therapy as a means of psychological rehabilitation and correction. Bulletin of the Russian Foundation for the Humanities, 3, 121-130.

The use of an educational film in the preparation of a future teacher on the example of the discipline "Introduction to the teaching profession. E V Kon&apos;kina, O S Shavrygina, 10Problems of modern pedagogical educationKon'kina, E. V., & Shavrygina, O. S. (2017). The use of an educational film in the preparation of a future teacher on the example of the discipline "Introduction to the teaching profession". Problems of modern pedagogical education, 10(55), 100-108.

Methodology of pedagogy: a modern view. V V Kraevsky, AcademyMoscowKraevsky, V. V. (2009). Methodology of pedagogy: a modern view. Moscow: Academy.

Possibilities of using cinema therapy in correctional, developmental and educational activities. Problems of modern teacher education. D A Kuznetsova, 3Kuznetsova, D. A. (2018). Possibilities of using cinema therapy in correctional, developmental and educational activities. Problems of modern teacher education, 3(60), 434-436.

The role of movies in the actualization and living of emotions. M Lavrent&apos;ieva, Yu, Bulletin of Science. 728Lavrent'ieva, M. Yu. (2020). The role of movies in the actualization and living of emotions. Bulletin of Science, 7(28), 37-44.

Types and forms of pedagogical knowledge. Municipal Formation: Innovation and Experiment. &apos; Lyz, N A , 6Lyz', N. A. (2014). Types and forms of pedagogical knowledge. Municipal Formation: Innovation and Experiment, 6, 40-48.

Imaging education: The media and schools in America. G I Maeroff, Teachers College PressNew York; LondonMaeroff, G. I. (1998). Imaging education: The media and schools in America. New York; London: Teachers College Press.

Scientific substantiation of media education, media education in applied and theoretical directions. G P Maximova, 20Bulletin of the Russian State University of EconomicsMaximova, G. P. (2005). Scientific substantiation of media education, media education in applied and theoretical directions. Bulletin of the Russian State University of Economics, 20, 53-61.

Teaching history with film. A Marcus, S Metzger, R Paxton, J Stoddard, RoutledgeNew YorkMarcus, A., Metzger, S., Paxton, R., & Stoddard, J. (2018). Teaching history with film. New York: Routledge.

Cinema, theater, the unconscious. A Meneghetti, OntopsychologyMoscowMeneghetti, A. (2001). Cinema, theater, the unconscious. Moscow: Ontopsychology.

Artistic-figurative cognition of pedagogical phenomena as a means of forming the pedagogical position of the future teacher (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Glazov State Pedagogical Institute. O Ovchenkova, Yu, KirovOvchenkova, O. Yu. (2006). Artistic-figurative cognition of pedagogical phenomena as a means of forming the pedagogical position of the future teacher (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Glazov State Pedagogical Institute named after V.G. Korolenko, Kirov.

Cinema and Aesthetic Education: Methodological Problems. S N Penzin, Voronezh University Publishing HouseVoronezhPenzin, S. N. (1987). Cinema and Aesthetic Education: Methodological Problems. Voronezh: Voronezh University Publishing House.

Film training and its scope. Psychological newspaper. A A Pleskachevskaya, 8Pleskachevskaya, A. A. (1998). Film training and its scope. Psychological newspaper, 8, 18-19.

Using the technology of video cases in the media education of schoolchildren. E A Plotnikova, Sign. 333Plotnikova, E. A. (2019). Using the technology of video cases in the media education of schoolchildren. Sign, 3(33), 42-48.

Humanitarian text in pedagogical knowledge and teaching of pedagogy. A S Robotova, St. PetersburgPublishing house of the Herzen State Pedagogical UniversityRobotova, A. S. (2008). Humanitarian text in pedagogical knowledge and teaching of pedagogy. St. Petersburg: Publishing house of the Herzen State Pedagogical University.

The use of media education in the upbringing of children. Taganrog: Publishing House of the Taganrog State Pedagogical Institute. N P Ryzhikh, Ryzhikh, N. P. (2011). The use of media education in the upbringing of children. Taganrog: Publishing House of the Taganrog State Pedagogical Institute.

Pedagogical reality and pedagogical knowledge: An experience of methodological reflection. V V Serikov, Editorial and PublishingMoscowHouse of the Russian New UniversitySerikov, V. V. (2018). Pedagogical reality and pedagogical knowledge: An experience of methodological reflection. Moscow: Editorial and Publishing House of the Russian New University.

Film therapy at school. Classroom Teacher Handbook. V R Schmidt, 12Schmidt, V. R. (2007). Film therapy at school. Classroom Teacher Handbook, 12, 34-46.

The content and means of forming the integrity of pedagogical consciousness among future teachers in the process of university professional training (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). T N Shurukhina, St. PetersburgHerzen State Pedagogical UniversityShurukhina, T. N. (2000). The content and means of forming the integrity of pedagogical consciousness among future teachers in the process of university professional training (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Herzen State Pedagogical University, St. Petersburg.

The film "Scarecrow" through the eyes of modern schoolchildren. V S Sobkin, O S Markina, MoscowInstitute of Sociology of Education, Russian Academy of EducationSobkin, V. S., & Markina, O. S. (2010). The film "Scarecrow" through the eyes of modern schoolchildren. Moscow: Institute of Sociology of Education, Russian Academy of Education.

Film training: techniques and methods of video communication. &apos; Trus, A A , SpeechSt. PetersburgTrus', A. A. (2011). Film training: techniques and methods of video communication. St. Petersburg: Speech.

Cinematography as a means of fostering tolerance among students. E Zhmyrova, Yu, V A Monastyrsky, Business Science-Society. Tambov: Publishing HouseZhmyrova, E. Yu., & Monastyrsky, V. A. (2012). Cinematography as a means of fostering tolerance among students. Tambov: Publishing House "Business Science-Society".