Retrieval of Global Carbon Dioxide From TanSat Satellite and Comprehensive Validation With TCCON Measurements and Satellite Observations
2022

Xinhua Hong xinhua95@mail.ustc.edu.cn. 
Senior Member, IEEEPeng Zhang zhangp@cma.gov.cn 
Yanmeng Bi 
Cheng Liu 
Youwen Sun ywsun@aiofm.ac.cn 
Wei Wang wwang@aiofm.ac.cn 
Zeqing Chen 
Hao Yin 
Chengxin Zhang 
Yuan Tian ytian@ahu.edu.cn. 
Jianguo Liu jgliu@aiofm.ac.cn. 
Peng Zhang 
Yanmeng Bi 
; Cheng 
Liu 
Peng Zhang 
Yanmeng Bi 
Cheng Liu 
Youwen Sun 
Wei Wang 
Hao Yin 
Jianguo Liu 
Chengxin Zhang 
Yuan Tian 

Xinhua Hong is with the School of Environmental Science and Optoelec-tronic Technology
University of Science and Technology of China
230026HefeiChina


Meteorological Administration
School of Environmental Science and Optoelec-tronic Technology
National Satellite Meteorological Center
100081BeijingChina, China


Center for Excellence in Regional Atmospheric Environment
Institute of Urban Environment
University of Science and Technology of China
230026HefeiChina


Anhui Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics
Chinese Academy of Sciences
361021XiamenChina


Department of Precision Machinery and Precision Instrumentation
Chinese Academy of Sciences
230031HefeiChina


Anhui Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics
University of Science and Technology of China
230026HefeiChina


Department of Precision Machinery and Precision Instrumentation
Zeqing Chen is with the School of Earth and Space Sciences, Univer-sity of Science and Technology of China
Chinese Academy of Sciences
230031, 230026Hefei, HefeiChina, China


Institutes of Physical Science and Information Technology
University of Science and Technology of China
230026HefeiChina


Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics
Anhui University
230601HefeiChina


Chinese Academy of Sciences
230031HefeiChina

Retrieval of Global Carbon Dioxide From TanSat Satellite and Comprehensive Validation With TCCON Measurements and Satellite Observations

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING
604101716202210.1109/TGRS.2021.3066623received June 29, 2020; revised February 3, 2021; accepted March 13, 2021. Date of publication April 6, 2021; date of current version December 16, 2021.-19/20-3. (Corresponding authors:Index Terms-CO 2Iterative Maximum A Posteriori Differ- ential Optical Absorption Spectroscopy (IMAP-DOAS)remote sensingsatellitesspectral analysisTanSatX CO2
To cope with global climate change and monitor global CO 2 concentration distribution, the first Chinese carbon dioxide satellite (TanSat) has been successfully launched in December 2016. In this study, we implemented a CO 2 retrieval scheme by calibrating the TanSat sun-glint (GL) mode spectra and adapting the Iterative Maximum A Posteriori Differential Optical Absorption Spectroscopy (IMAP-DOAS) algorithm for CO 2 spectral retrieval. The global terrestrial CO 2 total vertical column density (VCD) and column-averaged dry-air mole fractions of CO 2 (X CO2 ) were simultaneously retrieved Manuscript from TanSat GL spectral observations. Then, a comprehensive verification was performed between TanSat CO 2 retrieval and other measurements including Total Carbon Column Observing Network (TCCON), the Japanese Greenhouse gases Observing SATellite (GOSAT), and the US Orbiting Carbon Observatory-2 (OCO-2). Further comparisons between our TanSat CO 2 retrieval and ground-based FTIR measurements from TCCON indicated a good correlation with the mean bias of −0.78 ppm, the standard deviation at 1.75 ppm, and the Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.81. In addition, cross-satellite CO 2 validations of TanSat with GOSAT and OCO-2 showed consistently spatiotemporal trends for both CO 2 VCD and X CO2 . In summary, we can conclude that the presented CO 2 retrieval scheme has achieved global CO 2 retrieval from TanSat GL mode spectra with high precision and accuracy, as suggested by the results of independent ground-based and satellite validations.Index Terms-CO 2 , Iterative MaximumA Posteriori Differential Optical Absorption Spectroscopy (IMAP-DOAS), remote sensing, satellites, spectral analysis, TanSat, X CO2 . Xinhua Hong received the B.E. degree in hydrology and water resources engineering from Sichuan University, Chengdu, China, in 2018. He is pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the

I. INTRODUCTION

T HE Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change (IPCC) assessment reports have concluded that global warming is already an unquestionable fact. Combined with the global average of land and ocean surface temperature data, the mean temperature has increased at approximately 0.85 • from 1880 to 2012 [1], [2]. The main reason for global warming is the greenhouse effect caused by the increasing emissions of greenhouse gases [3]. Among six key greenhouse gases regulated in the Kyoto Protocol, carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) emissions accounted for 55.46% of the enhanced radiative forcing [2].

Our current knowledge of the carbon cycle is still insufficient given that the existing observation of CO 2 is spatially and temporally limited on the globe. Satellite measurement is an effective approach to monitoring the global distribution of CO 2 at high spatiotemporal resolution [4]. In December 2016, the TanSat satellite was successfully launched by China National Space Administration to better understand the spatial and temporal patterns of sources and sinks of CO 2 ; it was dedicated to global atmospheric carbon dioxide monitoring [5], [6], similar to its predecessors and successors such as Greenhouse gases Observing SATellite (GOSAT), GOSAT-2 and Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO)-2, OCO-3 satellites. The TanSat satellite carried two sensors, i.e., Atmospheric Carbon dioxide Grating Spectroradiometer (ACGS) and Cloud and Aerosol This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License.

For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ Polarimetry Imager (CAPI). ACGS can monitor atmospheric oxygen (O 2 ) and CO 2 concentrations by measuring absorption spectra in three bands, including the molecular O 2 A-band (approximately 758-778 nm, Visible), a weak CO 2 band (approximately 1594-1624 nm, short-wave IR [SWIR]-1), and a strong CO 2 band (approximately 2.042-2.082 nm, SWIR-2) under a spatial resolution of 2 km × 2 km and a spectral resolution of ∼0.044, ∼0.12, and ∼0.16 nm, respectively. CAPI is designed to obtain cloud and aerosol optical characteristics for eliminating cloudy soundings of the ACGS. However, the degradation and instability of the instrument performance have led to the fact that the quality of the TanSat spectra is not as good as its counterparts, such as GOSAT and OCO-2. In previous research (e.g., [6]- [8]), the systematic biases on the instrumental and spectral calibration, as well as their on-orbit degradation were not explicitly considered during TanSat CO 2 retrieval. For example, Wang et al. [9] ignored the calibration issue and resulted in a relatively poorer retrieval accuracy of ∼4.16 ppm for TanSat CO 2 before corrected. Recently, the problems were brought to the attention of Yang et al. [10]. Then a spectrum correction method was developed by the online fitting of an eighth order Fourier series to solve the spectral problem under the nadir (ND) mode. TanSat sun-glint (GL) mode CO 2 retrievals can provide a great meaningful reference for the aforementioned TanSat products. Meanwhile, complemented on the global scale, the CO 2 retrievals from two measurement modes will be of great significance for understanding and helpful to the application of TanSat products. In fact, the TanSat GL mode spectra seem in a relatively poorer quality than the ND mode spectra (Section III-B). In this study, we recalibrated the TanSat GL spectra to address some unanticipated issues, such as changes in spectral calibration parameters on orbit, low signalto-noise ratio (SNR) for certain spectral bands, etc., which possibly caused by the instrumental performance changes in the complex space environment after launch. The configuration and parameters of the Iterative Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) Differential Optical Absorption Spectroscopy (IMAP-DOAS) algorithm [11] were also adapted for TanSat CO 2 retrieval. The DOAS technique is an effective approach to determine the total column abundances of trace gases from groundbased [12], satellite [13], [14], and airborne [15] spectroscopy measurements. The classical DOAS approach relies on the linearization of the Lambert-Beer law, where the vertical column density (VCD) to be retrieved is directly proportional to the measured differential optical density [12]. This approach is based on the premise that the absorption cross section of the target gas is independent of temperature and pressure. However, different from in the UV/Vis band, the absorption lines are rather narrow and strongly dependent on temperature and pressure in the near-infrared (NIR) because absorption is only occurred by rotational and vibrational transitions. Therefore, the IMAP-DOAS algorithm has overcome the drawbacks of the DOAS technique in the NIR range. The IMAP-DOAS algorithms have been widely used for satellite CO [16] and CH 4 [17]- [19] retrieval from the SCanning Imaging Absorption spectroMeter for Atmospheric CHartographY (SCIAMACHY), and for verification of other greenhouse gas retrieval algorithms, see [20]- [22].

In this article, we present a CO 2 retrieval scheme and retrieved global CO 2 products from the TanSat sun-GL mode observation. A comprehensive verification was also performed between TanSat CO 2 retrieval and other measurements including TCCON, GOSAT, and OCO-2. This article is organized as follows. Section II presents a brief introduction to the materials. The IMAP-DOAS algorithm, the description of spectral recalibration, and the optimization of the CO 2 retrieval setting to adapt TanSat are described in Section III. Our independent ground-based and satellite validations are presented in Section IV. Section V gives a discussion for the assessment of the optical fit and the limitations of the current retrieval. Finally, Section VI provides a summary.


II. MATERIALS

A. TanSat Data 1) TanSat Level 1B GL Spectra: TanSat was launched on December 21, 2016 with a designed lifetime of three years. Its sun-synchronous orbit height is approximately 700 km. Its revisit period is 16 days with a 13:30 ascending local time. However, the quality of subsequent measurements could not be guaranteed due to the failure of the refrigerant on the satellite since October 2018. Therefore, the available data coverage for strong CO 2 band is the same with that for weak CO 2 , i.e., February 2017 to October 2018, and O 2 -A band is from February 2017 to present. We used the data from the weak CO 2 band of the GL mode level 1B spectra from March 2017 to September 2018 (available at http://satellite.nsmc.org.cn/portalsite/default.aspx. last accessed on May 22, 2020). Some specific parameters of TanSat-ACGS are shown in Table I [23].

The wavelength associated with each instantaneous field of view (IFOV) footprint per frame in three bands can be described by a six-order polynomial, as follows [24], [25]:
λ = 5 i=0 C 5 · P i(1)
where λ is the wavelength (nm), P denotes the pixel number, and C i represents the dispersion coefficient of the i th order. According to the prelaunch laboratory radiometric calibration of the TanSat-ACGS by the instrument manufacturer, a similar mathematical relation exists between the SNR and radiance in all channels of the three bands, as follows:
SNR(i, j ) = Radiance(i, j ) Radiance(i, j ) · C 2 1(i, j ) + C 2 2(i, j )(2)
where Radiance (i,j) is the apparent radiance of the j th field of view of the i th channel of a certain band. The corresponding SNR curve fitting coefficients are represented by C 1(i, j ) and C 2(i, j ) .


2) TanSat Cloud Mask Product:

The TanSat-CAPI cloud products by Wang et al. [26] were used directly for the filtering of satellite ground pixels (the pixels with the cloud mask equaling to 3 were selected). The TanSat-CAPI cloud  mask product is reasonably accurate when comparing against  TABLE I   TECHNICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF TANSAT-ACGS the MODIS cloud-screening product [27], with the Hit Radio (HR) scores > 80% and the Kuiper's skill (KSS) score at ∼0.7 [28].

B. Other Data 1) Solar Irradiance: Due to the degradation and stability of instrument performance, the TanSat mean normalized solar measurement shows change and never gets a radiometric correction. Therefore, we use the high-resolution solar irradiance database provided by R. Kurucz (http://kurucz.harvard.edu/sun/irradiance2008/) to replace TanSat solar measurement as the irradiance. This solar spectrum is measured by high-resolution Fourier Transform Spectrometer (FTS) at the Kitt Peak National Observatory; its wavelength range covers 1560-1740 nm, and the resolution reaches approximately 0.001 nm [4], [29]. We convolve this high-resolution solar spectrum with the recalibrated slit function of TanSat-ACGS SWIR-1 channel to gain I 0 , which is mentioned in (3).

2) Profiles and Reference Spectra: Goddard Earth Observing System (GEOS)-Chem model [30] is a global 3-D chemical transport model driven by GEOS-assimilated meteorological fields from the NASA Global Modeling and Assimilation Office [31]. The GEOS-Chem model has many extensive applications in a wide range of research topics on atmospheric composition [32]- [35]. We simulated CO 2 , CH 4 , H 2 O, and dry-air concentrations at the 2 • latitude × 2.5 • longitude horizontal resolution and 47, 47, 72, and 72 vertical pressure levels. The profiles described mainly involve three atmospheric components with strong absorption at SWIR-1 including CO 2 , CH 4 , and H 2 O. These profiles were interpolated into 10 sublayers, then we used the HIgh-resolution TRANsmission molecular absorption database (HITRAN, Version 2016) [36], [37] and a classical Voigt spectral line shape to calculate CH 4 , H 2 O, and CO 2 vertical optical densities. In addition, the dry-air profiles were used to calculate the dry-air total VCD.

3) TCCON Data: NIR solar absorption atmospheric measurements by the ground-based FTS of TCCON usually have a very high temporal resolution (∼90 s) and a fine spectral resolution (∼0.02 cm −1 ) [38], [39]. The retrieval results from TCCON sites are distributed over urban, suburban, rural, and terrain sites worldwide. TCCON has provided an important and independent means of verifying and calibrating satellite measurements. Therefore, the measurements of many appropriate TCCON sites were used to compare with the TanSat X CO2 retrievals (available from https://tccondata.org/, last accessed on May 27, 2020).


4) OCO-2 and GOSAT Products:

We compared similar products from other satellites to verify the reliability of TanSat CO 2 retrievals including OCO-2 and GOSAT, which are available at https://disc.gsfc.nasa.gov/datasets/and http://data2.gosat.nies.go.jp/, respectively. For the OCO-2 Level 2 standard geo-located CO 2 retrieval results, the version 8r is a previous version of the OCO-2 data set in NASA GES DISK (currently, the latest version is version 10, but its starting date is April 2020) and atmospheric carbon observations from space X CO2 retrieval algorithm established and improved by [40] and [41]. The GOSAT Level 2 X CO2 products are v02.72 version released by the National Institute for Environmental Studies of Japan. The GOSAT v02.72 version X CO2 products are retrieved from the MAP retrieval algorithm improved by [42]. Compared with v01.xx version (bias = −8.85 ppm, standard deviation (SD) = 4.75 ppm) [4], the bias and SD of this version are only −1.48 and 2.09 ppm, respectively, for the validation using TCCON data.


III. RETRIEVAL METHOD


A. IMAP-DOAS Algorithm

The classical DOAS established by [43] can be described as follows:
I (ν) = I 0 (ν) exp − σ (ν)c(s)ds ≈ I 0 (ν) exp −σ (ν) · c(s)ds ,(3)τ = ln I 0 (ν) I (ν) ≈ σ (ν) c(s)ds = σ (ν) · S,(4)D(ν) = S · n i=0 σ i (ν) · c i(5)
where I(ν) represents the radiance received by satellite at the wavelength ν; I 0 (ν) is the irradiance, which is the intensity of solar radiation at wavelength ν. σ (ν) is the absorption cross section of the target gas to be retrieved at wavelength ν. c(s) is the target gas concentration at the optical path s. D(ν) is the total optical density of n gases at wavelength ν. S denotes the slant column density (SCD), which is defined as the path integral of the concentration of the respective absorber along the actual light path. In fact, in the NIR wavelength region, the gas absorption cross section has strong temperature-and pressure-dependent properties and varies greatly with wavelength. This finding has been perceived and analyzed by some scientists at the twentieth century to the beginning of this century [44]- [46]. Thus, the drawback of the classical DOAS algorithm under certain conditions began to be noticed. Then, Buchwitz et al. [47] and Rodgers et al. [48] made important contributions to solve this problem. The CO 2 retrieval algorithm, namely, the IMAP-DOAS algorithm, is also an improvement on the classical DOAS algorithm. The IMAP-DOAS algorithm has been described in detail by [11] and utilized successfully by [18], [22], [49]- [51], and so on. The sensitivity of atmospheric temperature and pressure profile changes and nonlinear absorption are all considered by this algorithm. In the iterative procedure, the vertical optical densities of the target component are directly simulated and finally achieve the fitting of the differential optical density and the observed spectra. In the classical DOAS approach, some interference between different absorbers or with the Fraunhofer spectrum may occur, but though using convolutions with the instrumental slit function in every iteration, these interferences can be resolved. In addition, simultaneously, the strong absorption effect of the interference component is greatly weakened.

A forward radiative transfer model at high spectral resolution is used to calculate modeled radiance at each wavelength using the following equation:
F(x i ) = I 0 · exp − A n · τ ref n · x n,i · k i=0 a k ·λ k(6)
where F(x i ) = the forward modeled radiance at the i -th iteration of the state vector, I 0 = the incident intensity (solar transmission spectrum), A n = the air mass factor (AMF) for each n number of atmospheric state vector elements, τ ref n = the reference total optical density for each n number of atmospheric state vector elements,

x n,i = the trace gas-related state vector at the i -th iteration in each n layers, a k = polynomial coefficients to account for low-frequency spectral variations.

According to this equation, optimal estimation is applied with a state vector x, which comprises the scaling factors for the prior optical densities of the target trace gases in each vertical atmosphere layer. At each iteration i , a Jacobian matrix K i is calculated, where each column represents the derivative vector of the observed radiance with respect to each element of the state vector x i and
K i = (∂F(x)/∂x)| x i .
The forward model and the Jacobian matrix can be used to optimize the state vector at the i -th iteration as follows [49]:
x i+1 = x a + (K T i S −1 ε K i + S −1 a ) −1 K T i S −1 ε · y − F(x i ) + K i (x i − x a )(7)
where x a is a priori state vector, x i is the atmospheric state vector at the i -th iteration, y is the atmospheric optical density actually measured by the satellite, F(x i ) is the forward model evaluated at x i , S ε is the error covariance matrix, and S a is a priori covariance matrix.


B. Issues and Improvements

1) Evaluation of the GL Spectra of TanSat: Typically, atmospheric CO 2 abundances vary slightly with respect to the background concentration at ∼400 ppm. Therefore, the retrieval of CO 2 for space-based measurement should have a high precision, indicating that good retrieval conditions are desired. However, many unpredictable issues were exposed and needed to be addressed after TanSat was launched for on-orbit measurements, i.e., low SNR and uncorrected irradiance measurement. Otherwise, the precision accuracy of CO 2 retrieval would be greatly compromised. Furthermore, in the complex space environment (e.g., cosmic radiation exposure and possible instrument changes since launch [52]- [54]), the prelaunch calibration parameters measured in the on-ground laboratory seem unavailable for the TanSat retrieval account for the stability degradation of the instrument.

Unfortunately, we found that these problems are more serious in glint mode than in nadir mode. Two neighbor satellite orbits from the GL and ND, respectively, were used to evaluate the radiance measurement error. As shown in Fig. 1, we have selected three 0.5 • × 0.5 • regions under a clear sky from the center of Sahara Desert (21
• N-26 • N, 22 • E-27 • E).
The optical properties atmosphere and land surface could be approximately considered as the same. Thus, the SDs of all spectra at each wavelength inside each box can reflect the measurement error to some extent, i.e., the measured spectra with less error have a smaller SD. The Fig. 1
(b)-(d)
shows that the GL spectra have an approximately 16% (Area III) to 56% (Area II) higher SDs than ND spectra.

To further illustrate that the TanSat GL spectra are in a relatively poorer quality, TanSat CO 2 retrievals were also performed for ND and GL spectra, respectively, for ground pixels within the terrain region of 30 • N-60 • N, 45 • E-120 • E between April 10, 2017 and April 19, 2017 (mostly cloudless overland pixels). In Fig. 2, the left and middle columns show the CO 2 total column from the ND and GL spectra without precalibration, while the results of right column were from the GL spectra with precalibration. The retrieved CO 2 VCDs, root mean square (rms) of fitting residual and retrieval uncertainties are given in panels (a)-(c), panels (d)-(f), and panels (g)-(i), respectively. By comparing Fig. 2(d) and (e), (g) and (h), respectively, both the rms and CO 2 uncertainty from the GL mode were significantly higher than those from the ND mode (rms: 0.075 versus 0.060, Uncertainty: 0.21% versus 0.13%). This result suggested the GL measurement contains much more spectral noise than ND, leading to a challenge for CO 2 retrieval from GL spectra.

2) Spectral Precalibration: In previous trace greenhouse gas retrieval works, such as [18], the high spatial and moderate spectral resolutions were used directly to retrieve target gas concentrations on the basis of the same algorithm, but the TanSat CO 2 retrieval setting should be further optimized. We have conducted a series of targeted tests to improve these conditions, including filtering out poor signal quality, replacing the solar spectrum, fitting wavelength range to avoid low SNR region, and the most important procedure, spectral precalibration.

As shown in Fig. 2(e) and (h), when the GL spectra are not recalibrated, the retrieved rms and uncertainties are in a very high level. To address these issues, we performed an on-orbit  recalibration of the GL spectra. Prior to optical density fitting, some spectral parameters, such as the instrument slit function, spectral shift, and squeeze, were calibrated through cross correlation with a high-resolution solar spectrum. Then the spectral correction factors divided from the retrieval experiment were applied to the linear correction of GL spectra [55]- [58]. The method is described in detail in Appendix A. Fig. 2(c), (f), and (i) represent the retrievals using the current retrieval setting with a spectral precalibration. Compared by Fig. 2(e) and (f), and (h)-(i), evidently, preprocessing the spectra can improve the rms, which is reduced by ∼15%.

In addition, the recalibrated measurement spectra lead to a ∼30% decrease in the uncertainty of retrieved total VCD. After recalibrated the spectra, the inversion performance achieved almost close to that in nadir mode.

3) Updates of Configurations and Parameters: Compared to the retrieval of other gases such as CO, CH 4 , and HDO based on the IMAP-DOAS algorithm [18], [22], [49]- [51], CO 2 retrieval with the necessary of a 1% (∼4 ppm) precision has more demanding requirements on the related parameters and configurations. The applications of the newer version HITRAN (Version 2016) [37], the corrections of geometrical AMF [59], and the daily GEOS-Chem priori profiles with a higher spatiotemporal resolution et al. have also improved our retrieval accuracy. Table II lists our updated CO 2 retrieval setting, and some configurations and parameters used in [18] are also listed for reference. Take the updating the priori profiles for example, in the previous gas retrieval on the basis of the IMAP-DOAS theory, only a single US standard profile proposed in 1976 (USS76) [60] for target gas a priori information at any location all over the world. However, for CO 2 retrieval, the USS76 profile is outdated and not precise enough. Although we have required the degrees of freedom for signal (DFS) for CO 2 /X CO2 retrieval to be greater than or equal to 1 when filtering, the influence of the priori profiles on the CO 2 retrieval still cannot be ignored. Fig. 3 shows the comparisons of the average CO 2 total VCD on global maps with a 2 • × 2 • spatial resolution over April 2017 retrieved using different prior profile. Fig. 3(a)-(d) shows the CO 2 retrieval from the GOSAT, OCO-2, and TanSat (with GEOS-Chem and USS76 profiles), respectively. The difference between TanSat retrieval using different prior profiles and the other two satellite data sets is shown in Fig. 3(e)-(h). Apparently, the use of the USS76 priori profile causes a large deference of approximately −3.6×10 20 −6×10 20 molecules/cm 2 , while the application of the GEOS-Chem profiles effectively reduced these differences to within ±8 × 10 19 molecules/cm 2 .


C. Filters

The TanSat data retrieved cover the period from March 10, 2017 to September 30, 2018; 3.164 orbits are available. To improve the accuracy of the retrievals and eliminate the errors caused by cloud, aerosol, large zenith angle, and low SNR in the oceanic region, we have established the following basic screening rules. 


1) Only Clear-Sky Scenes:

The entire light path is from the incident point of sunlight entering the atmosphere to the ground footprint corresponding to the measured pixel and then to the satellite receiver. Therefore, we calculate the SCD of CO 2 along this light path in the atmosphere. SCD is related to VCD, the integral of the concentration along the vertical from the surface to the top of the atmosphere, by way of the AMF, where AMF = SCD/VCD. Since scattering in the SWIR is generally low [47], [62], for our applications, if the sky is clear enough, then the impact of scattering is much lower than the retrieval precision error [63]. Thus, scattering in the atmosphere can be neglected, and AMF = 1/cos (SZA) + 1/cos (LZA) (SZA = solar zenith angle, LZA = line-of-sight zenith angle). Then, this geometrical calculation was corrected for sphericity adapted from [59]. However, because clouds are not considered in the IMAP-DOAS algorithm, scattering could become nonnegligible in some scenes, such as heavy aerosol loading, relatively large cloud fraction, or dark surfaces. Similar to [18], considering that the deviation of the AMF may be large under the cloudy or high aerosol weather conditions, we have selected clear scenes to ensure that our retrievals are accurate enough. As for the TanSat-CAPI cloud mask value, specifically, 0 for full cloud, 1 for many clouds, 2 for possible clear sky, and 3 for clear sky. Therefore, to pick out clear-sky scenes, we selected data, where the TanSat-CAPI instrument measured the local cloud mask value equal to 3. 2) Only Global Land Area: Relative to the land, due to the ocean surface has low surface reflectance, the SNR is low. Fig. 4 shows one orbit as an example of the measured average SNR and radiance at the weak CO 2 band of every footprint. As shown in Fig. 4, the difference in radiance and SNR between land and ocean areas is very evident. In ocean areas, the average radiance and SNR are only approximately 1/3 of the land area. Furthermore, under a clean cloud-free scene, low radiance and low SNR hinder the accuracy of spectral fitting in ocean areas. On the contrary, under cloudy weather, due to the influence of scattering, a certain inaccuracy is brought to the AMF calculation. Thus, the retrievals in the ocean area still have a large deviation. In view of these reasons, we only selected the global land 


IV. RESULTS AND VALIDATIONS


A. Validation Using TCCON Measurements

We used the data from the global TCCON sites for this comparison to validate the TanSat measurements. On the basis of the filter rules described in Section III-C, three additional matching conditions have been added as the spatiotemporal co-location criteria for calculations of the regression analyses as follows [6], [64]- [66]. 1) Spatial Criteria: All retrievals within 800 km around the site. A relatively wide spatial collocation criteria should be set to obtain sufficient co-incidences due to the narrow swath (∼20 km) and the discrete nature of the observations. Furthermore, this distance is reasonable and feasible because the atmospheric CO 2 abundance is relatively stable. 2) Temporal Criteria: Data measured by the TCCON sites within 2 h of the TanSat overpass. We have used the arithmetic mean corresponding to each overpass. 3) Station Criteria: We excluded the stations located within areas with significant topography and an active volcano such as Reunion Island or close to source region such as Caltech. Due to Sodankyla and Eureka are at very high latitude, they will also not be used for validation.  Table III, and the matchups are presented with error bars. Two red dotted lines are used to indicate ±1% deviation and one red line is used to indicate a linear regression fit to the data. The number of matchups (N), the Pearson correlation coefficient (cor), averaged bias, SD, and a black one-to-one line are included.

Under the constraints of these conditions, we compared all the TanSat X CO2 retrievals with the global TCCON sites. The average bias and SD between TanSat and TCCON for each site are listed in Table III [67]- [76]. We found that we have maintained good accuracy in comparison with the 10 TCCON sites that satisfied the matching conditions globally. Against most TCCON sites, the SD of TanSat retrievals over land is 0.44 (Lamont) ∼1.59 (Anmyeondo) ppm, and the mean bias derived from the TCCON sites is −0.95 ppm (Park Fall) to +2.66 (Izana) ppm. Most stations have a similar accuracy, which the SD is generally less than 2 ppm, and the mean bias is less than 1 ppm. The correlation analysis corresponding to Table III is shown in Fig. 5. The figure shows, in general, that TanSat retrievals are in good agreement with global TCCON site data. In the overpass averaged results, the bias and SD are 0.78 and 1.75 ppm, respectively. Moreover, the Pearson correlation coefficient is 0.81, and most co-incidences fell in the 1% error region.


B. Validation Using Satellite Observations

Since the launch of the GOSAT and OCO-2, many operational or scientific global CO 2 data sets have been developed from satellite instruments. We performed comparisons with similar products from GOSAT and OCO-2. However, comparing the original retrieved results of individual satellites with each other is especially difficult due to the rare of overlap in spatiotemporal co-locations. Therefore, three satellite products were binned in 2 • by 2 • grid elements for contrasts and averaged by season. Fig. 6 shows the global quarterly average CO 2 VCD distribution of TanSat retrievals, GOSAT, and OCO-2 products in the same representative season from September 2017 to August 2018. The distribution of GOSAT retrievals is slightly sparser than the two other satellites but still provides sufficient data for comparison. The content of CO 2 in the atmosphere is very stable. Thus, the CO 2 distribution obtained by the three products did not change significantly during the period of one and a half years under study. Evidently, the global CO 2 density has a significant relationship with elevation, and elevation may become the most important influencing factor. Meanwhile, some "hotspots" of CO 2 density are evident, such as around the coastal cities of continents, Europe, Southeast Asia, India, and Southern North America. Large CO 2 emissions are caused by industries and residences due to the intensive and frequent human gathering activities in these regions. Fig. 6 shows that TanSat CO 2 retrieval is highly consistent with the distribution of the two other satellites, particularly in several of the most representative low-value areas, such as the Rocky Mountains in the western North American continent, the Andes in the western South American continent, the South African Plateau, the Himalayas, and most of the Arctic (the Arctic is only compared with OCO-2). For some high-value areas, such as the southeastern continent of North America, northern Latin America, parts of northern Africa, and western Eurasia, TanSat CO 2 total column retrievals are still in good agreements with these satellite products.

Similar to the total column density, global quarterly X CO2 composites of TanSat, GOSAT, and OCO-2 are illustrated in Fig. 7 from September 2017 to August 2018. Different from the distribution of total columns, the variation characteristics of global scale X CO2 distribution are prominent on time and spatial scales. A fairly high degree of spatiotemporal agreement between the X CO2 patterns of three products is found. As shown in Fig. 7, the seasonal variation of X CO2 in the southern hemisphere is not as dramatic as the Northern Hemisphere over time. Except for the local winter and spring (from March to August, relative to the southern hemisphere), the other seasons are generally maintained at ∼402 ppm over land in the southern hemisphere. However, Fig. 7(g) shows that the TanSat X CO2 retrievals are lower than the two other products by approximately ∼2 ppm to ∼4 ppm in the South African plateau, South America, and Australia. When the southern hemisphere enters its winter [ Fig. 7(j)-(l)], to a certain extent, the X CO2 values in various regions of the southern hemisphere increase. Relative to its fall, the extent of uplift in the southern hemisphere after entering the winter ranged from TanSat to approximately ∼4 ppm to ∼8 ppm, and GOSAT and OCO-2 showed values between ∼2 and ∼6 ppm and ∼1 and ∼8 ppm, respectively. Fig. 7(j) and (g) showed that this increase is particularly significant in a small number of parts of South Africa and Australia for TanSat data sets.

In fact, whether in the southern hemisphere or the northern hemisphere, X CO2 increases in most areas after entering the local winter. This situation in the southern hemisphere has been described in previous paragraph. For the northern hemisphere, in most regions, the values of X CO2 have also risen to varying degrees compared with the local autumn. Some studies reported that respiration suppression due to a reduction in snow cover in winter may account for as much as ∼25% of the increase in the annual CO 2 sink of northern forests [77]. A decrease in respiration in response to warming during the release period could decrease the amplitude of seasonal CO 2 -cycle (SCA) exchange [78]. The land area in the northern hemisphere is more extensive than that of the southern hemisphere, accounting for 67.5% of the total land area of the world. Thus, X CO2 distribution becomes comparable. In the local summer and autumn, the hemisphere had been stable at a low value (∼396-398 ppm in most regions). As shown in Fig. 7(a)-(c) and (j) and (k), during this period, the TanSat and OCO-2 evidently have a relatively close appearance, and the GOSAT shows that the regions larger than 400 ppm in northern Africa and Europe are wider and the X CO2 values are higher. Figs. 7(d)-(f) and Fig. 7(g)-(i) show that, in the first half of the year after entering winter, the X CO2 began to rise to varying degrees in most of the domain until the local spring. Fig. 7(d), (e), (g), and (h) shows that TanSat X CO2 retrievals in these regions were at high values (∼405 ppm to ∼412 ppm) throughout the year and had a similar appearance to the GOSAT, especially between 0 • to 30 • N. However, the OCO-2 products showed smaller X CO2 values than the two other products at this latitude band, in the ∼398 ppm to ∼406 ppm range. For higher latitudes, TanSat retrievals were ∼0 ppm to ∼4 ppm lower than GOSAT and OCO-2 data sets in most areas.

To evaluate the reliability of the CO 2 retrieved from TanSat observations, we have compared TanSat retrievals with GOSAT and OCO-2 products as well to quantitatively investigate the reliability of the TanSat CO 2 /X CO2 products. Before the quantitative comparisons, three products were binned in 2 • by 2 • grid elements respectively. Then, we selected the grids with the same latitude and longitude on the same day as coincidences. We have matched 976 and 1364 valid coincidences for comparison with GOSAT and OCO-2 data sets, respectively. We performed linear correlation analysis for the CO 2 total column density and X CO2 , and the scatter plots against these satellite products are presented in Fig. 8(b), (c), (e), and (f). The same comparison between OCO-2 and GOSAT as a reference is provided in Fig. 8(a) and (d). In general, the following characteristics are apparent from Fig. 8: the linear relationship of CO 2 total column density is better than that of X CO2 , and the correlation of OCO-2 products is slightly better than that of GOSAT. Specifically, in terms of the CO 2 VCD, R 2 with GOSAT is 0.73 and that with OCO-2 is 0.75. For X CO2 , because the criteria between satellites are not as strict as the comparison with TCCON, R 2 is not as high as the total column amount of CO 2 . However, it still reached 0.41 and 0.48, close to the R 2 between the GOSAT and OCO-2. Although the correlation with GOSAT is slightly lower than that with OCO-2, bias and SD are significantly better than the comparison with OCO-2. The mean bias and SD of the former are −2.28 and 2.83 ppm, and those of the latter are 2.65 and 3.48 ppm, respectively.


V. DISCUSSION


A. Assessment of the Fitting Spectra

Following (6) and (7), we used the forward model to fit the optical density, which is the logarithm of the ratio of the standard solar reference spectrum to the radiance from TanSat-ACGS GL mode. Fig. 9 displays an example of simulated optical density in the spectral window of 1605.8-1622.1 nm. Fig. 9(a) shows the optical density of the original and recalibrated spectrum. Fig. 9(b) and (c) shows the spectral  fitting before and after recalibration. It is visible that the fit differential slant optical density (DSOD) is highly consistent with the measured density in this optical fitting window. The recalibration improved the retrieval of this spectrum, increasing the R 2 from 0.87 to 0.93. Fig. 9(d) has displayed two kinds of residuals (observed optical density minus fit optical density) of the spectral fittings, which shown in Fig. 9(b) and (c). As Fig. 9(b)-(d) shows, the recalibration greatly improved the retrieval of this spectrum, reducing the rms by 20% and the mean of fit absolute residuals by about 20% for the cited example. Fig. 9(e) shows the distribution of R 2 and the average residuals from the whole NO.02348 orbit. Evidently, after recalibration, for the most fitting results, R 2 is concentrated between ∼0.83 and ∼0.93, and the average residuals are concentrated at ∼ ±0.005.


B. Limitations of the Current Retrieval

The main objective of this study was to retrieve global CO 2 from the TanSat sun-GL mode spectra. Our presented retrieval setting was able to inverse the terrestrial CO 2 /X CO2 well under a cloudless sky but tended to fail when the cloudy weather or on marine regions. The lower SNR of the spectra in the ocean region and the bias of the geometric AMF due to clouds forced us to abandon the ocean CO 2 retrieval and to choose the definitely cloud-free scenes. With the two major prerequisites of land and clear sky and other filtering conditions described in Section III-C, finally the amount of valid data obtained was only about 11%. Not only for the TanSat, the low percentage of valid data has led to a poor map coverage which seems to have become a major drawback of low-Earth-orbit (LEO) satellites. For example, according to NIES GOSAT Projection (2012) and [65], the percentage of valid data for GOSAT and OCO-2 is less than 5% and approximately 15%, respectively. The low percentage of valid data, long revisit period (∼16 days), narrow swath of TanSat (∼18 km), and the discontinuity of TCCON measurements make it not easy to find sufficient co-incidences for validation against TCCON sites. Fig. 10 and Table IV (in Appendix B) show a validation against TCCON with the spatial criteria of 400 or 550 km. However, there were not enough independent TCCON sites have been involved. Considering the stability of CO 2 in the atmosphere, we finally adopted the spatial criteria of 800 km as [6] for enough matchups. We also retrieved the spectra in nadir mode, and the obtained valid data showed that the percentage was even smaller, only about 8%. As shown in Fig. 11 (Appendix C), the X CO2 retrieval results in nadir mode have a lower coverage compared to in glint mode. According to the matching criteria in the A part of Section IV, only two TCCON sites eventually met the validation requirements (JPL, bias = 1.38 ppm, SD = 0.96 ppm [79]; Zugspitze, Germany, bias = 2.80 ppm, SD = 1.28 ppm [80]), leading us to not have enough evidence to determine the precision of the TanSat ND retrievals. We expect that new breakthroughs in algorithms can be achieved in the future to overcome the difficulties of low SNR in marine areas and realize CO 2 /X CO2 retrieval under higher cloud fraction conditions. Then the CO 2 retrieval using the TanSat L1B spectra will be completer and more sophisticated.


VI. CONCLUSION

Excellent optical and meteorological conditions are strongly required by the precision of CO 2 /X CO2 retrieval from satellite measurement. The low signal quality issues of TanSat sunglint spectra and the retrieval algorithm setting combined with unsuitable configuration and parameters compromise the precision accuracy of CO 2 retrieval. This article presented a method to adapt to TanSat CO 2 retrieval setting and retrieve global CO 2 concentrations through spectral recalibration and the IMAP-DOAS algorithm. We performed a comprehensive verification between TanSat CO 2 retrieval and other measurements including TCCON, GOSAT, and OCO-2. The results proved that the presented retrieval scheme can effectively adapt to TanSat CO 2 retrieval. The time span of the data retrieved was from March 2017 to September 2018. A total of 3.164 available orbits were retrieved for CO 2 total VCD and X CO2 , covering all terrestrial regions of the world from 80 • S to 80 • N under a completely cloudless sky. In the period of approximately one and a half years, we acquired 22.997 available co-incidences with the ten TCCON sites worldwide. The validation against TCCON site data showed that the SD of our measurements can reach 1.75 ppm, and the bias can be within −0.95 ppm to +2.66 ppm. In the correlation analysis, TanSat data sets showed good linear relationship with the GOSAT and OCO-2 data sets. The correlation coefficients R 2 reached 0.73 and 0.75 for the CO 2 total column, and R 2 reached 0.41 and 0.48 for X CO2 . In general, the correlation with OCO-2 products was better than that with GOSAT products, and the mean bias and SD of GOSAT were significantly better than those of OCO-2. These comparative results were close to the comparison between GOSAT and OCO-2. Furthermore, the global spatiotemporal distribution of our retrievals showed a high degree of consistency with GOSAT and OCO-2 observations.

Using TanSat data to retrieve CO 2 /X CO2 has great potential. Next, we will improve our work and attempt to optimize the existing retrievals to seek higher precision and more accurate CO 2 /X CO2 retrievals in the future.


APPENDIX A ASSESSMENT OF THE FITTING SPECTRA

The instrument response function for the j-th wavelength window, L j (λ), could be fit by a Super-Gaussian shape, which was expressed by the equation
L j (λ) = k 2ω 1 k × e − λ−λ c, j ω k (A1)
where ω and k represent the width and shape factors, respectively, while is the gamma function and λ c, j represents the center wavelength of the j th wavelength window. Shift and stretch parameters are permitted to correct possible misalignment between the observed and reference spectra as well as absorption cross sections. A second-order polynomial is used to fit shift and stretch parameters, which was described as
λ j = a + b λ j − λ c, j + c λ j − λ c, j 2 (A2)
where λ j is the wavelength from the original calibration. The parameters a, b, and c represent the offset and the first and second-order stretch according to λ j .

Thus, the equation used in the calibration can be expressed as follows:  
I (λ) = (I S ⊗ L)(λ − λ) × exp − n i=1 c i (σ i ⊗ L)(λ − λ)(A3)
where I (λ) is the spectrum with recalibration, I S (λ) is the solar spectrum with a high wavelength resolution, ⊗ is the convolution symbol, c i is the column density of the species i , and σ i is the absorption cross section of the species i . To correct the spectra, we performed a retrieval experiment. The simulated spectrum at the retrieval experiment I sim (λ) was divided by its I (λ) to obtain the spectral correction factor cor(λ), which was described as
cor(λ) = I sim (λ) I (λ) .(A4)
6432 groups of correction factors were given in the retrieval experiment. These correction factors were averaged at each wavelength to obtain the final correction factors cor avg (λ), which were applied to the linear correction of all spectra. Thus, the original spectrum was recalibrated and convert to the cor avg (λ) · I (λ), which was used to the actual retrieval.


APPENDIX B VALIDATION AGAINST TCCON WITH

OTHER SPATIAL CRITERIA See Fig. 10 and Table IV.   Fig. 11 and Table V.


ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors thank the TCCON and PIs for providing ground-based X CO2 data: Tae Guo, Yipeng Huang, Hongjie Fan, and Wanbiao Li for the TanSat-CAPI cloud mask products. They thank the OCO-2 team and the GOSAT team for providing satellite products. They are also deeply indebted to Nicholas Deutscher (Centre for Atmospheric Chemistry, School of Chemistry, University of Wollongong) and Dr. Lianghai Wu (SRON Netherlands Institute for Space Research, Utrecht, the Netherlands) for their helpful comments and suggestions during the preparation of this article. They would also like to thank the two anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments, which helped to improve the article significantly.

Fig. 1 .
1Comparison of the spectral quality from two neighbor orbits of different observation modes (i.e., GL and ND). (a) Red band represents the orbit 01685 (ND, April 16, 2017) and a blue band represents the orbit 01714 (GL, April 18, 2017). The three selected regions are also shown by the rectangles. (b-d) SDs of the spectra at each wavelength in Area I, II, and III, respectively. The black curves represent the SD form the glint mode, while the red represents the SD from the nadir mode.

Fig. 2 .
2Comparisons of CO 2 VCD retrieval results from all orbits that passed the region of 30 • N-60 • N and 45 • E-120 • E from April 10, 2017 to April 19, 2017. The left and middle columns show the retrieved results from the original [(a), (d), and (g)] ND and [(b), (e), and (h)] GL spectra without precalibration, while the [(c), (f), and (i)] results of right column are from the GL spectra with precalibration. The (a)-(c) retrieved result, (d)-(f) rms of fitting residual, and (g)-(i) uncertainty are placed in the upper, middle, and bottom panels, respectively.

Fig. 3 .
3Sensitivity test about prior profiles on a 2 • × 2 • grid averaged over April 2017. (a)-(d) Global maps with the CO 2 total VCD of GOSAT, OCO-2, and TanSat products. The products from GOSAT and OCO-2 data sets are placed at (a) and (b), while the retrievals from TanSat using the GEOS-Chem profiles and the USS76 profile are placed at (c) and (d). (e) and (f) Difference between the retrievals of TanSat using the different profiles and GOSAT products. (g) and (h) Same as (e) and (f), but the difference is between TanSat and OCO-2.

Fig. 4 .
4Scatterplots of the measured SNR and radiance from the whole NO.01262 orbit (date: March 18, 2017) at the weak CO 2 band. The red dots represent land pixels and the black dots represent ocean pixels. The averages of the measured SNR and radiance are included, which of the land and ocean pixels are indicated by a green symbol and a blue symbol, respectively. area as the research object to maximize the retrieval's accuracy.3) SZA: The solar zenith angle ≤ 80 • . 4) DFS: DFS for CO 2 ≥ 1.

Fig. 6 .
6CO 2 total columns of TanSat, GOSAT, and OCO-2 products are on a 2 • × 2 • grid averaged by season. The left column is the quarterly average of TanSat retrievals, the middle column belongs to GOSAT, and the OCO-2's products are placed in the right. From top to bottom, the CO 2 total columns are averaged over September 2017 to November 2017, December 2017 to February 2018, March 2018 to May 2018, and June 2018 to August 2018, respectively.

Fig. 7 .
7Same asFig. 6, but for X CO2 .

Fig. 8 .
8Scatterplots of the comparisons of the TanSat retrievals against GOSAT and OCO-2 products. (a), (b), and (c) CO 2 total column; (d), (e), and (f) X CO2 . In each panel, we provided the number of matchups, the Pearson correlation coefficient R 2 , one red line indicated a linear regression fit to the data, one-to-one line, and rms error (RMSE). The number of samples (N), averaged bias, and SD are also included.

Fig. 9 .
9Spectral fit. (a) Optical density of the original and recalibrated spectra. (b) Fitting of the original spectrum. (c) Same as (b), but for the recalibrated spectrum. (d) Residuals of the fitting in (b) and (c). (e) Density scatterplots for the fit R 2 and average of the residuals from the whole NO.02348 orbit with precalibration.

Fig. 10 .
10Same as Fig. 5, but for the spatial criteria of 400 or 550 km.

Fig. 11 .
11X CO2 retrieved from the TanSat nadir mode spectra on a 2 • × 2 • grid averaged by season.


-Young Goo (PI of Anmyeondo), Paul Wennberg (PI of Lamont and Park Falls), Justus Notholt (PI of Bremen), Thomas Blumenstock (PI of Izana), Frank Hase (PI of Karlsruhe), Dave Pollard (PI of Lauder), Isamu Morino (PI of Rikubetsu), Nicholas Deutscher (IP of Darwin), R. Sussmann (IP of Zugspitze), Debra Wunch, Young-Suk oh and Voltaire A. Velazco, Christof Petri, Matthias Schneider, S. Dohe, Vanessa Sherlock, J. Messerschmidt, Rebecca A. Washenfelder, DavidW.T. Griffith, Coleen Roehl, J.-F. Blavier, Geoffrey C. Toon, M. Rettinger, and every person working in TCCON. They thank Xi Wang, Zheng

TABLE II UPDATES
IIOF CONFIGURATION AND PARAMETERS

TABLE III
IIISUMMARY OF THE COMPARISON BETWEEN TANSAT RETRIEVALS AND TCCON MEASUREMENTS FOR X CO2Fig. 5. Correlation analysis of X CO2 retrieved from TanSat measurements with collocated TCCON data. Different color and shape symbols indicate different sites in

TABLE IV SAME
IVAS TABLE III, BUT FOR THE SPATIAL CRITERIA IS OF 400 OR 550 KM

TABLE V
VSAME ASTABLE III, BUT FOR THE TANSAT CO 2 RETRIEVAL FROM ND SPECTRA APPENDIX C TANSAT CO 2 RETRIEVAL FROM ND SPECTRASee 
His research interests are mainly in the research and long-term monitoring of high-precision Fourier transform spectral inversion method for key gas components in the atmosphere, the detection and analysis of gas emissions from various pollution sources, and the simulation of GEOS-Chem model. He is the Deputy President with the Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and also the Director of the Key Laboratory of Environmental Optics and Technology. His research interest includes the optical environment pollution monitoring technology.Chengxin
Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change. IPCC) Report. (IPCC) Report. (2007). Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change. [Online]. Available: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar4/syr/

Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change. IPCC) Report. (IPCC) Report. (2014). Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change. [Online]. Available: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr/

Troubling milestone for CO 2. N Jones, Nature Geosci. 68589N. Jones, "Troubling milestone for CO 2 ," Nature Geosci., vol. 6, no. 8, p. 589, 2013.

Retrieval algorithm for CO 2 and CH 4 column abundances from short-wavelength infrared spectral observations by the Greenhouse gases observing satellite. Y Yoshida, Atmos. Meas. Techn. 44Y. Yoshida et al., "Retrieval algorithm for CO 2 and CH 4 column abundances from short-wavelength infrared spectral observations by the Greenhouse gases observing satellite," Atmos. Meas. Techn., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 717-734, 2011.

Effects of spectral sampling rate and range of CO 2 absorption bands on XCO 2 retrieval from TanSat hyperspectral spectrometer. Y Liu, Z Cai, D Yang, Y Zheng, M Duan, D Lü, Chin. Sci. Bull. 5914Y. Liu, Z. Cai, D. Yang, Y. Zheng, M. Duan, and D. Lü, "Effects of spectral sampling rate and range of CO 2 absorption bands on XCO 2 retrieval from TanSat hyperspectral spectrometer," Chin. Sci. Bull., vol. 59, no. 14, pp. 1485-1491, May 2014.

The TanSat mission: Preliminary global observations. Y Liu, Sci. Bull. 6318Y. Liu et al., "The TanSat mission: Preliminary global observations," Sci. Bull., vol. 63, no. 18, pp. 38-45, 2018.

First global carbon dioxide maps produced from TanSat measurements. D Yang, Y Liu, Z Cai, X Chen, L Yao, D Lu, Adv. Atmos. Sci. 356D. Yang, Y. Liu, Z. Cai, X. Chen, L. Yao, and D. Lu, "First global carbon dioxide maps produced from TanSat measurements," Adv. Atmos. Sci., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 621-623, Jun. 2018.

A retrieval algorithm for TanSat XCO 2 observation: Retrieval experiments using GOSAT data. Y Liu, D Yang, Z Cai, Chin. Sci. Bull. 5813Y. Liu, D. Yang, and Z. Cai, "A retrieval algorithm for TanSat XCO 2 observation: Retrieval experiments using GOSAT data," Chin. Sci. Bull., vol. 58, no. 13, pp. 1520-1523, May 2013.

Carbon dioxide retrieval from TanSat observations and validation with TCCON measurements. S Wang, Remote Sens. 12142204S. Wang et al., "Carbon dioxide retrieval from TanSat observations and validation with TCCON measurements," Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 14, p. 2204, Jul. 2020.

Toward high precision XCO 2 retrievals from TanSat observations: Retrieval improvement and validation against TCCON measurements. D Yang, J. Geophys. Res., Atmos. 12522Art. no. e2020JD032794D. Yang et al., "Toward high precision XCO 2 retrievals from TanSat observations: Retrieval improvement and validation against TCCON measurements," J. Geophys. Res., Atmos., vol. 125, no. 22, 2020, Art. no. e2020JD032794.

Iterative maximum a posteriori (IMAP)-DOAS for retrieval of strongly absorbing trace gases: Model studies for CH 4 and CO 2 retrieval from near infrared spectra of SCIAMACHY onboard ENVISAT. C Frankenberg, U Platt, T Wagner, Atmos. Chem. Phys. 51C. Frankenberg, U. Platt, and T. Wagner, "Iterative maximum a pos- teriori (IMAP)-DOAS for retrieval of strongly absorbing trace gases: Model studies for CH 4 and CO 2 retrieval from near infrared spectra of SCIAMACHY onboard ENVISAT," Atmos. Chem. Phys., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 9-22, 2005.

Simultaneous DOAS and mist-chamber IC measurements of HONO in Houston, TX. J Stutz, Atmos. Environ. 4433J. Stutz et al., "Simultaneous DOAS and mist-chamber IC measure- ments of HONO in Houston, TX," Atmos. Environ., vol. 44, no. 33, pp. 4090-4098, Oct. 2010.

Atmospheric greenhouse gases retrieved from SCIAMACHY: Comparison to ground-based FTS measurements and model results. O Schneising, Atmos. Chem. Phys. 123O. Schneising et al., "Atmospheric greenhouse gases retrieved from SCIAMACHY: Comparison to ground-based FTS measurements and model results," Atmos. Chem. Phys., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 1527-1540, Feb. 2012.

Satellite UV-Vis spectroscopy: Implications for air quality trends and their driving forces in China during. C Zhang, Light, Sci. Appl. 81100C. Zhang et al., "Satellite UV-Vis spectroscopy: Implications for air quality trends and their driving forces in China during 2005-2017," Light, Sci. Appl., vol. 8, no. 1, p. 100, Nov. 2019.

MAMAP-A new spectrometer system for column-averaged methane and carbon dioxide observations from aircraft: Instrument description and performance analysis. K Gerilowski, Atmos. Meas. Techn. 42K. Gerilowski et al., "MAMAP-A new spectrometer system for column-averaged methane and carbon dioxide observations from aircraft: Instrument description and performance analysis," Atmos. Meas. Techn., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 215-243, Feb. 2011.

Retrieval of CO from SCIAMACHY onboard ENVISAT: Detection of strongly polluted areas and seasonal patterns in global CO abundances. C Frankenberg, U Platt, T Wagner, Atmos. Chem. Phys. 56C. Frankenberg, U. Platt, and T. Wagner, "Retrieval of CO from SCIAMACHY onboard ENVISAT: Detection of strongly polluted areas and seasonal patterns in global CO abundances," Atmos. Chem. Phys., vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 1639-1644, Jun. 2005.

Global column-averaged methane mixing ratios from 2003 to 2009 as derived from SCIAMACHY: Trends and variability. C Frankenberg, 10.1029/2010JD014849J. Geophys. Res., Atmos. 116D04302C. Frankenberg et al., "Global column-averaged methane mixing ratios from 2003 to 2009 as derived from SCIAMACHY: Trends and variability," J. Geophys. Res., Atmos., vol. 116, no. D04302, 2011, doi: 10.1029/2010JD014849.

Retrieval techniques for airborne imaging of methane concentrations using high spatial and moderate spectral resolution: Application to AVIRIS. A K Thorpe, C Frankenberg, D A Roberts, Atmos. Meas. Techn. 72A. K. Thorpe, C. Frankenberg, and D. A. Roberts, "Retrieval techniques for airborne imaging of methane concentrations using high spatial and moderate spectral resolution: Application to AVIRIS," Atmos. Meas. Techn., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 491-506, Feb. 2014.

Airborne DOAS retrievals of methane, carbon dioxide, and water vapor concentrations at high spatial resolution: Application to AVIRIS-NG. A K Thorpe, Atmos. Meas. Techn. 1010A. K. Thorpe et al., "Airborne DOAS retrievals of methane, carbon dioxide, and water vapor concentrations at high spatial resolution: Application to AVIRIS-NG," Atmos. Meas. Techn., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 3833-3850, Oct. 2017.

PPDF-based method to account for atmospheric light scattering in observations of carbon dioxide from space. S Oshchepkov, A Bril, T Yokota, 10.1029/2008JD010061J. Geophys. Res., Atmos. 113S. Oshchepkov, A. Bril, and T. Yokota, "PPDF-based method to account for atmospheric light scattering in observations of carbon dioxide from space," J. Geophys. Res., Atmos., vol. 113, no. D23210, 2008, doi: 10.1029/2008JD010061.

First ground-based FTIR observations of methane in the inner tropics over several years. A K Petersen, Atmos. Chem. Phys. 1015A. K. Petersen et al., "First ground-based FTIR observations of methane in the inner tropics over several years," Atmos. Chem. Phys., vol. 10, no. 15, pp. 7231-7239, Aug. 2010.

Inverse modeling of pan-arctic methane emissions at high spatial resolution: What can we learn from assimilating satellite retrievals and using different process-based wetland and lake biogeochemical models?. Z Tan, Atmos. Chem. Phys. 1619Z. Tan et al., "Inverse modeling of pan-arctic methane emissions at high spatial resolution: What can we learn from assimilating satellite retrievals and using different process-based wetland and lake biogeochemical models?" Atmos. Chem. Phys., vol. 16, no. 19, pp. 12649-12666, Oct. 2016.

Retrieval of global terrestrial solar-induced chlorophyll fluorescence from TanSat satellite. S Du, Sci. Bull. 6322S. Du et al., "Retrieval of global terrestrial solar-induced chloro- phyll fluorescence from TanSat satellite," Sci. Bull., vol. 63, no. 22, pp. 1502-1512, Nov. 2018.

Laboratory spectral calibration of the TanSat atmospheric carbon dioxide grating spectrometer. Z Yang, Methods Data Syst. 73Geosci. Instrum.Z. Yang et al., "Laboratory spectral calibration of the TanSat atmospheric carbon dioxide grating spectrometer," Geosci. Instrum., Methods Data Syst., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 245-252, Aug. 2018.

Prelaunch radiometric calibration of the TanSat atmospheric carbon dioxide grating spectrometer. Z Yang, IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 567Z. Yang et al., "Prelaunch radiometric calibration of the TanSat atmospheric carbon dioxide grating spectrometer," IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 4225-4233, Jul. 2018.

A cloud detection scheme for the Chinese carbon dioxide observation satellite (TANSAT). X Wang, Z Guo, Y Huang, H Fan, W Li, Adv. Atmos. Sci. 341X. Wang, Z. Guo, Y. Huang, H. Fan, and W. Li, "A cloud detection scheme for the Chinese carbon dioxide observation satellite (TANSAT)," Adv. Atmos. Sci., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 16-25, Jan. 2017.

MODIS atmosphere L 2 cloud mask product. S Ackerman, R Frey, NASA MODIS Adapt. Process. Syst. Goddard Space Flight CenterS. Ackerman and R. Frey, "MODIS atmosphere L 2 cloud mask product," NASA MODIS Adapt. Process. Syst., Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD, USA, 2015.

Evaluation of arctic cloud products from the EUMETSAT climate monitoring satellite application facility based on CALIPSO-CALIOP observations. K.-G Karlsson, A Dybbroe, Atmos. Chem. Phys. 104K.-G. Karlsson and A. Dybbroe, "Evaluation of arctic cloud products from the EUMETSAT climate monitoring satellite application facil- ity based on CALIPSO-CALIOP observations," Atmos. Chem. Phys., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1789-1807, Feb. 2010.

High resolution irradiance spectrum from 300 to 1000 nm. R L Kurucz, presented at the AFRL Transmiss. Meeting. Lexington, MA, USAR. L. Kurucz, "High resolution irradiance spectrum from 300 to 1000 nm," presented at the AFRL Transmiss. Meeting, Lexington, MA, USA, Jun. 2005. [Online]. Available: https://ui.adsabs.harvard. edu/abs/2006astro.ph..

. 5029k/Abstract, 5029K/abstract

Global modeling of tropospheric chemistry with assimilated meteorology: Model description and evaluation. I Bey, J. Geophys. Res., Atmos. 106D19I. Bey et al., "Global modeling of tropospheric chemistry with assimi- lated meteorology: Model description and evaluation," J. Geophys. Res., Atmos., vol. 106, no. D19, pp. 23073-23095, Oct. 2001.

Aerosol optical depths and their contributing sources in taiwan. K L Chan, K L Chan, Atmos. Environ. 148K. L. Chan and K. L. Chan, "Aerosol optical depths and their con- tributing sources in taiwan," Atmos. Environ., vol. 148, pp. 364-375, Jan. 2017.

Revisiting particle dry deposition and its role in radiative effect estimates. E W Emerson, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA117E. W. Emerson et al., "Revisiting particle dry deposition and its role in radiative effect estimates," Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 117, no. 42, pp. 26076-26082, Oct. 2020.

Ground-based FTIR observation of hydrogen chloride (HCl) over Hefei, China, and comparisons with GEOS-chem model data and other ground-based FTIR stations data. H Yin, Opt. Exp. 2868041H. Yin et al., "Ground-based FTIR observation of hydrogen chloride (HCl) over Hefei, China, and comparisons with GEOS-chem model data and other ground-based FTIR stations data," Opt. Exp., vol. 28, no. 6, p. 8041, 2020.

High levels of daytime molecular chlorine and nitryl chloride at a rural site on the north China plain. X Liu, Environ. Sci. Technol. 5117X. Liu et al., "High levels of daytime molecular chlorine and nitryl chloride at a rural site on the north China plain," Environ. Sci. Technol., vol. 51, no. 17, pp. 9588-9595, Sep. 2017.

Detection and attribution of wildfire pollution in the arctic and northern midlatitudes using a network of Fourier-transform infrared spectrometers and GEOS-chem. E Lutsch, Atmos. Chem. Phys. 2021E. Lutsch et al., "Detection and attribution of wildfire pollution in the arctic and northern midlatitudes using a network of Fourier-transform infrared spectrometers and GEOS-chem," Atmos. Chem. Phys., vol. 20, no. 21, pp. 12813-12851, Nov. 2020.

The HITRAN2012 molecular spectroscopic database. L S Rothman, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf. 130L. S. Rothman et al., "The HITRAN2012 molecular spectroscopic database," J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf., vol. 130, pp. 4-50, Nov. 2013.

The HITRAN2016 molecular spectroscopic database. I E Gordon, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf. 203I. E. Gordon et al., "The HITRAN2016 molecular spectroscopic database," J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf., vol. 203, pp. 3-69, Dec. 2017.

A calibration for the total carbon column observing network using HIPPO aircraft profiles. D Wunch, G C Toon, S C Wofsy, B B Stephens, P O Wennberg, Proc. AGU Fall Meeting Abstr. AGU Fall Meeting AbstrD. Wunch, G. C. Toon, S. C. Wofsy, B. B. Stephens, and P. O. Wennberg, "A calibration for the total carbon column observing network using HIPPO aircraft profiles," in Proc. AGU Fall Meeting Abstr., 2009, p. A44A-02.

The total carbon column observing network. D Wunch, Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. A, Math., Phys. Eng. Sci. 369D. Wunch et al., "The total carbon column observing network," Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. A, Math., Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 369, pp. 2087-2112, May 2011.

The ACOS CO 2 retrieval algorithm-Part 1: Description and validation against synthetic observations. C W O&apos;dell, Atmos. Meas. Tech. 51C. W. O'Dell et al., "The ACOS CO 2 retrieval algorithm-Part 1: Description and validation against synthetic observations," Atmos. Meas. Tech., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 99-121, 2012.

Improved retrievals of carbon dioxide from Orbiting Carbon Observatory-2 with the version 8 ACOS algorithm. C W O&apos;dell, Atmos. Meas. Techn. 1112C. W. O'Dell et al., "Improved retrievals of carbon dioxide from Orbiting Carbon Observatory-2 with the version 8 ACOS algorithm," Atmos. Meas. Techn., vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 6539-6576, Dec. 2018.

Improvement of the retrieval algorithm for GOSAT SWIR XCO 2 and XCH 4 and their validation using TCCON data. Y Yoshida, Atmos. Meas. Techn. 66Y. Yoshida et al., "Improvement of the retrieval algorithm for GOSAT SWIR XCO 2 and XCH 4 and their validation using TCCON data," Atmos. Meas. Techn., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1533-1547, 2013.

Differential Optical Absorption Spectroscopy. U Platt, J Stutz, WileyHoboken, NJ, USAU. Platt and J. Stutz, Differential Optical Absorption Spectroscopy. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2006, pp. 135-158.

Atmospheric NO3: 1. Measurement technique and the annual cycle at 40 • N. S Solomon, J. Geophys. Res. 94D8S. Solomon et al., "Atmospheric NO3: 1. Measurement technique and the annual cycle at 40 • N," J. Geophys. Res., vol. 94, no. D8, pp. 11041-11048, 1989.

Correction of the oxygen interference with UV spectroscopic (DOAS) measurements of monocyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in the atmosphere. R Volkamer, Atmos. Environ. 3221R. Volkamer, "Correction of the oxygen interference with UV spec- troscopic (DOAS) measurements of monocyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in the atmosphere," Atmos. Environ., vol. 32, no. 21, pp. 3731-3747, Nov. 1998.

A new DOAS parameterization for retrieval of trace gases with highly-structured absorption spectra. A N Maurellis, R Lang, W J Van Der Zande, Geophys. Res. Lett. 2724A. N. Maurellis, R. Lang, and W. J. van der Zande, "A new DOAS parameterization for retrieval of trace gases with highly-structured absorption spectra," Geophys. Res. Lett., vol. 27, no. 24, pp. 4069-4072, Dec. 2000.

Retrieval of CO, H 2 O, CH 4 , CO 2 , and N 2 O columns from SCIA-MACHY/Envisat by WFM-DOAS: Current status. M Buchwitz, R Beek, S Noél, H Bovensmann, J P Burrows, Proc. Envisat ERS Symp. Envisat ERS Symp572M. Buchwitz, R. de Beek, S. Noél, H. Bovensmann, and J. P. Burrows, "Retrieval of CO, H 2 O, CH 4 , CO 2 , and N 2 O columns from SCIA- MACHY/Envisat by WFM-DOAS: Current status," in Proc. Envisat ERS Symp., vol. 572, 2005, p. 132.1.

Inverse Methods for Atmospheric Sounding. C D Rodgers, World ScientificSingaporeC. D. Rodgers, Inverse Methods for Atmospheric Sounding. Singapore: World Scientific, 2000.

Dynamic processes governing lower-tropospheric HDO/H 2 O ratios as observed from space and ground. C Frankenberg, Science. 32559461374C. Frankenberg et al., "Dynamic processes governing lower-tropospheric HDO/H 2 O ratios as observed from space and ground," Science, vol. 325, no. 5946, p. 1374, 2009.

Airborne methane remote measurements reveal heavy-tail flux distribution in Four Corners region. C Frankenberg, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA113C. Frankenberg et al., "Airborne methane remote measurements reveal heavy-tail flux distribution in Four Corners region," Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 113, no. 35, pp. 9734-9739, Aug. 2016.

Validation of SCIAMACHY HDO/H 2 O measurements using the TCCON and NDACC-MUSICA networks. R A Scheepmaker, Atmos. Meas. Techn. 84R. A. Scheepmaker et al., "Validation of SCIAMACHY HDO/H 2 O measurements using the TCCON and NDACC-MUSICA networks," Atmos. Meas. Techn., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1799-1818, 2015.

Effect of AO/UV/RD exposure on spaceborne diffusers: A comparative experiment. M Zhao, Appl. Opt. 54319157M. Zhao et al., "Effect of AO/UV/RD exposure on spaceborne diffusers: A comparative experiment," Appl. Opt., vol. 54, no. 31, p. 9157, 2015.

In-flight performance of the ozone monitoring instrument. V M E Schenkeveld, Atmos. Meas. Techn. 105V. M. E. Schenkeveld et al., "In-flight performance of the ozone moni- toring instrument," Atmos. Meas. Techn., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 1957-1986, Jun. 2017.

Preflight evaluation of the performance of the chinese environmental trace gas monitoring instrument (EMI) by spectral analyses of nitrogen dioxide. C Zhang, IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 566C. Zhang et al., "Preflight evaluation of the performance of the chinese environmental trace gas monitoring instrument (EMI) by spectral analy- ses of nitrogen dioxide," IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 3323-3332, Jun. 2018.

An improved high-resolution solar reference spectrum for Earth's atmosphere measurements in the ultraviolet, visible, and near infrared. K Chance, R L Kurucz, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf. 1119K. Chance and R. L. Kurucz, "An improved high-resolution solar refer- ence spectrum for Earth's atmosphere measurements in the ultraviolet, visible, and near infrared," J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf., vol. 111, no. 9, pp. 1289-1295, Jun. 2010.

First observation of tropospheric nitrogen dioxide from the environmental trace gases monitoring instrument onboard the GaoFen-5 satellite. C Zhang, Light, Sci. Appl. 91C. Zhang et al., "First observation of tropospheric nitrogen dioxide from the environmental trace gases monitoring instrument onboard the GaoFen-5 satellite," Light, Sci. Appl., vol. 9, no. 1, Dec. 2020.

Ozone profile retrievals from the ozone monitoring instrument. X Liu, P K Bhartia, K Chance, R J D Spurr, T P Kurosu, Atmos. Chem. Phys. 105X. Liu, P. K. Bhartia, K. Chance, R. J. D. Spurr, and T. P. Kurosu, "Ozone profile retrievals from the ozone monitoring instrument," Atmos. Chem. Phys., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 2521-2537, Mar. 2010.

Characterization and correction of OMPS nadir mapper measurements for ozone profile retrievals. J Bak, Atmos. Meas. Techn. 1011J. Bak et al., "Characterization and correction of OMPS nadir mapper measurements for ozone profile retrievals," Atmos. Meas. Techn., vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 4373-4388, Nov. 2017.

Revised optical air mass tables and approximation formula. F Kasten, A T Young, Appl. Opt. 2822F. Kasten and A. T. Young, "Revised optical air mass tables and approximation formula," Appl. Opt., vol. 28, no. 22, pp. 4735-4738, 1989.

The MODTRAN 2/3 report and LOWTRAN 7 model. F X Kniezys, L. W. Abreu and G. P. AndersonPhillips Lab., Geophys. Directorate, PL/GPOSHanscom AFB, MA, USAF. X. Kniezys et al., "The MODTRAN 2/3 report and LOWTRAN 7 model," L. W. Abreu and G. P. Anderson, Eds., Phillips Lab., Geophys. Directorate, PL/GPOS, Hanscom AFB, MA, USA, Nov. 1996. [Online].

FTS measurements of the solar spectrum. G Toon, 10.1364/FTS.2013.FTh1C.3Jet Propuls. Lab., California Inst. Technol. Tech. Rep. FTh1C.3G. Toon, "FTS measurements of the solar spectrum," Jet Propuls. Lab., California Inst. Technol., Pasadena, CA, USA, Tech. Rep. FTh1C.3, 2013. [Online]. Available: https://www.osapublishing. org/abstract.cfm?URI=FTS-2013-FTh1C.3, doi: 10.1364/FTS.2013. FTh1C.3.

Spaceborne estimate of atmospheric CO 2 column by use of the differential absorption method: Error analysis. E Dufour, F.-M Bréon, Appl. Opt. 4218E. Dufour and F.-M. Bréon, "Spaceborne estimate of atmospheric CO 2 column by use of the differential absorption method: Error analysis," Appl. Opt., vol. 42, no. 18, pp. 3595-3609, 2003.

Sensitivity studies for space-based measurement of atmospheric total column carbon dioxide by reflected sunlight. J Mao, S R Kawa, Appl. Opt. 434J. Mao and S. R. Kawa, "Sensitivity studies for space-based measure- ment of atmospheric total column carbon dioxide by reflected sunlight," Appl. Opt., vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 914-927, 2004.

Validation of TANSO-FTS/GOSAT XCO 2 and XCH 4 glint mode retrievals using TCCON data from near-ocean sites. M Zhou, Atmos. Meas. Tech. 93M. Zhou et al., "Validation of TANSO-FTS/GOSAT XCO 2 and XCH 4 glint mode retrievals using TCCON data from near-ocean sites," Atmos. Meas. Tech., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1415-1430, 2016.

Carbon dioxide retrieval from OCO-2 satellite observations using the RemoTeC algorithm and validation with TCCON measurements. L Wu, Atmos. Meas. Techn. 115L. Wu et al., "Carbon dioxide retrieval from OCO-2 satellite obser- vations using the RemoTeC algorithm and validation with TCCON measurements," Atmos. Meas. Techn., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 3111-3130, May 2018.

Validation of columnaveraged dry-air mole fraction of CO 2 retrieved from OCO-2 using ground-based FTS measurements. Y Bi, Q Wang, Z Yang, J Chen, W Bai, J. Meteorological Res. 323Y. Bi, Q. Wang, Z. Yang, J. Chen, and W. Bai, "Validation of column- averaged dry-air mole fraction of CO 2 retrieved from OCO-2 using ground-based FTS measurements," J. Meteorological Res., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 433-443, Jun. 2018.

TCCON Data From Anmeyondo (KR), Release GGG2014.R0. T.-Y Goo, Y.-S Oh, V A Velazco, T.-Y. Goo, Y.-S. Oh, and V. A. Velazco. (2014). TCCON Data From Anmeyondo (KR), Release GGG2014.R0. [Online]. Available: https://data.caltech.edu/records/266

TCCON Data From Lamont (US), Release GGG2014.R1. P O Wennberg, D Wunch, C M Roehl, J.-F Blavier, G C Toon, N T Allen, P. O. Wennberg, D. Wunch, C. M. Roehl, J.-F. Blavier, G. C. Toon, and N. T. Allen. (2016). TCCON Data From Lamont (US), Release GGG2014.R1. [Online]. Available: https://data.caltech.edu/records/279

TCCON Data From Bremen (DE), Release GGG2014.R0. J Notholt, J. Notholt et al. (2014). TCCON Data From Bremen (DE), Release GGG2014.R0. [Online]. Available: https://data.caltech.edu/records/268

T Blumenstock, F Hase, M Schneider, O E García, E Sepúlveda, TCCON Data From Izana (ES). Release GGG2014.R1. [OnlineT. Blumenstock, F. Hase, M. Schneider, O. E. García, and E. Sepúlveda. (2017). TCCON Data From Izana (ES), Release GGG2014.R1. [Online].

TCCON Data From Karlsruhe (DE), Release GGG2014.R1. F Hase, T Blumenstock, S Dohe, J Groß, M Kiel, F. Hase, T. Blumenstock, S. Dohe, J. Groß, and M. Kiel. (2015). TCCON Data From Karlsruhe (DE), Release GGG2014.R1. [Online]. Available: https://data.caltech.edu/records/278

TCCON Data From Lauder (NZ), 125HR, Release GGG2014.R0. V Sherlock, B Connor, J Robinson, H Shiona, D Smale, D F Pollard, V. Sherlock, B. Connor, J. Robinson, H. Shiona, D. Smale, and D. F. Pollard. (2014). TCCON Data From Lauder (NZ), 125HR, Release GGG2014.R0. [Online]. Available: https://data.caltech.edu/records/281.

TCCON Data From Orléans (FR), Release GGG2014.R1. T Warneke, T. Warneke et al. (2019). TCCON Data From Orléans (FR), Release GGG2014.R1. [Online]. Available: https://data.caltech.edu/records/1301.

TCCON Data From Park Falls (US), Release GGG2014.R1. P O Wennberg, P. O. Wennberg et al. (2017). TCCON Data From Park Falls (US), Release GGG2014.R1. [Online].

I Morino, N Yokozeki, T Matsuzaki, M Horikawa, TCCON Data From Rikubetsu (JP). Release GGG2014.R1. [OnlineI. Morino, N. Yokozeki, T. Matsuzaki, and M. Horikawa. (2016). TCCON Data From Rikubetsu (JP), Release GGG2014.R1. [Online].

TCCON Data From Darwin (AU), Release GGG2014.R0. D W T Griffith, D. W. T. Griffith et al. (2014). TCCON Data From Darwin (AU), Release GGG2014.R0. [Online]. Available: https://data.caltech.edu/records/269

Decrease in winter respiration explains 25% of the annual northern forest carbon sink enhancement over the last 30 years. Z Yu, Global Ecol. Biogeography. 255Z. Yu et al., "Decrease in winter respiration explains 25% of the annual northern forest carbon sink enhancement over the last 30 years," Global Ecol. Biogeography, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 586-595, 2016.

Contrasting effects of CO 2 fertilization, landuse change and warming on seasonal amplitude of Northern Hemisphere CO 2 exchange. A Bastos, Atmospheric Chem. Phys. 1919A. Bastos et al., "Contrasting effects of CO 2 fertilization, land- use change and warming on seasonal amplitude of Northern Hemi- sphere CO 2 exchange," Atmospheric Chem. Phys., vol. 19, no. 19, pp. 12361-12375, 2019.

TCCON data from jet propulsion laboratory (US), Release GGG2014.R1. P O Wennberg, P. O. Wennberg et al. (2016). TCCON data from jet propul- sion laboratory (US), Release GGG2014.R1. [Online]. Available: https://data.caltech.edu/records/277

TCCON data from Zugspitze (DE), Release GGG2014.R1. R Sussmann, M Rettinger, R. Sussmann and M. Rettinger. (2018). TCCON data from Zugspitze (DE), Release GGG2014.R1. [Online]. Available: https://data.caltech.edu/records/923