Evaluation of Open Source Web Application Vulnerability Scanners
AJNUCopyright AJNU

Hilmi S Abdullah 
IT Department
Amedi Technical Institute
Duhok Polytechnic University
Kurdistan Region -Iraq

Evaluation of Open Source Web Application Vulnerability Scanners

Academic Journal of Nawroz University
AJNU10.25007/ajnu.v9n1a53247Web Application SecurityOpen Web Application Security Project (OWASP)Vulnerability ScannerPenetration Testing
Nowadays, web applications are essential part of our lives. Web applications are used by people for information gathering, communication, e-commerce and variety of other activities. Since they contain valuable and sensitive information, the attacks against them have increased in order to find vulnerabilities and steal information. For this reason, it is essential to check web application vulnerabilities to ensure that it is secure. However, checking the vulnerabilities manually is a tedious and time-consuming job. Therefore, there is an exigent need for web application vulnerability scanners. In this study, we evaluate two open source web application vulnerability scanners Paros and OWASP Zed Attack Proxy (OWASP ZAP) by testing them against two vulnerable web applications buggy web application (bWAPP) and Damn Vulnerable Web Application (DVWA).

the main stages of penetration testing.


Fig. 1. Main stages of penetration testing


EXPERIMENT ENVIRONMENT

To perform the experiment we used the operating system Kali Linux, web application vulnerability scanners and vulnerable web applications. 


Vulnerable Web Applications


Operating System

To perform the test, Kali Linux is used as a virtual  which is open source and cross-platform. Paros

Version 3.2.13 is used for this experiment [14,15].    OWASP ZAP was able to detect the following critical vulnerabilities:

• SQL Injection

• Cross Site Scripting (Reflected)

• Cross Site Scripting (Persistent)

• Remote OS Command Injection


• Path Traversal

• External Redirect


• Remote File Inclusion

On the other side, Paros was able to detect the following critical vulnerabilities only:

• SQL Injection


• SQL Injection Fingerprinting

Overall, the performance of OWASP ZAP was better than Paros as can be seen in Fig. 3 


recent years, web application hacking has increased dramatically. This is because the importance of the web applications in our daily lives. Ensuring the security of web applications and finding their vulnerabilities is crucial as the majority of information and services on the internet are provided through web applications, such as e-commerce, social networking and egovernance [1, 2]. There are several vulnerabilities which can result in data breach and shutdown of the web applications. Open Web Application Security three components; first, the web crawler for gathering website data; second, the attacker component which sends random and invalid input to the web application; and the last component is the analyzer which analyzes the returned data, detects the vulnerabilities and generates the report.


machine in Oracle VirtualBox. Kali Linux is an open source operating system based on Debian which is used for penetration testing and digital forensics. For this experiment version 3.28.0 is used. It contains several built-in penetration tools such as OWASP ZAP, Paros, etc. [10, 11].

Fig. 2 .
2Kali Linux 3.3 Open Source Web Application Vulnerability Scanners There are various open source tools used for web application penetration testing. For this experiment OWASP ZAP and Paros are used, both are built-in Kali Linux as shown in Fig. 2. • OWASP ZAP: Is an open source web application penetration testing tool. It is used by web developers and security professionals to scan and find the vulnerabilities of web applications. For this experiment version 2.7.0 is used [12, 13]. • Paros: Is a web application vulnerability scanner doi : 10.25007/ajnu.v9n1a532 50Academic Journal of Nawroz University (AJNU)


are several high risk (critical) vulnerabilities detected in the tested web applications by both scanners. The majority of these vulnerabilities were Injection and Cross Site Scripting (XSS) which are in the OWASP top 10 list for 2017.


There are various available scanners both commercial and free [4, 5]. In this study we test and evaluate two open source web application finding the reachable pages of the scanned web application as well as identifying its entry points such as HTML forms input and the parameters of GET or POST, etc.Secondly, the attacker component is responsible for analyzing the data obtained by the crawler, then generates values for each vulnerability type and sends form data to the web server to obtain the response. analyzes the response from the web server. Then it determines if a specific attack was successful. Next, it generates the report of the scan [7, 8].Fig. 1 [8]showsvulnerability 
scanners 
OWASP 
Zed 
Attack 

Proxy(OWSAP ZAP) and Paros. 

Section II provides the basic concepts of web 

application vulnerabilities according to OWASP top 10 

list as well as penetration testing methods in addition to 

an overview of how web application vulnerability 

scanners work. Section III explains the experiment 

environment including tested scanners and web 

applications in addition to the methodology. Section IV 

doi : 10.25007/ajnu.v9n1a532 

48 
Academic Journal of Nawroz University (AJNU) 

presents the results, analysis and assessment of the 

tested scanners. Finally, we provide the conclusion in 

section V. 

2. Background 

2.1 Web Application Vulnerabilities 

There are variety of vulnerabilities that threatens web 

applications. OWASP lists the top 10 application 

security risks, following is the list for 2017 [3]. 

• Injection: Injection happens when untrusted data is 

included in a query or a command to trick the 

interpreter and get unauthorized access to data [3]. 

• Broken Authentication: Attackers might steal 

identities of other users and compromise 

passwords when authentication and session 

management isn't perfect [3]. 

• Sensitive Data Exposure: Attackers might get access 

to sensitive data such as financial data if they are 

not fully protected [3]. 

• XML External Entities (XXE): These attacks will 

result in denial of service or revealing confidential 

data by uploading malicious XML files which are 

parsed by poorly configured XML parsers [3]. 

• Broken Access Control: This vulnerability occurs 

when authenticated users' permissions are not 

restricted properly, which enables the attackers to 

access sensitive data and change other users' data 

and permissions [3]. 

• Security Misconfiguration: This security breach 

happens when the default configurations are 

insecure. Continuous upgrade of servers, 

frameworks and applications is necessary [3]. 

• Cross-Site Scripting (XSS): The XSS vulnerability 

enables the attackers to inject and run scripts on the 

victim's browser [3]. 

• Insecure Deserialization: This vulnerability occurs 

when the web application doesn't secure the 

deserialization process properly which can be used 

to perform injection and other attacks [3]. 

• Using Components with Known Vulnerabilities: Using 

vulnerable components such as frameworks and 

libraries might enable different attacks that lead to 

data loss or server takeover [3]. 

• Insufficient Logging and Monitoring: Logging of the 

events and persistent monitoring to discover any 

suspicious events is necessary [3]. 

2.2 Testing Methods 

Penetration testing of the web applications is necessary 

prior to their launching and during their operation. The 

test can be performed either automatically or manually 

[6]. 

• Automated Testing: Is a technique of using software 

tools to scan web application pages to discover 

vulnerabilities and generate reports at the end of 

the test. There are several tools used for automated 

testing such as OWASP ZAP, Burp Suite, Paros, 

W3af, etc. [5] 

• Manual Testing: Sometimes automated testing is not 

enough to assess the vulnerabilities of the web 

application and there is a need for human 

intervention to perform the attacks as in social 

engineering. [5] 

2.3 Web Application Vulnerability Scanners 

Generally, web application vulnerability scanners 

contain crawler, attacker and analyzer components [7]. 

Firstly, the crawler component is responsible for 

Finally, the analyzer component interprets and 

doi : 10.25007/ajnu.v9n1a532 

Academic Journal of Nawroz University (AJNU) 
49 




There are several available vulnerable web applications developed intentionally for the purpose of learning and testing. For this experiment, the following two vulnerable web applications have been selected which are available online and can be downloaded for free.• DVWA: Damn Vulnerable Web Application 

(DVWA) is a web application used by security 

professionals and web developers for testing and 

teaching purposes. It is GNU General Public 

License version 3; version 1.10 is used for this 

experiment. DVWA is PHP/MySQL web 

application and contains many vulnerabilities. It 

has four different security levels; the lowest level 

has been selected for this experiment [4]. 

• bWAPP: buggy Web Application (bWAPP) is a free 

and open source vulnerable web application 

designed for testing and teaching purposes. It is 

written in PHP and uses MySQL database; version 

2.2 is used for this experiment. It has three different 

security levels low, medium and high. For this 

experiment, the lowest one is used [9]. 



Table I
Ilists the general characteristics of the tested open source scanners.

Table 1 :
1General characteristics of the tested scannersWe ran an automated scan for both scanners OWASP ZAP and Paros against the vulnerable web applications DVWA and bWAPP which were installed on the localOWASP ZAP 
Paros 

License 
ASF2 
GPL 

Version 
2.7.0 
3.2.13 

Scanning 

Method 
Automated 
Automated 

Status 
Up to date 
Outdated 

Operating 

System 
Cross-Platform Cross-Platform 

3.4 Methodology 

host. For both scanners the default configuration were 

selected. Later on, when the scanning process finished, a 

report was generated about the detected vulnerabilities 

in the tested vulnerable web applications. 

4. Result and discussion 

To evaluate OWASP ZAP and Paros, we compared the 

number and types of the detected vulnerabilities by 

each scanner. In addition, their features and ease of use 

is assessed. 

At the end of the scanning process we analyzed the 

reports generated by the tested scanners against the 

tested vulnerable web applications. Both scanners 

categorize the vulnerabilities per risk levels high, 

medium and low. Table II presents the summary of the 

detected vulnerabilities in the tested vulnerable web 

applications. 



Table 2 :
2Detected vulnerabilities summary


Assessment of vulnerabilities of web applications of Bangladesh: A case study of XSS &amp; CSRF. Sixth International Conference on Digital Information and Communication Technology and its Applications (DICTAP), Konya, 2016, (pp. 74-78). 3. OWASP. (2018).The Open Web Application Security Project. Retrieved from https://www.owasp.org/ 4. Makino Y. & Klyuev V. (2015). Evaluation of web vulnerability scanners. Intelligent Data Acquisition and Assessment and Penetration Testing of Web Application. Communication, Control and Automation (ICCUBEA), Pune, 2017, (pp. 1-6). 6. Srinivasan S. & Sangwan R. (2017). Web App Security: A Comparison and Categorization of Testing Frameworks. IEEE Software, vol. 34, no. 1, IEEE, 2017, (pp. 99-102). 7. Suteva N., Zlatkovski D. & Mileva A. (2013). Evaluation and testing of several free/open source web vulnerability scanners, 10th Conference for Informatics and Information Technology, Bitola, Macedonia, 2013. 8. Jiménez R. (2016). Pentesting on web applications using ethical -hacking. IEEE 36th Central American and Panama Convention (CONCAPAN XXXVI), San Jose, 2016, (pp. 1-6). 9. BWAPP. (2018). A buggy Web Application. Retrieved from http://itsecgames.com/ 10. Gaddam R. & Nandhini M. (2017). An analysis of various snort based techniques to detect and prevent intrusions in networks proposal with code refactoring snort tool in Kali Linux environment. International Conference on Technologies (ICICCT), Coimbatore, 2017 (pp. 10-15). 11. Denis M., Zena C. & Hayajneh T. (2016). Penetration testing: Concepts, attack methods, and defense strategies. IEEE Long Island Systems, Applications and Technology Conference (LISAT), Farmingdale, NY, 2016 (pp. 1-6).which makes a 

comparison between the tested scanners based on the 

number of detected vulnerabilities. 

doi : 10.25007/ajnu.v9n1a532 

Academic Journal of Nawroz University (AJNU) 
51 

Fig. 3. Comparison of the detected vulnerabilities 

Finally, considering the features of both scanners for 

the assessment, OWASP ZAP has more features 

compared to Paros as well as it is more user-friendly 

and it is regularly updated unlike Paros which is 

outdated. Furthermore, OWASP ZAP detected various 

types of critical vulnerabilities while Paros was able to 

detect only SQL injection. 

5. CONCLUSION 

Web applications are used by people on everyday life 

for various services like e-governance, shopping and 

communication. However, the importance of web 

applications attracts the attackers for different 

purposes. Therefore, there is an increasing need to 

secure these web applications by penetration testing 

using vulnerability scanners. In this study we tested 

two open source scanners and compared their 

performance and features. Obviously, OWASP ZAP 

performed better, as it detected more vulnerabilities 

than Paros with a more diverse range of vulnerabilities. 

In addition, OWASP ZAP has more features and is 

regularly updated which makes it superior to Paros. 

6. References 

1. Al-Khurafi, O. & Al-Ahmad. M. (2015). Survey of Web 

Application Vulnerability Attacks. 4th International 

Conference on Advanced Computer Science Applications 

and Technologies (ACSAT), Kuala Lumpur, 2015 (pp. 

154-158). 

2. Farah T., Shojol M., Hassan M. & Alam D. (2016). 

Advanced 
Computing 
Systems:Technology 
and 

Applications 
(IDAACS), 
IEEE 
8th 

InternationalConference vol. 1. IEEE, 2015, (pp. 399-402). 

5. Nagpure S. & Kurkure S. (2017). Vulnerability 

International 
Conference 
on 
Computing, 

Inventive 
Communication 
and 
Computational 



A case study on web application vulnerability scanning tools. N Daud, K Bakar, M Hasan, Science and Information Conference. Daud N.,Bakar K. & Hasan M. (2014) .A case study on web application vulnerability scanning tools. Science and Information Conference, London, 2014 (pp. 595-600).

Zed Attack Proxy Project -OWASP. Owasp Zap, OWASP ZAP. (2018). Zed Attack Proxy Project -OWASP. Retrieved from https://www.owasp.org/index.php/OWASP_Zed_Atta

The Basics of Hacking and Penetration Testing. P Engebretson, SyngressWaltham, MAEngebretson P. (2013). The Basics of Hacking and Penetration Testing. Waltham, MA: Syngress.

Ensemble based approach to increase vulnerability assessment and penetration testing accuracy. J Goel, M Asghar, V Kumar, S Pandey, Goel J., Asghar M., Kumar V. & Pandey S. (2016). Ensemble based approach to increase vulnerability assessment and penetration testing accuracy.

Cyber Security (ICICCS-INBUSH). NoidaInternational Conference on Innovation and Challenges in Cyber Security (ICICCS-INBUSH), Noida, 2016 (pp. 330-335).