Transcription fidelity and control of alternative splicing contribute to heat stress survival in Arabidopsis
28 October 2025

Henrik Mihály Szaker 
Genetics and Biotechnology Institute
Department of Plant Biotechnology
Hungarian University of Agriculture and Life Sciences
2100GödöllőHungary

HUN-REN Biological Research Centre
Institute of Plant Biology
6726SzegedHungary

Radhika Verma 0000-0002-3801-4489
Genetics and Biotechnology Institute
Department of Plant Biotechnology
Hungarian University of Agriculture and Life Sciences
2100GödöllőHungary

István Szádeczky-Kardoss 
Genetics and Biotechnology Institute
Department of Plant Biotechnology
Hungarian University of Agriculture and Life Sciences
2100GödöllőHungary

Nóra Gál 
Genetics and Biotechnology Institute
Department of Plant Biotechnology
Hungarian University of Agriculture and Life Sciences
2100GödöllőHungary

Syed Hussam Abbas 
Genetics and Biotechnology Institute
Department of Plant Biotechnology
Hungarian University of Agriculture and Life Sciences
2100GödöllőHungary

Éva Darkó 
HUN-REN
Phytotron Department
Center for Agricultural Research
Agricultural Institute
2462MartonvásárHungary

Aladár Pettkó-Szandtner 
Core Facility
Proteomics Research Group
HUN-REN Biological Research Centre
6726SzegedHungary

Dániel Silhavy 
HUN-REN Biological Research Centre
Institute of Plant Biology
6726SzegedHungary

Tibor Csorba csorba.tibor.levente@uni-mate.hu 0000-0003-4185-1496
Genetics and Biotechnology Institute
Department of Plant Biotechnology
Hungarian University of Agriculture and Life Sciences
2100GödöllőHungary

Transcription fidelity and control of alternative splicing contribute to heat stress survival in Arabidopsis
28 October 2025EB4743C26018EFE46F2A7980DB33416410.1093/plcell/koaf256Received January 29, 2025. Accepted September 19, 2025.
Transcriptional quality control is essential to maintain the integrity of genetic information.Although well characterized in yeast and metazoans, the regulation of transcriptional fidelity in plants remains elusive.We explored transcriptional fidelity and alternative splicing control in Arabidopsis thaliana using genetic, molecular biology, and deep sequencing tools.Using circle-sequencing assays, we analyzed the error landscape of the transcriptome at single-nucleotide depth under ambient and heat-stress conditions in wild-type and different quality control mutant plants.We found that the frequency of nucleotide misincorporations and insertions is significantly elevated under heat stress, and that nucleotide imbalance also leads to error-prone transcription.We demonstrate that the RNA polymerase II-associated elongation cofactor TFIIS is a fidelity factor for both transcription and alternative splicing, as its absence reduces the accuracy of both processes.Moreover, we found that the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) cytoplasmic surveillance system is also required for heat-stress tolerance: NMD degrades transcripts containing premature termination codons, generated by 1 to 2 nucleotide indels of erroneous transcription and by alternative splicing during heat stress.In conclusion, the interplay between these RNA surveillance systems safeguards the correct genetic information flow and is critical for developmental regulation and heat-stress adaptation in plants.

Introduction

RNA transcription is an essential mechanism of the cell.In eukaryotes there are 3 main nuclear DNA-dependent RNA polymerases (RNAPI, RNAPII, and RNAPIII) (Sydow and Cramer 2009;Osman and Cramer 2020); plants encode 2 additional RNA polymerases not strictly required for survival, the RNAPIV and RNAPV (Onodera et al. 2005;Chen et al. 2018).Among these, the RNAPII is responsible for the production of protein-coding transcripts.The core of RNAPII consists of highly conserved structural elements (Sydow and Cramer 2009;Osman and Cramer 2020).During the transcriptional elongation process, the incorporation of correct ribonucleotides promotes forward translocation of the transcriptional complex (Nedialkov et al. 2003;Bar-Nahum et al. 2005;Sydow and Cramer 2009), while transcriptional errors cause rearrangements of the active core leading to arrests and backtrackings (Kettenberger et al. 2003;Nedialkov et al. 2003;Sydow and Cramer 2009).The active core of RNAPII possesses an intrinsic 3′-5′ exonuclease activity, which can cleave off the incorrectly incorporated (di)nucleotide(s) upon arrests/backtrackings (Kettenberger et al. 2003;Sydow and Cramer 2009).The nuclease activity of RNAPII is potentiated by the elongation cofactor TFIIS (Kettenberger et al. 2003;Ruan et al. 2011).The C-terminal zinc-finger domain of TFIIS complements the RNAPII active site and accelerates the excision of mis-incorporated nucleotides (Jeon and Agarwal 1996;Kettenberger et al. 2003).Diverse conditions may alter the error rates of RNAPII.Mutagens or aging can cause error-prone transcription in yeast and animals (Saxowsky et al. 2008;Chung, Verheijen, Navapanich, et al. 2023).The presence of TFIIS markedly boosts RNAPII fidelity under oxidative stress or nucleotide depletion (Grasser et al. 2009;Koyama et al. 2010).Recent studies in plants have shown that TFIIS is required for both efficient transcription and proper alternative splicing (AS), but the molecular basis of its actions, particularly its contributions to transcriptional fidelity remained unexplored (Grasser et al. 2009;Al Khateeb et al. 2019;Antosz and Deforges 2020;Obermeyer et al. 2022;Szadeczky-Kardoss et al. 2022;Ahmad et al. 2024).

Despite the existence of co-transcriptional proofreading and other nuclear quality control mechanisms, some faulty transcripts remain undetected in the nucleus and are exported to the cytoplasm.These inaccurate mRNAs can be identified and eliminated by diverse cytoplasmic quality control systems.Nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) is a translation-terminationcoupled eukaryotic mRNA quality control pathway that recognizes and destabilizes premature termination codon (PTC)-containing aberrant mRNAs (Kurosaki et al. 2019;Luha et al. 2024).NMD identifies PTC-containing mRNAs by the presence of NMD-eliciting cis elements including upstream open reading frames (uORF) or unusually long and/or intron-containing 3′ UTRs (Arciga-Reyes et al. 2006;Kertesz et al. 2006;Kerenyi et al. 2008;Kalyna et al. 2012;Kurosaki et al. 2019).NMD is indispensable in higher eukaryotes (Kurosaki et al. 2019;Luha et al. 2024).In Arabidopsis thaliana, mutations of NMD factors (including UP FRAMESHIFT1 (UPF1), UPF3, SUPPRESSOR OF MORPHOGENESIS IN GENITALIA7 (SMG7)) cause a range of developmental abnormalities, even seedling lethality (Arciga-Reyes et al. 2006;Riehs-Kearnan et al. 2012).In plants, NMD efficiency is controlled by different regulatory circuits, including an autoregulation by UPF3 and SMG7 or by the translation termination factor eRF1-1 (Kerenyi et al. 2008;Gloggnitzer et al. 2014;Degtiar et al. 2015;Nyiko et al. 2017).

Frameshifts caused by insertions, deletions, or nonsense (STOP-codon generating) substitutions in the ORF can lead to the formation of PTC, thus 1 to 2 nucleotide transcription errors can induce NMD.Alternative splicing can also generate transcripts possessing NMD-eliciting features (Lewis et al. 2003;Kalyna et al. 2012;Drechsel et al. 2013;Tabrez et al. 2017;Fair et al. 2024).By destabilizing these aberrant transcripts, NMD prevents the production of potentially detrimental truncated proteins (Gout et al. 2017;Fritsch et al. 2018;Chung, Verheijen, Navapanich, et al. 2023;Chung, Verheijen, Zhang, et al. 2023).The role of plant NMD during abiotic stress conditions is understudied (Kurosaki et al. 2019;Luha et al. 2024).It was suggested that NMD regulates cytoplasmic protein response (Sugio et al. 2009), light signaling (Shi et al. 2012) or salt stress response (Drechsel et al. 2013;Vexler et al. 2016).Whether NMD has roles during heat stress (HS) adaptation has not been considered yet.

Heat is a major abiotic stressor that impacts growth, viability, and reproductive fitness of most organisms (Liu and Charng 2013;Ohama et al. 2017;Charng et al. 2023;Bakery et al. 2024).Elevated temperature damages cellular structures, impairs enzymatic pathways, and leads to proteotoxic stress through protein misfolding and aggregation.To relieve or revert the negative impacts of HS, several heat stress transcription factors (HSF) are activated.These subsequently drive the expression of secondary transcription factors, heat shock proteins (HSP), and other participants.These components assemble into a coordinated network to ensure proteostasis (Liu and Charng 2013;Ohama et al. 2017;Charng et al. 2023;Bakery et al. 2024).Different classes of ATP-dependent chaperones, including HSP70 and HSP90 are expressed in the early phase of HS and are involved in refolding of denatured proteins.Upon prolonged heat, the low molecular weight ATP-independent small HSP holdases (sHSP, 16 to 42 kDa) are produced; these bind to the unfolded proteins and keep them in a ready-to-refold soluble state, preventing their aggregation (McLoughlin et al. 2016;McLoughlin et al. 2019;Waters and Vierling 2020).Protein aggregates are disassembled by the interplay between disaggregase HSP101, the HSP70 chaperones, and different classes of sHSPs (McLoughlin et al. 2016;McLoughlin et al. 2019;Waters and Vierling 2020).Transcriptional mistakes and inaccurate splicing may lead to the generation of aberrant proteins on a global scale, enhancing the demand for HSP activities to preserve cellular protein homeostasis (Vermulst et al. 2015;Chung, Verheijen, Zhang, et al. 2023;Xie et al. 2024).

The biological relevance of transcriptional proofreading and transcriptome quality control during high-temperature adaptation has not been explored in plants.In this work, we use TFIIS and NMD mutant A. thaliana lines to gather evidence supporting the notion that TFIIS-and NMD-mediated cooperative safeguarding of transcriptional fidelity and correct AS are essential for proper development and HS adaptation in plants.Findings of the study establish transcriptome quality control mechanisms as pillars of HS adaptation and raise its relevance in agriculture and adaptation to climate change.


Results

To get an insight into transcription fidelity changes during HS, we performed a preliminary error rate survey on our previous RNAseq, in which we analyzed the transcriptomes of wild-type (A.thaliana Columbia-0 ecotype, Col-0) and tfIIs-1 T-DNA insertion mutant plants grown under normal and HS conditions (Szadeczky-Kardoss et al. 2022) (Supplementary Fig. S1).Although in Col-0 the total error and the substitution rates were not changed (Supplementary Fig. S1, A and B), we observed increased insertion rate change during HS exposure (thermotolerance to moderately high temperatures regime, 1 day exposure to 37 °C, TMHT/1d; see Materials and Methods) that was further elevated in the tfIIs-1 mutant (Supplementary Fig. S1C).Moreover, an increasing trend in deletions at TMHT/1d was also observed (Supplementary Fig. S1D).Most of the indels were of 1 to 2 nucleotide lengths (Supplementary Fig. S1, E and F), potentially leading to the production of PTC-containing aberrant transcripts.Even though error rate estimation by this approach is poor (Fritsch et al. 2018), these observations raise the following assumptions: (i) safeguarding transcriptional fidelity is needed, (ii) TFIIS regulates fidelity in plants, and (iii) the 1 to 2 nt indel containing transcripts may be posttranscriptionally regulated by NMD.


CirSeq unravels the transcriptional error landscape in A. thaliana

To decipher the landscape of mRNA transcriptome errors in Arabidopsis at single nucleotide resolution, we performed circlesequencing (CirSeq) assay, a method developed to detect bona fide RNA errors.CirSeq is the most reliable method for transcriptional error estimation that was used to determine transcriptional error rates in several organisms, including yeast, worm, fly, mouse, or human cells, but not plants (Acevedo et al. 2014;Vermulst et al. 2015;Fritsch et al. 2018;Chung, Verheijen, Navapanich, et al. 2023;Chung, Verheijen, Zhang, et al. 2023).

To examine the role of potential trans factors and their interactions in fidelity regulation, we comparatively analyzed tfIIs-1 (Grasser et al. 2009), upf1-5, upf3-1 single mutants (Arciga-Reyes et al. 2006) and the obtained tfIIs-1;upf1 and tfIIs; upf3 double mutant lines (see Materials and Methods).upf1-5 is a hypomorphic NMD mutant, containing a T-DNA SALK insertion within the 3′UTR region of the gene, upf3-1 is a strong NMD mutant with a T-DNA SALK insertion in exon 5 (we refer to upf1-5 and upf3-1 single mutants commonly as nmd mutants throughout the study).

TFIIS binds to RNAPII complex but not to other polymerases (Ruan et al. 2011;Antosz et al. 2017;Szadeczky-Kardoss et al. 2022;Fang et al. 2024).To specifically examine RNAPII transcripts, we performed CirSeq on total RNA following poly-A purification (Supplementary Fig. S2).

By CirSeq, we have detected a total of 29,952 errors of RNAPII transcripts (Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig. S3).The total error rate in Col-0 at non-treated (NT) conditions was 9.5 × 10 −6 (±8.3 × 10 −7 ) and it did not change at TMHT/1d (Fig. 1A; for error rates exact values, see Supplementary Table S1).By contrast, the error rate was increased by 2.5-fold in tfIIs-1 at NT and was further elevated by 5.1-fold at TMHT/1d.These observations indicate that TFIIS acts as a fidelity factor under both NT and TMHT/1d conditions and that HS negatively affects fidelity.We also determined the error rates of transcription in the nmd single and the tfIIs;nmd double mutants: the total error rates were not impacted by the NMD-deficiency (Fig. 1A, Supplementary Fig. S3A).

To unpick the spectrum of errors, we divided the errors into groups, such as substitutions, insertions, and deletions.In correlation with metazoan data (Gout et al. 2017;Fritsch et al. 2018), the overwhelming number of mistakes were substitutions (∼85.3% to 92.2% of total, Supplementary Fig. S2B).Thus, the substitution rate changed similarly to the total error rate: it was significantly increased in the tfIIs-1 mutant (Fig. 1B, Supplementary Fig. S3B) and was further elevated by TMHT/1d (relative to Col-0 and NT), but not affected by the NMD.These data indicate that TFIIS is the primary factor controlling substitution and consequently total error rates.

The rate of insertions was increased in all tfIIs-1 background lines but not in nmd single mutants (versus [vs] Col-0) and was further enhanced by high temperature treatment (TMHT/1d) (Fig. 1C, Supplementary Fig. S3C).Relevantly, the insertion rate increased synergistically in the tfIIs;upf3 double mutant vs tfIIs-1 at TMHT/ 1d (Fig. 1C).In tfIIs;upf1 (vs tfIIs-1), we observed a milder but similar trend (Supplementary Fig. S3C).These findings suggest that TFIIS and NMD pathways act through different mechanisms to prevent accumulation of insertion-containing transcripts.No difference was found in the deletion rate between genotypes or treatments (Fig. 1D, Supplementary Fig. S3D).

Next, we assorted the substitutions into exchange types (Fig. 1E, Supplementary Fig. S3E).Two abundant types of substitutions were identified: the cytosine-to-uracil (C→U) and the guanine-to-adenine (G→A).The C→U changes were rather independent of genotype and temperature, while the G→A changes were strongly tfIIs-1-and HS-dependent (Fig. 1E, Supplementary Fig. S3E).Additionally, the guanine-to-uracil (G→U) was independent, while the low-rate substitutions C→A, U→A, U→C, and U→G errors were also TFIIS-and HS-dependent (Fig. 1E, Supplementary Fig. S3E).

We examined the type of indels: a significant ∼3-fold enrichment was observed for the insertion of adenine at the expense of the other nucleotides, especially in tfIIs-1 backgrounds (Supplementary Fig. S4A), while the type of deleted bases was random (Supplementary Fig. S4B).To understand the impact of the cis factors on error-making, we analyzed the −/+ 20 nucleotide environment of errors, GC-content, and transcript length, but no pattern of cis sequence context nor correlations between error rates and these features have been found.A-D) letters indicate significant differences between the statistically different groups at P < 0.05 using Tukey's post hoc test (significance of substitutions' types rates differences are shown in Supplementary Fig. S2C).


The potential impact of transcription errors at proteome level

To estimate their downstream impact, we studied the effects of transcriptional mistakes on amino acid changes in silico.∼25.8% to 31.4% of substitutions caused silent mutations (Supplementary Fig. S5).These originated mainly from nucleotide replacement at the third position of the codons.∼63.4% to 70.5% of substitutions caused missense mutations, resulting in amino acid changes (Supplementary Figs.S6 and S7).These changes were rooted in the combined consequence of the number of codons encoding the particular amino acid and the bias of erroneous transcription by RNAPII for a particular substitution: (i) amino acids encoded by multiple codons were converted as the consequence of a single nucleotide substitution (e.g.Ala→Ser, Gly→Val, etc.); (ii) the prevalent nucleotide exchanges have driven the particular amino acid changes such as C→U (e.g.Ala→Val, Pro→Leu, etc.), G→A (Ala→Thr, Glu→Lys, Val→Ile etc.), or G→U (e.g.Ala→Ser, Val→Phe, etc.).Some of the prevalent amino acid exchanges are converted into amino acids having functionally similar side chains, while other swaps may hold the potential to strongly impact the protein structure/activity (such as Asp→Arg, Glu→Lys, etc., converting the negatively charged side chain into a positive one) (Supplementary Figs.S6 and S7).∼2.3% to 8.0% of nucleotide substitutions lead to the generation of nonsense mutations (STOP codons) (Supplementary Fig. S5).These types of errors were surprisingly numerous, mainly generated by G→U changes (Glu→STOP, Gly→STOP), by C→U changes (Gln→STOP), or by G→A changes (Trp→STOP) (Supplementary Figs.S6 and S7).


Distribution of transcriptional errors within the genome and along the transcripts

To discern the topology of transcriptional quality regulation, we investigated the genomic distribution of errors (Fig. 2).The transcriptional mistakes were evenly scattered throughout the entire genome: centromeric and pericentromeric regions are depleted due to the absence of RNAPII transcripts, not due to error rate changes (Fig. 2A).Errors were equally partitioned between the 5 chromosomes (Fig. 2B).We performed a gene ontology (GO) analysis of error-containing transcripts.The GO results reflect the transcription pattern of the given condition: under NT, transcripts Transcriptional error topology across genome and Arabidopsis metagene.A) A total of 29,952 errors were detected to be distributed randomly across the entire genome (from inside to outside: scatter plot of the number of errors, heatmap of error rates (log 0.25), CirSeq total coverage using 500 kb segments, chromosomes (chr1-5), centromeres are indicated; B) Total error rates distribution between the 5 chromosomes (bars represent standard errors, n ≥ 3); C) Substitution rate distribution across metagene divided to scale into 5′ untranslated region (5′UTR), coding sequence (CDS) and 3′ untranslated region (3′UTR); D) Indel error rate distribution across the metagene; genotypes and treatments are shown on the top, non-treated (NT), heat-treated 1 day (37 °C, 1 d), translation START and STOP codons are indicated, ( for x-axis scale see Methods).

supporting growth were enriched, while at high temperature (TMHT/1d) transcripts involved in heat acclimation were overrepresented (Supplementary Table S1).These results show that errors are characteristic of current transcriptomes and support the observation that errors are scattered randomly.We also analyzed error distribution along a metagene: a mild and gradual elevation of the substitution rates was observed toward the 3′ end of the CDS (Fig. 2C).This pattern was not HS-or genotype-specific but mostly apparent in samples with high error rate values (Supplementary Fig. S8).The distribution of indel rates had an increased accumulation within the 5′UTR and START-codon region and a gradual enrichment towards and around the STOP-codon (Fig. 2D, Supplementary Fig. S9).


NMD eliminates transcripts containing indels within the coding region

To investigate the potential impact of NMD on the clearance of transcription errors, we evaluated the distribution of errors on metagene segments including CDS and UTRs.While in Col-0 and tfIIs-1 plants at both NT and TMHT/1d conditions, a modest enrichment was found for substitution error rates within the CDS compared to the 5′/3′ UTR regions (Fig. 3, A and B), the insertion rates were significantly lower within the CDS compared to the 5′/3′ UTR regions (Fig. 3C), with deletions having a similar trend (Fig. 3D).These observations suggest that the transcripts having frameshift-causing indels, but not the ones containing substitutions within the CDS are selectively eliminated.Notably, the highest difference between the indel rates in 5′/3′ UTRs and CDS was found at TMHT/1d in tfIIs-1, this difference decreased in tfIIs; upf1 and finally disappeared in tfIIs;upf3 (Fig. 3, C and D).Thus, transcripts containing indels within the CDS, but not within the 5′/3′ UTRs, are eliminated in a translation-coupled manner by the NMD pathway.Notably, NMD does not alter the accumulation of substitution errors containing faulty mRNAs.


TFIIS genetically interacts with the NMD pathway

If both TFIIS and NMD contribute to the reduction of downstream negative effects of faulty transcription, then the TFIIS and NMD mutants should genetically interact.To analyze the interaction between the TFIIS and NMD pathways, we studied the development and HS-sensitivity of upf1-5 and upf3-1 single, and tfIIs;upf1 and tfIIs;upf3 double mutant plants (Fig. 4).Under normal temperature, the tfIIs-1 shows essentially a wild-type phenotype (Grasser et al. 2009), while the upf1-5 plants have minor developmental defects, including jagged and slightly narrow leaves (Arciga-Reyes et al. 2006).The upf3-1 displays stronger developmental alterations, with well-marked rosette leaf shape and floral morphological changes, and slightly retarded growth compared to wild type (Arciga-Reyes et al. 2006) (Fig. 4A).The developmental phenotype of the nmd single mutants became severely intensified in the double mutant combinations; the tfIIs;upf1 plants formed narrow, downward curling leaves with wavy and serrated edges but seeded normally.The tfIIs;upf3 plants showed dramatic growth phenotype, they were stunted and failed to flower at normal temperature (LD, 21 °C).Their leaf shape alterations were similar as in the tfIIs;upf1, but more extreme, the overall rosette growth was strongly retarded.Flowering was slightly accelerated in tfIIs-1 (Grasser et al. 2009) but was delayed in upf1-5, tfIIs;upf1 and upf3-1 compared to Col-0.The tfIIs;upf3 mutant flowered only at higher temperature (LD, 25 °C), and its flowering was still significantly retarded (Supplementary Fig. S10A).

We have also conducted an automated phenotyping examination on the mutant series (Supplementary Fig. S10, B  tfIIs-1, tfIIs;upf1, and especially the tfIIs;upf3 mutants are smaller compared to Col-0, upf1-5, and upf3-1, respectively.While the genotypes Col-0, upf1-5, upf3-1, and tfIIs;upf1 retained their round shape, the mutant plants tfIIs-1 and tfIIs;upf3 were oval shaped, as presented by higher eccentricity values.The TCARI (Transformed Chlorophyll Absorption Reflectance Index) values, related to the chlorophyll content of leaves showed a similar tendency, and were lower in tfIIs-1, tfIIs;upf1, and tfIIs;upf3 mutants compared to Col-0, upf1-5, or upf3-1 (Supplementary Fig. S10E).This trait was also manifested in the color segmentation data (Supplementary Fig. S10G).TFIIS mutation impact on leaf pigment content was limited, since the F v /F m chlorophyll fluorescence parameter (representing the optimal quantum efficiency of PSII) remained unchanged, except for tfIIs;upf3 mutants, where it dropped significantly (Supplementary Fig. S10F).

The typical stunted growth in the NMD mutants is the result of an autoimmune response caused by the stabilization of PTC-containing immune receptor mRNAs (Gloggnitzer et al. 2014).To understand the basis of developmental phenotype alterations of the tfIIs;upf mutants, we measured the PATHOGENESIS RELATED GENE 1 (PR1) mRNA levels, a marker gene of immunity (Gloggnitzer et al. 2014).In wild-type Col-0, tfIIs-1, upf1-5 single, and tfIIs;upf1 double mutants, the level of PR1 mRNA was very low, while in upf3-1 was slightly elevated at 21 °C, ∼5-fold vs Col-0, suggesting a mild autoimmune status of this line (Supplementary Fig. S11A).Notably, PR1 increased dramatically in tfIIs;upf3 (∼500-fold vs Col-0), showing that the absence of TFIIS causes intensification of the immunity response in the strong NMD mutant background upf3-1, but not in upf1-5, in correlation with their phenotypes.These observations were also confirmed by RNA transcriptome; several immune response genes were overexpressed in the tfIIs;upf3 mutants at normal temperature (see later).

High ambient temperature suppresses the autoimmune response of NMD mutants (Gloggnitzer et al. 2014).Therefore, we measured PR1 changes at 25 °C and 28 °C.PR1 accumulation decreased to background level in tfIIs;upf3 plants were already at 25 °C (Supplementary Fig. S11A).Besides, we also examined the developmental changes at 25 °C: the stunted growth phenotype of tfIIs;upf3 plants was partially suppressed (Supplementary Fig. S11B), in correlation with the reduction in PR1 mRNA levels.Despite the still strong growth phenotypes at 25 °C, tfIIs;upf3 were able to proceed into the generative phase and produce very few seeds.Notably, the leaf shape alterations of tfIIs;upf3 were constant at both 21 °C and 25 °C temperature and were very similar to tfIIs;upf1 leaf shape phenotype, suggesting that the NMD deficiency-caused leaf/rosette phenotype is independent of the autoimmunity.


NMD is needed for efficient HS response

In plants, biotic and abiotic stresses can modify NMD activity, but the roles of NMD in HS adaptation were not analyzed before (Shi et al. 2012;Kurosaki et al. 2019;Luha et al. 2024).To test if NMD maintains its activity during elevated heat, we measured the level of selected NMD targets in plants under control conditions or exposed to short-term (TMHT/1h) or persistent HS (TMHT/1d) and following two-day recovery period (RE) (see Materials and Methods).

eRF1-1 (Nyiko et al. 2017) and SMG7 (Nyiko et al. 2013) are NMD-regulated transcripts bearing NMD-inducing introns in their 3′UTR, while At3g53400 and At5g45430 are NMD targets possessing uORFs (Degtiar et al. 2015).All tested NMD targets were maintained at low level in Col-0 and tfIIs-1 (∼2-6-fold lower vs upf1-5 or upf3-1 background plants) suggesting that they are efficiently destabilized by NMD under ambient conditions (Supplementary Fig. S12).Moreover, in the NMD-functional lines (Col-0 and tfIIs-1), all these NMD targets remained at a low level throughout all heat treatments (∼3-6-fold lower vs upf1-5 or upf3-1 plants), showing that NMD functions during HS.The TFIIS and NMD factors (UPF1, UPF3) do not regulate each other at the transcriptional level during ambient or HS conditions (Supplementary Fig. S13), except that UPF3 mRNA was increased in tfIIs-1 background at TMHT/1d, implying a TFIIS-UPF3 regulatory loop.TFIIS mRNA HS-changes in Col-0 and tfIIs-1 confirmed previous findings (Szadeczky-Kardoss et al. 2022).

To analyze NMD functionality genome-wide, we performed an RNA transcriptome analysis (see Materials and Methods).To strictly select the potential NMD direct targets (referred to as NMD targets), we considered the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that were upregulated significantly (P < 0.01) and at least 1.4-fold in both upf1-5 and upf3-1 NMD mutants compared to Col-0 at NT condition (n = 304).Relevantly, the NMD targets were overexpressed in the nmd single and double mutants relative to the NMD-functional plants (e.g.Col-0 and tfIIs-1) throughout the TMHT heat treatment (Fig. 4B, Supplementary Fig. S14, Supplementary Table S2) in correlation with RT-qPCR data.These observations confirm that the NMD pathway remains active during prolonged high-temperature exposure.

To phenotypically test whether NMD plays an active role in HS responses (HSRs), upf1-5 and upf3-1 mutants were subjected to TMHT (Fig. 4, C and D, Supplementary Fig. S15A).Importantly, both nmd mutants showed enhanced heat sensitivity when exposed to TMHT for 3 to 5 d suggesting that NMD pathway is a required functional component of the HSR.


TFIIS and NMD cooperatively regulate transcriptome changes

Prompted by the findings that both TFIIS (Szadeczky-Kardoss et al. 2022) and NMD (Fig. 4) are important for HSR, we next evaluated the interaction between TFIIS and NMD factors during TMHT at phenotypic level.Although the nmd single mutants did not show sensitivity at TMHT/2d, the tfIIs;upf1 and tfIIs;upf3 seedlings were significantly more HS-sensitive than the tfIIs-1 (Fig. 5, A and B, Supplementary Fig. S15B).The HS-sensitivity phenotype of double mutants is not simply the sum of single mutants' phenotype, certifying the genetic interplay between TFIIS and NMD pathways during heat adaptation.

We have previously demonstrated that the transcriptomes of Col-0 and tfIIs-1 plants are relatively similar under NT, but upon HS adaptation the transcriptional reprogramming is retarded in the tfIIs-1 mutant (Szadeczky-Kardoss et al. 2022).The absence of TFIIS alters both DEGs and AS patterns.To unravel the molecular basis of NMD's impact and the TFIIS-NMD cooperation during HS, we examined the RNA transcriptome data (Fig. 5C, see Materials and Methods).

First, we compared the transcript levels of nmd single mutants commonly changed compared to Col-0 (upf1∩upf3 vs Col-0) and the tfIIs;nmd double mutants compared to tfIIs-1 (tfIIs;upf1∩tfIIs; upf3 vs tfIIs-1).We applied strict DEG selection criteria: 1.4-fold significant (P < 0.01) common expression changes in both nmd mutants.In upf1∩upf3 vs Col-0 217, 87 and 99 DEGs were upregulated, while 159, 24, and 66 DEGs were downregulated at NT, NT&1 h or 1 h conditions, respectively.In tfIIs;upf1∩tfIIs;upf3 vs tfIIs-1 261, 137, and 141 DEGs were upregulated, while 184, 50, and 56 DEGs were downregulated at NT, NT&1 h or 1 h, respectively (Fig. 5D).About twice more DEGs were upregulated than downregulated in both genotypic comparisons in the NT and 1 h samples, which is consistent with the positive role of NMD in RNA decay.Much more DEGs were found at TMHT/1d (compared to NT or 1 h) suggesting that under persistent HS several indirect effects shape the transcriptome (Fig. 5D).Importantly, more upregulated DEGs were found in the tfIIs;upf1∩tfIIs;upf3 vs tfIIs comparison than in the upf1∩upf3 vs Col-0 comparison at all 3 conditions (NT: 398 vs 304, TMHT/1h: 278 vs 186, TMHT/1d: 727 vs 498).As DEGs upregulated in the nmd mutants are potential NMD direct targets, we concluded that in the absence of TFIIS, more PTC-containing NMD direct target mRNAs are produced.These TFIIS-dependent targets could include transcription error-generated faulty species but also AS isoforms (see later), which are destabilized by NMD.

The GO analysis revealed enrichment of a variety of DEGs in both upf1∩upf3 (vs Col-0) and tfIIs;upf1∩tfIIs;upf3 (vs tfIIs-1) (see Supplementary Table S2).The combination of TFIIS and NMD mutation mostly affected response to abiotic stress, nucleotide and protein homeostasis, photosynthesis, and transcripts linked to cytoplasm and chloroplast compartments.

Since tfIIs;upf3 mutant has an autoimmune phenotype at ambient temperature, we evaluated whether heat sensitivity of NMD mutants could stem from enhanced immunity.Consistently, with the elevated PR1 expression (Supplementary Fig. S11) and the developmental phenotype of tfIIs;upf3 plants (Fig. 4A),  S2.

autoimmunity-related transcripts (van Wersch et al. 2016;Freh et al. 2022) (see Materials and Methods) were overexpressed in tfIIs;upf3 under NT conditions (Supplementary Fig. S16).However, during TMHT/1h and TMHT/1d, the level of autoimmune transcripts mostly decreased (Supplementary Fig. S16, Supplementary Table S2).Thus, the HS-sensitivity of nmd mutants is unlikely due to the autoimmunity activation.


TFIIS and NMD regulate the steady-state level of AS isoforms

In plants, TFIIS contributes to the transcriptome homeostasis in several ways, including AS regulation (Dolata et al. 2015;Godoy Herz et al. 2019;Zhu et al. 2020;Szadeczky-Kardoss et al. 2022).On the other hand, NMD can detect and degrade RNA isoforms if these contain PTC and are exported to the cytoplasm for translation.To examine at what extent the TFIIS-dependent splicing generates PTC-transcripts targeted by NMD, we identified and analyzed the AS events and isoforms (AS transcript species) in our mutants and during temperature treatments.The AS events/isoforms were rare in the nmd single mutants.In contrast, we found a significantly increased number of AS events in tfIIs-1 (vs Col-0) at TMHT/1d but not at TMHT/1h (Fig. 6A, Supplementary Fig. S17, Supplementary Table S3).This reinforces the previous finding that TFIIS is required for proper AS during persistent HS (Szadeczky-Kardoss et al. 2022).Notably, AS events and isoforms were synergistically enriched when tfIIs-1 was combined with upf1-5 and especially with upf3-1 under all temperature conditions (Fig. 6A, Supplementary Fig. S17).These data suggest that in the absence of TFIIS, many AS transcripts are generated, and a large portion of these are stabilized in nmd backgrounds.This also implies that most AS products are efficiently exported and translated, therefore dangerous for proteostasis.

To verify what fraction of AS transcripts generated in tfIIs-1 are potentially destabilized by NMD, we determined the ORF and 3′ UTR length changes (ORFs vs AS-ORFs and 3′UTR vs AS-3′UTR, respectively) in silico: amongst all types of AS events, ∼59.6% caused shortening of ORFs through the appearance of a novel STOP codon (shAS-ORFs;neo-STOP), with only ∼19.6% being shorter AS-ORFs terminated at the original STOP codon (shAS-ORFs;ori-STOP); the remaining AS transcripts bear a longer ORF with either original or new STOP (lgAS-ORFs;ori-STOP or lgAS-ORFs;neo-STOP, respectively) (Fig. 6B).Amongst these, the largest class (sh AS-ORFs; neo-STOP) but probably not the other classes are targeted by NMD.We examined 3′UTR length of shAS-ORFs;neo-STOP transcripts: STOP-codon "repositioning" caused significant 3′UTR lengthening: the original/canonical 3′UTRs having a median of 280 bp length (in accordance with Srivastava et al. 2018) was changed to 847 bp, that is, an NMD-eliciting cis feature (Kertesz et al. 2006) (Fig. 6, C and D).These transcripts could originate from intron retention (IR) events, the most frequent AS event type in plants (e.g.IRs often introduce a new in-frame STOP; Supplementary Fig. S17).We also analyzed the presence of introns in 3′UTR of shAS-ORFs;neo-STOP transcripts, the other important cis-inducer of NMD: 98.6% of the transcripts contained at least 1 intron within the 3′UTR.Notably, ∼91.2% of transcripts possessed both features, potentially making them strong NMD targets (Fig. 6F).

In sum, the prevalent fraction of AS events/isoforms, which are generated only in the absence of TFIIS, are potentially NMD targets.Simultaneous absence of TFIIS and NMD pathway therefore leads to abundant production of aberrant RNAs through AS.


The TFIIS and NMD genetic interaction is required for normal proteostasis

A central branch of the HSR is the production of HSPs, which ensures protein homeostasis through chaperone activities.To uncover the potential basis of HS-sensitivity, we analyzed expressional changes of HsfA2 and selected HSPs during TMHT in tfIIs-1, upf1-5, upf3-1, and double mutant combinations compared to Col-0 plants.The accumulation of HsfA2 and several HSP mRNAs was retarded in the tfIIs-1 mutants during TMHT/1h (Fig. 7A, Supplementary Fig. S18).The upf1-5 (but not upf3-1) plants also contained slightly but consistently lower levels of HS-transcripts.The effect of UPF1 was transcriptional, as in the upf1-5 plants the unspliced HSP transcripts also accumulated to reduced levels (Supplementary Fig. S19).These observations are in concert with previous findings, which show that UPF1 operates co-transcriptionally to regulate mRNA maturation and release (Hong et al. 2019;Singh et al. 2019).Based on tfIIs-1 vs tfIIs-1; upf1-5 comparison, our data shows that UPF1 requirement is surpassed in the tfIIs-1 mutant background, as the effects of single tfIIs-1 and upf1-5 are not additive in the double mutant plants.The HsfA2 and HSP70, HSP90, and HSP101 mRNA levels were not altered significantly in upf3-1 compared to Col-0, and no difference was found in their accumulation between the single tfIIs-1 and double mutant tfIIs-1;upf3-1 (Fig. 7A, Supplementary Fig. S18).In sum, the TFIIS and UPF1 (but not UPF3) are needed for HSR at the transcriptional level.The effects of UPF1 may be direct or indirect, which needs clarification by targeted experiment.

To investigate genome-wide HSR, we selected and analyzed the HSR transcript dynamics in the RNAseq data (Supplementary Fig. S20).During TMHT/1h a transcriptional activation of HSR mRNAs could be detected in all genotypes, while at TMHT/1d transcriptional repression/attenuation occurred (Supplementary Fig. S20A).At TMHT/1d the level of HSR transcripts was slightly reduced in tfIIs-1 mutant backgrounds.For a more detailed analysis, we clustered the HSR transcript based on their expression patterns (set1 HS -12 HS , Supplementary Fig. S20B, Supplementary Table S2).Although the dynamics were rather similar, several differences could be observed between Col-0 and mutant lines.Overall, RNA transcriptome data are in accordance with RT-qPCR measurements (Fig. 7A, Supplementary Figs.S18 and S19) and indicate that proper steady-state level of most (but not all) HSR transcripts during HS requires primarily the activity of TFIIS (set2 HS , 3 HS , 6 HS , 7 HS , 9 HS , 10 HS , and 12 HS ), or some of the combined actions of TFIIS and NMD (4 HS , 8 HS , and 11 HS ) (Supplementary Fig. S20B).

To consider the consequences of transcriptional changes at protein level during early HS, we measured the HSP protein amounts.The protein and mRNA expression changes are correlated.The tfIIs-1, upf1-5, tfIIs-1;upf1-5, and tfIIs-1;upf3-1 accumulated significantly lower levels of HSP90 and HSP101 proteins compared to Col-0 plants at TMHT/1h (Supplementary Fig. S21).The reduced amount of HSP90 and HSP101 proteins in upf1-5, but not upf3-1, also correlated with mRNA expression changes (Supplementary Fig. S18, B and C vs Supplementary Fig. S21).Notably, no difference was observed between tfIIs-1 single and tfIIs-1;upf1-5 or tfIIs-1;upf3-1 double mutants in their HSP protein contents.

Previously, it was proposed that the amount of ATP-independent sHSP holdases is a readout of cellular proteotoxicity (McLoughlin et al. 2016;McLoughlin et al. 2019;Waters and Vierling 2020;Szadeczky-Kardoss et al. 2022).Therefore, we measured the accumulation of sHSP class I (sHSP-CI) members sHSP18.2and sHSP22 mRNAs in the TMHT/1h and 1d conditions: both transcripts accumulated at significantly lower level at TMHT/1h in tfIIs-1 and in tfIIs;upf1, tfIIs;upf3 double mutants (relative to Col-0) and were strongly increased after TMHT/1d treatment in tfIIs-1 backgrounds but not in the nmd single mutants (Supplementary Fig. S22).Interestingly, the elevation of sHSP mRNA levels at TMHT/1d occurred at a lower extent when tfIIs-1 was combined with either upf1-5 or upf3-1 mutations.

Following this, we studied sHSP protein amount differences.Significantly higher levels of sHSP-CI proteins were accumulated in all single and double mutants compared to Col-0 at TMHT/1d (Fig. 7B, Supplementary Fig. S23).Notably, accumulation of sHSP-CI increased in tfIIs;upf1 and tfIIs;upf3 relative to the corresponding single mutants and persisted during the recovery period in tfIIs-1 backgrounds, while it reached Col-0 level in the upf1-5 and upf3-1 plants.This implies that the interaction of TFIIS and NMD pathway is needed for efficient proteostasis.

To de facto quantify the level of proteotoxicity in plants, we purified the insoluble aggregate fractions and calculated the insoluble/soluble protein ratios during NT and TMHT/1d.In tfIIs-1, tfIIs; upf1, and tfIIs;upf3 plants, the amounts of insoluble aggregates were elevated.In the tfIIs;upf3 mutant, higher amounts of aggregates were detected compared to the corresponding single mutants, showing enhanced proteotoxicity (Fig. 7C, Supplementary Fig. S24).We tried to detect neo-peptides from error-containing transcripts using aggregate purification and mass spectrometry (MS), but we didn't find any conclusive ones; the same approach on human cells also failed before (Cugusi et al. 2022).This is likely because errors are randomly distributed across the transcriptome, making these unique neo-peptides too rare to be detected by standard MS.This limitation could be overcome by Ribosome profiling (Ribo-seq) or using engineered error reporters.

We also evaluated the partitioning of sHSP-CI in the soluble and insoluble fractions, respectively.The sHSP holdases keep their client proteins in the soluble fraction (Waters and Vierling 2020); when the capacity of cellular proteostasis is exceeded by the high volume of unfolded proteins, the sHSPs may aggregate with their substrates and pile up in the insoluble aggregates.The sHSP-CI proteins were detected in a rather similar amount in the soluble fractions in all genotypes but were more abundant in the insoluble fractions of single tfIIs-1 and upf3-1 compared to Col-0 and were markedly increased in the tfIIs;upf1 and tfIIs;upf3 mutants (Fig. 7C).HSP101 protein distribution shows a pattern very similar to sHSP-CI (Fig. 7C).The enhanced accumulation of sHSPs and HSP101 in the insoluble aggregates of tfIIs-1 and upf3-1 compared to Col-0, and the double mutants tfIIs;upf1 and tfIIs;upf3, relative to the single mutants, further certify the proteotoxicity and the requirement of both TFIIS and NMD, and their interaction to maintain protein homeostasis during HS.et al. 2009;Riehs-Kearnan et al. 2012;Gloggnitzer et al. 2014;Szadeczky-Kardoss et al. 2022;Obermeyer et al. 2023).The qualitative alterations may originate from both transcriptional errors and altered AS.The importance of AS regulation during development and HSR has been extensively documented before (Bokszczanin et al. 2013;Ling et al. 2018;Jo et al. 2022;Rosenkranz et al. 2022;Wen et al. 2023;Rosenkranz et al. 2024;Jo et al. 2025;Larran et al. 2025;Ma et al. 2025).We assumed that reduced transcriptional fidelity could also be an important factor that strongly contributes to these phenotypes.To test whether transcriptional fidelity perturbations on its own can affect plant development and HS viability, we treated Col-0 and tfIIs-1 plants with mycophenolic acid (MPA) or solvent control (CTL).MPA is a pharmaceutical compound that depletes intracellular guanosine triphosphate (GTP) and causes transcriptional mistakes, as shown in yeast (Koyama et al. 2010).(We tried to combine MPA treatment with HS but got confounding/unclear results; the effect of MPA at elevated temperatures in the plant system merits clarification.)


TFIIS is vital under nucleotide-imbalance-induced transcriptional fidelity stress

To test whether MPA also causes transcriptional mistakes in plants, we studied error rate changes by CirSeq (Fig. 8).MPA treatment led to ∼1.7-fold increased total error rates in Col-0 plants; these were significantly elevated in tfIIs-1 mutant plants by ∼3.7-fold.Differences were found for substitutions and insertions, but not for deletions.The shifts in substitutions were generated almost exclusively by G→A changes, in correlation with the expected effect of MPA on GTP levels (Fig. 8B).These data de facto show that nucleotide imbalance stress affects the precision of transcription in plants.

Since the G→A substitutions were the most prevalent type of errors (Fig. 1E, Supplementary Fig. S3E), MPA utilization may at least partially mimic the impact of errors on phenotype.MPA did not alter NMD efficiency (Supplementary Fig. S25).Therefore, we analyzed MPA-sensitivity of Col-0 and tfIIs-1 seedlings' phenotypes.Col-0 plants grown on MPA-containing media developed more slowly; their leaves were distorted and accumulated anthocyanin compounds characteristic of stress responses (Fig. 8C).Relevantly, tfIIs-1 plants were significantly more affected; most of the seedlings died in the posttreatment period (Supplementary Fig. S26).Our observations are in accordance with the literature (Grasser et al. 2009;Koyama et al. 2010 support the notion that nucleotide imbalance reduces transcriptional fidelity in plants and that under nucleotide imbalance stress conditions fidelity factor TFIIS is essential for survival.


Discussion

Several studies on RNAPII transcriptional regulation have been published in yeast and metazoan, but plant systems have remained less explored despite their importance in view of climate change.Here, we demonstrate that TFIIS nuclear and NMD cytoplasmic quality control systems act cooperatively to safeguard transcriptome homeostasis in planta, and we evidence its biological relevance during development and stress adaptation in the dicot model A. thaliana.


The error landscape of Arabidopsis transcriptome is altered by environmental conditions

To understand transcriptome quality regulation, we examined transcriptional fidelity.For this, we implemented CirSeq analysis under NT and HS conditions and characterized the error content of Arabidopsis transcriptome at single-nucleotide resolution.Our error data are in strong correlation with independent findings (Li et al. 2025).In addition, we provide evidence that transcriptional errors are continuously generated and depend on internal/external conditions, including HS and nucleotide imbalance stress.CirSeq assays revealed that substitutions are the predominant error type (∼90%), with some being constant while others are environment sensitive.The most prevalent substitutions detected were the C→U and G→A exchanges.Since ATP and UTP are the most abundant ribonucleotides (Straube et al. 2021), their high concentration may predispose a preference for these swaps.

C→U and G→A mistakes were also detected frequently in other organisms (Chung Verheijen, Navapanich, et al. 2023).These substitutions may be favored due to the similarity of their ring structures.Notably, the frequency of the C→U substitution is high and constant, whereas G→A substitution rate is low in Col-0 plants but dramatically increased in tfIIs-1 and HS conditions.Since G→A formation is slow but efficiently extended (Sydow and Cramer 2009), heat may primarily promote its initial formation.GTP depletion by MPA treatment also caused G→A substitutions in tfIIs-1 but did not lead to G→U swaps, confirming the specificity/ bias of given nucleotide exchanges.C→U errors could result from a dG nucleotide (G within the DNA template) pairing with U (instead of C), similar to a G-U wobble base-pair in RNA duplexes.This substitution could be more frequently incorporated, as proposed in yeast (Sydow and Cramer 2009).

The possibility arises that some of the substitutions are the consequence of RNA editing events (Meng et al. 2010;Chung, Verheijen, Zhang, et al. 2023).In Arabidopsis the main nuclear RNA editing types are the U-to-C, A-to-G, A-to-C, and G-to-U.The U→C, A→G, and A→C substitutions are very rarely detected, but the G→U substitutions are relatively common.It was shown that G-to-U editing tends to occur at conserved cis element (Meng et al. 2010); however, in our dataset the G→U swaps are distributed randomly suggesting that these changes are mainly caused by transcriptional errors instead of editing.The C→U substitutions could also be the consequence of editing.C-to-U editing is most frequent in the organelles of flowering plants, but not on nuclear transcripts (Meng et al. 2010).Our raw material consists mainly of RNAPII products (Supplementary Fig. S2A); therefore, C-to-U editing might not considerably alter C→U error rates defined by us in plants.Regardless, this intriguing possibility needs to be further explored.

Insertions and deletions are rarer (∼5% to 10%) than substitutions, suggesting that RNAPII transcription is less likely to continue transcription following indels.We observed a bias for adenine insertion (Supplementary Fig. S4).ATP has the highest cellular concentration of NTPs (Straube et al. 2021), perhaps explaining this preference.Notably, insertion rates are genotype-, temperature-and MPA-dependent (varying ∼10-fold), but deletion rates remain low and constant (Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig. S3).We speculate that the unpaired nucleotide on the DNA template strand (e.g. the deletion fault) is recognized by RNAPII through alternative means, as compared to substitutions and insertions.Insertions (but not deletions) likely derive from substitutions: the mismatched nucleotide is erroneously elongated by a correct one, without forward translocation of the RNAPII.Consequently, the proofreading events triggered by substitutions and insertions (RNA-sided errors) at the polymerization core or +1 position may be mechanistically similar.

Transcriptional fidelity may have different causes, since it varies across cellular age, tissues, developmental stage, or under diverse environments (Vermulst et al. 2015;Chung, Verheijen, Navapanich, et al. 2023;Chung, Verheijen, Zhang, et al. 2023).While our study focuses on seedlings, future research on mature plants grown in soil and in the field could provide a more comprehensive understanding of fidelity regulation dynamics in plants.

The transcription velocity and fidelity are connected, as shown in yeast and human cells: high temperature could increase transcription speed, which may lead to higher error rates (Muniz et al. 2021;Chung, Verheijen, Zhang, et al. 2023).We postulate that in plants, high temperature may result in faster and consequently more erroneous transcription.Heat-induced destabilization of chromatin structure (Pecinka et al. 2010) may contribute to increased elongation speed and consequently elevated error rates.It was also demonstrated that the speed of RNAPII continuincreases within the gene body (Danko et al. 2013;Jonkers et al. 2014).correlation with this, we observed a mild increase in error rate toward the 3′ end of CDS (Fig. 2, C and D).Interconnection of fidelity and speed of in plants needs in-depth examination.


Transcriptome fidelity safeguarding occurs co-and posttranscriptionally

Next, we have shown that transcriptional errors are constantly surveyed co-and posttranscriptionally to be eliminated by the nuclear co-transcriptional fidelity factor TFIIS and the cytoplasmic post-transcriptional quality control NMD pathway (Fig. 8D).Importantly, TFIIS eliminates both substitutions and indels, while NMD specifically targets for decay the frame-shifted transcripts caused by indels within the CDS.Notably, the insertion rate is significantly higher in the tfIIs;nmd double mutants compared to the tfIIs-1, while the substitution rate is unchanged (Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig. S3).This suggests that the nuclear and cytoplasmic fidelity pathways cooperatively eliminate the indels.In sum, while TFIIS plays a dominant role in ensuring high fidelity of transcription, NMD acts as a backup control layer that eliminates the transcription error-generated PTC-containing faulty transcripts, which remained undetected by TFIIS proofreading (Fig. 8D).

Besides, all types of transcriptional errors can create faulty mRNAs lacking STOP codons or having other aberrant features.Aberrant mRNAs are targets of diverse RNA quality control (RQC) pathways at several levels.Nuclear RQC pathways could degrade aberrant transcripts on-chromatin (e.g.XRN-or nuclear exosome-mediated co-transcriptional decay) (van Hoof et al. 2002;Nagarajan et al. 2013;Lange et al. 2014;Bhat et al. 2024) or off-chromatin (e.g.posttranscriptional RNA quality checks to inhibit export of aberrant/immature RNA species) (Garland and Jensen 2020), while XRN4 and the cytoplasmic exosome degrade faulty mRNAs after the nuclear export.No-Go Decay and Non-Stop Decay (NGD and NSD), like NMD, are translationcoupled cytoplasmic RQCs.NGD eliminates faulty mRNAs containing translation elongation inhibiting sequences and structures, whereas NSD degrades early transcription termination or endonucleolytic cleavage-generated aberrant mRNAs lacking the STOP codon (Hwang and Maquat 2011;Szadeczky-Kardoss, Csorba, et al. 2018;Szadeczky-Kardoss, Gal, et al. 2018).Amongst the translation-coupled RQCs, NMD likely identifies and decays the largest pool of erroneous transcripts (having non-sense substitutions or indels causing frameshifts) that are particularly harmful for proteostasis (Vermulst et al. 2015).To what extent the alternative RQC pathways contribute to the erroneous transcript elimination under normal and stress conditions, and how TFIIS activity interacts with these RQCs deserves further dedicated research.


TFIIS and NMD cooperatively control DEGs and AS of plant transcriptomes

Besides the transcriptional fidelity control (e.g.transcriptional error survey and decay), TFIIS-NMD pathway interaction may regulate other aspects of transcriptomes, including DEGs AS patterns.To better understand this, we performed an RNA transcriptome analysis; we show that both DEGs' regulation (mRNA steady state levels) and AS patterns are cooperatively controlled by TFIIS and NMD.We unraveled that a large portion of AS products could bear PTC, therefore are potentially an NMD target.By comparing transcriptomes of Col-0 and tfIIs-1 plants, we demonstrated that the AS pattern is significantly changed in tfIIs-1, especially under HS (Fig. 6, Szadeczky-Kardoss et al. 2022).Furthermore, AS products accumulated significantly in the tfIIs; nmd mutants (vs tfIIs-1), implying that many AS transcripts are indeed eliminated by NMD following their cytoplasmic export and translation.


Molecular changes at the basis of HS-phenotypic alterations

It was shown previously that TFIIS regulates transcriptional reprogramming during HSR in plants (Szadeczky-Kardoss et al. 2022;Obermeyer et al. 2023).Adding to this, now we demonstrate that NMD pathway and TFIIS-NMD interaction are needed for both proper development and HS tolerance.Notably, the molecular basis of synergistic phenotypes of double mutants at different temperature conditions is different (see below).

At ambient (NT) temperature immunity-related transcripts are destabilized by NMD in wild-type plants (Gloggnitzer et al. 2014).However, the tfIIs;upf3 double mutant has a strong autoimmune phenotype (at NT) due to accumulation of the immunity-related transcripts (vs Col-0, tfIIs-1, or upf3-1).At high temperatures immunity-related transcripts are at a low level (Gloggnitzer et al. 2014) (Supplementary Fig. S11), and the phenotype is partially rescued, indicating a causal relationship between the expression of immunity factors and developmental alterations.This suggests that TFIIS and NMD cooperate to suppress autoimmunity that could be the main cause of developmental alterations of tfIIs;upf3 plants at ambient temperatures.

At HS the molecular basis of HS sensitivity of mutants is distinct.First, by performing RT-qPCR and RNA transcriptome, we have shown that the NMD pathway is functional during early (TMHT/1h) and persistent (TMHT/1d) heat stress.In addition, NMD absence causes HS sensitivity.Secondly, we combined tfIIs-1 with nmd mutants and have revealed synergistic impacts on both molecular changes and HS phenotypes.Likely, several layers of transcriptome regulation, including production of erroneous transcripts, DEGs and AS patterns (but unlikely autoimmunity), contribute to HS sensitivity of tfIIs;nmd lines.We propose that the HS-phenotype of tfIIs;nmd double mutants is due to the proteotoxic stress caused by DEGs and accumulation of aberrant proteins translated from the faulty transcript, including erroneous and PTC-containing AS species.Due to the amplification of genetic information during translation, the impact of transcriptome faults is further amplified at the proteome level (Marguerat et al. 2012).In addition, under HS conditions a specific transcriptome is expressed; concentration of errors within this transcript set further outsizes the impact of mistakes on the proteome (Supplementary Table S1).

In conclusion, transcription quality control is crucial for both ambient conditions and adapting to HS, operating on several levels.First, TFIIS acts as a fidelity factor, efficiently resolving RNA Polymerase II (RNAPII) halts.This reduces the time RNAPII spends arrested, thus contributing to the efficient completion of the transcription cycle (a quantitative aspect).Second, the cooperation between TFIIS and NMD pathways ensures transcriptome quality by suppressing the generation and accumulation of faulty transcription and splicing products.This is vital for proteostasis and overall cellular function (a qualitative aspect).Given that HS alters transcriptional accuracy and AS, the induction of TFIIS during elevated temperatures (Szadeczky-Kardoss et al. 2022) likely represents an adaptive response to enhance transcriptional and splicing fidelity.Ultimately, the transcriptome probably aims for an optimal trade-off between the quantity and quality of transcripts to ensure proper development and stress adaptation.


Materials and methods


Plant materials

Arabidopsis seeds were bleach sterilized, stratified for 2 days in the dark and plated on Murashige and Skoog (Duchefa M0222, https://duchefa-biochemie.com) medium agar plates (0.5× Murashige and Skoog salts, 0.5% sucrose, 1% agar, pH 5.8).Plants were routinely grown in a Sanyo MLR-350 growth cabinet under cool white light at 21 °C long-day condition (16 h light/8 h dark).

The tfIIs-1;upf3-1 plants are sterile at 21° C but can produce very low amounts of viable seed at 25 °C; this gives us the opportunity to obtain seeds.Further molecular works using these seeds were performed under standard conditions (on seedlings grown at 21 °C).


Mutant and transgenic lines used in the study

tfIIs-1 (SALK_056755) (Grasser et al. 2009), upf1-5 (SALK_081178) (Arciga-Reyes et al. 2006), upf3-1 (SALK_025175) (Arciga-Reyes et al. 2006).Mutant seeds were ordered from NASC (https:// arabidopsis.info).upf3-1 seeds were donated by K. Riha lab.By crossing these single mutants, we generated the double mutants used in the study.


Phenotyping analysis

For developmental characterization, Col-0 wild-type, tfIIs-1, upf1-5, upf3-1, tfIIs;upf1, and tfIIs;upf3 plants were grown in a Sanyo MLR-350 growth cabinet under cool white light at 21 °C long-day condition (16 h light/8 h dark) in soil.Three-week-old plants were examined using an automatized PlantScreen Modular high-throughput phenotyping system (Photon System Instruments Ltd, PSI, Brno).The measurements consisted of a 20-min dark adaptation period at 21 °C inside the acclimation chamber followed by chlorophyll fluorescence, RGB, and hyperspectral imaging.The morphological (plant area, diameter, eccentricity) and physiological (TCARI, F v /F m ) parameters were determined from the image analysis with the use of PlantScreen software tool package according to the software instructions (PSI, Brno).Color segmentation analysis was performed also from the RGB images: the size of the circles represents the number of pixels in each color class (n = 10).Statistical analysis is shown in Supplementary Table S4.


Heat stress treatments

For HS treatment regime, TMHT, 7-day-old seedlings were placed in a growing cabinet preheated to 37 °C and kept for 1 to 5 days.During the treatment, long-day conditions were used (16 h light/ 8 h dark).Treatments were started at midday (Zeitgeber time, ZT8).For molecular works, samples were collected immediately after treatment lasting for 1 hour (1 h), 1 day (1 d), or following a 2-day recovery period (RE).For phenotyping, plants (on agar plates) were treated as described above, then kept at 21 °C for 1 or 2 wk for post-growth, and then photographed.Statistical analysis is shown in Supplementary Table S4.


Mycophenolic acid treatment

For MPA treatments, seedlings were pre-grown for 7 days on 0.5× MS containing 0.5% sucrose and 1% agar media plates; on 7th day the seedlings were treated with 0.4 mg/mL MPA (ethanol stock solution 10 mg/mL), or solvent (CTL, ethanol), 2 mL/plate, respectively.For CirSeq library preparation, CTL-or MPA-treated seedlings were collected the next day (24 h treatment); for phenotyping experiments, the CTL-or MPA-treated seedlings were placed in plant growing cabinets and were grown at standard conditions for 14 days.Statistical analysis is shown in Supplementary Table S4.


CirSeq library preparations

All materials and reaction conditions for circle-sequencing were done as described previously (Fritsch et al. 2018).In brief, after total RNA extraction and polyadenylated RNA purification (to enrich for RNAPII products), the mRNA was enzymatically fragmented and then circularized.The circular RNAs were reverse transcribed during a rolling cycle reaction with a strand-displacing reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen SuperScript III RT; the product contains multiple concatenated units within a long single-molecule cDNA).After this, the single-stranded cDNA was converted into doublestranded form, end-repaired, dA-tailed, and finally adapterligated for library construction and sequencing.Sequencing service was performed by Novogene Ltd.If transcription mistakes are present in the original RNA template, the error will be detected on every concatenated copy, periodically in the very same position; if errors are made by technical inaccuracies of the methods (by reverse transcription, PCR amplification, or sequencing), they will be scattered along the cDNA concatenated units in different positions; therefore can be easily eliminated by bioinformatic selection (Fritsch et al. 2018) (see below).

For CirSeq sample preparation we have used non-treated (NT, plants grown at 21 °C, 16 h/8 h light/dark) and 1-day 37 °C-treated seedlings.The HS time-point was chosen because (i) transcription is generally suppressed at early time points of HS (TMHT/1h) but later (at TMHT/1d) broadly resumed (Szadeczky-Kardoss et al. 2022), and (ii) RNA-seq indicated that erroneous transcripts accumulate to higher levels after 1 d HS (Supplementary Fig. S1C).Notably, the TMHT/1d regime impacts very mildly the HS-sensitivity phenotype of tfIIs-1 or upf single and double mutant plants (Szadeczky-Kardoss et al. 2022), reducing the chance of pleiotropic indirect effects.


Bioinformatic analyses of circle-sequencing data

Raw circle-sequencing data of at least 3 biological replicates was analyzed according to previously described pipelines and codes (Chung, Verheijen, Zhang, et al. 2023), https://github.com/LynchLab/TranscriptErrors. Raw paired-end reads were trimmed with Cutadapt (https://doi.org/10.14806/ej.17.1.200).Tandem repeats were identified and consensus sequences of the repeats from the same read were created.The consensus sequences were mapped to the A. thaliana TAIR10 (v.56) cDNA dataset and the breakpoints (the ends of the initial RNA fragments before circularization) were identified.The consensus sequences were realigned to the RNAPII transcriptome with Tophat2 according to the breakpoints (Kent 2002).A refining step was implemented for the non-perfectly aligned sequences to search for a better breakpoint position before re-mapping these reads with Tophat2.Lastly, every mapped base was examined for identifying substitutions, insertions, and deletions, with the following conditions: (i) it needs to be part of at least 3 repeats on the same read; (ii) it is at least 3 nucleotides away from the ends of consensus; (iii) the sum of quality scores for the base is higher than 100; (iv) the identity of the repeats containing the base is at least 90%; (v) less than 1% of all base calls for the given position are different from the reference genome.

The Circo plot was created with Circos software (Krzywinski et al. 2009).Data were calculated for the metagene plots with deepTools (Ramirez et al. 2016).Sections of the metagenes were adjusted to the A. thaliana average transcript section lengths, namely the 5′UTR, the CDS, and the 3′UTR ratios (155:1391:242 nt, Srivastava et al. 2018;Pucker et al. 2019).The possible impact of errors on the amino acid changes was analyzed with SNPEFF software (Cingolani et al. 2012).We used the data from our previously published RNAseq dataset (Szadeczky-Kardoss et al. 2022) for the preliminary error rate analysis with the help of the webtool Alfred (https://www.gear-genomics.com)(Rausch et al. 2019).Gene ontology (GO) analysis was performed with the web tool g: Profiler (https://biit.cs.ut.ee/gprofiler/gost) (Raudvere et al. 2019) (Supplementary Table S1).


RNA extraction and RT-qPCR

RNA extraction and RT-qPCR were performed as previously described (Szadeczky-Kardoss et al. 2022): total RNA was purified by grinding about 30 mg of seedlings in 600 µL of extraction buffer (0.1 M glycine-NaOH, pH 9.0, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, 2% SDS) and extracting it with equal volumes of phenol-chloroform (pH 4.3) and chloroform; subsequently, RNA was precipitated with ethanol and resuspended in sterile water.For RT-qPCR assays, 5 μg total RNA was treated with DNase I according to the manufacturer instructions (Ambion AM2222, www.thermofisher.com),TFIIS and NMD ensure heat stress survival | 15 then precipitated in ethanol and resuspended in sterile water. 1 μg of DNase I-treated RNA and random primer was used for the firststrand cDNA reaction (NEB, E6300S, neb.com).qPCRs were done using qPCR Master Mix (NEB, M3003S, neb.com).qPCR reactions were run in a LightCycler 96 (Roche) real-time PCR machine.At least 3 biological samples were assessed in each experiment.P-values were calculated using unpaired 2-tailed Student's t-test to assess the significance of differences; t-test comparison of samples is shown where considered relevant.For primers and statistical analysis, please see Supplementary Table S4.


RNA transcriptome and AS analysis

Total RNA samples obtained from Col-0, tfIIs-1, upf1-5, upf3-1, tfIIs; upf1, and tfIIs;upf3 mutants under non-treated (NT), 1-hour (1 h) and 1-day (1 d) conditions from seedlings have been prepared for paired-end Illumina sequencing in 3 biological replicates each.Raw RNA-seq data have been made available in the SRA repository (repository link).We aligned reads to the Arabidopsis genome (TAIR10.v56)with HISAT2 (Kim et al. 2015).Differential expression analysis was made with StringTie (Pertea et al. 2015), Cuffquant, and Cuffdiff (Trapnell et al. 2012(Trapnell et al. , 2013)).Heatmaps were made with Cluster3.0(de Hoon et al. 2004) and Java Treeview (https://bitbucket.org/TreeView3Dev/treeview3/src/master/).

Alternative splicing analysis was performed with ASpli (v3.12) (Estefania et al. 2021).

For each gene, transcript exon coordinates were determined using Samtools (Li et al. 2009) and StringTie (Pertea et al. 2015), based on the RNA-seq alignment files.In silico transcript sequences were generated from the A. thaliana reference genome using these exon coordinates.Transcript identifiers, exon positions, sequences, and expression values (FPKM) were stored in a MySQL database and used for downstream steps.To predict amino acid sequences and support further examination, A. thaliana CDS and protein sequences were utilized.In silico translated proteins were generated from the predicted transcripts, enabling comparative studies and annotation refinement.For the further study of AS transcripts, ORFs, 3′UTR lengths, and introns within 3′UTRs, specific Python3 programs were used (https://github.com/galnora/as_analysis). GO term data of AS transcripts is made available in Supplementary Table S3.


Protein extraction and western blotting

For protein assays, heat-treated or non-treated 7-day seedlings were homogenized in protein extraction buffer (150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 6 M urea, 2% SDS, and 5% B-mercaptoethanol), treated for 5 min at 95 °C and cell debris removed by centrifugation at 18,000 × g at 4 °C for 10 min.The supernatants were resolved on 12% SDS-PAGE, transferred to Hybond PVDF membranes (GE Healthcare) and subjected to western blot analysis.Antibodies used for detection were the following: anti-sHSP-CI antibody (AS07 254, Agrisera), anti-HSP90-1 antibody (AS08 346, Agrisera), and anti-HSP101 (AS07 253, Agrisera); as secondary antibody we used monoclonal HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit (A6154, Sigma-Aldrich).The proteins were visualized by chemiluminescence (ECL kit; GE Healthcare) and quantified by Image Lab 5.1 (Bio-Rad); protein signals have been normalized to Rubisco large subunit (RbcL).Statistical analysis is shown in Supplementary Table S4.


Insoluble aggregate purification

For protein aggregate purifications, first total protein extracts were prepared by homogenization of 0.1 g fresh plant material in 2.4 mL aggregate isolation buffer [25 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM Na EDTA, 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 5 mM ϵ-amino-N-caproic acid, 1 mM benzamidine], first using a mortar and pestle and then a Cole-Parmer PTFE glass tissue grinder.The soluble and insoluble fractions were separated by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C.The soluble fraction was prepared by adding 2× SDS-PAGE sample buffer and heating for 5 min at 95 °C.The insoluble pelleted fraction was washed 5 times in the aggregate isolation buffer containing 0.1 g of quartz sand (Sigma-Aldrich); an additional wash was performed with aggregate isolation buffer without Triton X-100.The pellet containing the insoluble protein aggregates was resuspended in 400 mL 2× SDS-PAGE sample buffer, heat-treated for 5 min at 95 °C, and clarified by centrifugation at 1500 × g for 1 min before gel loading.Samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie brilliant blue; the whole lanes have been quantified by Image Lab 5.1 (Bio-Rad) and ratios calculated.Statistical analysis is shown in Supplementary Table S4.

Figure 1 .
1
Figure 1.Transcriptional fidelity is reduced at high temperature and in the absence of TFIIS.Analysis of transcriptional errors of CirSeq assays using wild type (Col-0) and various mutant plants grown at NT or heat stress conditions.A) Total error rates; B) substitution rates, C) insertion rates, D) deletion rates, and E) rates of different substitution types of RNAPII transcripts in Arabidopsis mutants; non-treated (NT), heat-treated 1-day (37 °C, 1 d); circles show single measurement values; bars represent standard errors, n = 3, A-D) letters indicate significant differences between the statistically different groups at P < 0.05 using Tukey's post hoc test (significance of substitutions' types rates differences are shown in Supplementary Fig.S2C).




Figure2.Transcriptional error topology across genome and Arabidopsis metagene.A) A total of 29,952 errors were detected to be distributed randomly across the entire genome (from inside to outside: scatter plot of the number of errors, heatmap of error rates (log 0.25), CirSeq total coverage using 500 kb segments, chromosomes (chr1-5), centromeres are indicated; B) Total error rates distribution between the 5 chromosomes (bars represent standard errors, n ≥ 3); C) Substitution rate distribution across metagene divided to scale into 5′ untranslated region (5′UTR), coding sequence (CDS) and 3′ untranslated region (3′UTR); D) Indel error rate distribution across the metagene; genotypes and treatments are shown on the top, non-treated (NT), heat-treated 1 day (37 °C, 1 d), translation START and STOP codons are indicated, ( for x-axis scale see Methods).


Figure 3 .
3
Figure 3. Error rate distributions within the sections of the transcript.Total error A), substitution B), insertion C), and deletion D) rates were summed and separately plotted for 5′ untranslated region (5′UTR), coding sequence (CDS), and 3′ untranslated region (3′UTR); genotypes and temperature regimes are displayed under diagrams.Bars represent standard errors, n ≥ 3; P-values based on 2-tailed Student's t-test ( ⋕ P < 0.05, ⋕⋕ P < 0.01, ⋕⋕⋕ P < 0.001) for CDS vs 5′ or 3′UTR comparisons are shown only.


Figure 4 .
4
Figure 4. NMD pathway is needed for heat stress survival.A) Phenotype of tfIIs-1, upf1-5, upf3-1, tfIIs-1;upf1-5, and tfIIs-1;upf3-1 mutants vs wt (Col-0) at ambient growth conditions (LD, 21 °C); B) Box plot of the NMD target transcripts (fragments per kilobase per million, FPKM; box plot elements: center line, median; box limits second and third quartiles; whiskers, upper and lower quartiles), conditions and genotypes are shown; n = 3, statistical difference (mutants vs Col-0 (wt)) P-values based on 2-tailed Student's t-test, ***P < 0.001; C) Heat-sensitivity phenotype of upf1-5 and upf3-1 mutants compared to Col-0 (wt); treatment durations are indicated, and quantification of TMHT experiments are shown in Supplementary Fig. S15A; D) Schematic of heat stress regime, thermotolerance to moderately high temperature (TMHT) and non-treated (NT) control, and triangles denote picturing times.


Figure 5 .
5
Figure5.Genetic interaction between TFIIS and NMD during HSR is needed for transcriptome reprogramming.A) Phenotype of tfIIs-1, upf1-5, tfIIs-1; upf1-5 and B) tfIIs-1, upf3-1, tfIIs-1;upf3-1 mutants compared to Col-0 (wt), quantification of TMHT experiments are shown in Supplementary Fig.S15B; C) Normalized FPKM changes of RNA transcriptomes in Col-0 (wt) and mutant lines during different temperature treatments (non-treated, NT; 1-h 37 °C, 1 h; 1-d 37 °C, 1 d ), n = 3; P-values based on 2-tailed Student's t-test **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 are shown for mutants vs Col-0 (wt); box plot elements: center line, median; box limits second and third quartiles; whiskers, upper and lower quartiles; D) Venn diagrams of transcripts commonly altered in upf1-5 and upf3-1 vs Col-0, or in the double mutants vs tfIIs-1; arrows represent up-or downregulated changes, respectively, and conditions are shown below; GO term analysis of the different groups of genes is shown in Supplementary TableS2.


Figure 6 .
6
Figure 6.TFIIS and NMD pathway regulate alternative splicing under ambient and heat stress conditions.A) Differentially accumulated AS transcript isoforms in genotypes and conditions shown, n ≥ 3; B) The different classes of AS transcripts retaining original STOP codon (short (sh) AS-ORFs and long (lg) AS-ORFs, ori-STOP) or acquiring a new STOP following AS (shAS-ORFs and lgAS-ORFs, neo-STOP); numbers denote AS isoforms; C) Canonical (top) or alternatively spliced transcripts' (bottom) ORF and 3′UTR lengths of shAS-ORFs;neo-STOP transcripts, each vertical line represents a transcript, sorted based on ORF lengths; D) Canonical ORFs, n = 3,264 vs AS-ORFs, n = 1,923 (left) or canonical 3′UTRs, n = 3,264 vs AS-3′UTRs, n = 1,923 (right) length changes as a consequence of differential splicing; P-values based on 2-tailed Student's t-test ***P < 0.001 are shown for AS vs canonical transcript variants; box plot elements: center line, median; box limits second and third quartiles; whiskers, upper and lower quartiles; E) AS-3′UTRs' intron numbers within shAS-ORFs;neo-STOP transcripts; F) Venn diagram of AS transcript numbers having long 3′UTR (>300 bp) and 3′UTR possessing at least one intron (≥1).


CFigure 7 .
7
Figure 7. Genetic interaction between TFIIS and NMD during HSR is needed for proteostasis.A) HsfA2 mRNA relative expression levels and B) sHSP-CI protein amount in mutants compared to Col-0 (wt); non-treated (NT), 1 h treatment at 37 °C (1 h), 1 day heat treatment (1 d) and 2 days recovery at ambient temperature (RE); circles show single measurement values; bars are standard errors, n ≥ 3; P-values based on 2-tailed Student's t-test *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 are shown for mutants vs Col-0 (wt) comparisons, nonsignificant (ns); C) soluble fraction (Rubisco large subunit, RbcL; HSP101, sHSP-CI) and insoluble fraction (aggregates, HSP101, sHSP-CI); treatments and genotypes are shown at top; insoluble/soluble quantification at Supplementary Fig. S24.


Figure 8 .
8
Figure 8. Transcriptional error rate changes in response to nucleotide imbalance.A) total error, substitution, insertion, and deletion rate and B) substitution rate measurements in Col-0 (wt) and tfIIs-1 mutant plants, solvent-treated, CTL, and one-day mycophenolic acid-treated (MPA); circles show single measurement values; bars represent standard errors, n = 2; in (A) the letters indicate significant differences between the genotypes and conditions at P < 0.05 using Tukey's post hoc test; significant differences of substitution rates (P < 0.05; Tukey's post hoc test) for B) panel are shown in Supplementary Fig. S26A.C) MPA-sensitivity phenotype of Col-0 and tfIIs-1 mutant plants (quantifications are shown in Supplementary Fig. S26B), treatment scheme is shown above, MPA treatment start is indicated with open triangle, CirSeq sampling at gray, time of picturing at black triangles; D) Working model of transcriptional fidelity and AS regulation (NT conditions are omitted for simplicity; see main text).

Accession numbersSequence data from this article can be found in the GenBank/ EMBL data libraries under accession numbers: AT2G38560 (TFIIS), AT5G47010 (UPF1), and AT1G33980 (UPF3).AcknowledgmentsWe are grateful to K. Riha for upf3-1 mutant seeds.Data availabilityRaw RNA-seq and CirSeq data have been made available in the SRA repository under the BioProject IDs: PRJNA729886 and PRJNA1152953, respectively.FundingThis work was supported by the National Research, Development and Innovation Fund [K-137722, K-139349, K146300], by Flagship Research Group Program of the Hungarian University of Agriculture and Life Sciences; by Horizon 2020 Framework Programme [grant no.739593; KIM NKFIA 2022-2.1.1-NL-2022-00005];by Tempus Public Foundation fellowship grant [to H.A. and R.V.]; funding for open access charge by National Research, Development and Innovation Fund [K-146300].Author contributionsSupplementary dataThe following materials are available in the online version of this article.Supplementary FigureS1.Elevated temperature (TMHT/1h and 1 d at 37 °C) promotes accumulation of transcription fidelity errors that are also partially dependent on TFIIS activity and temperature conditions.Supplementary TableS1.Cirseq GO analysis.Supplementary TableS2.RNAseq FPKM DEG GO analysis.Supplementary TableS3.RNAseq-AS_Aspli GO analysis.Supplementary TableS4.DNA oligos and statistical analysis.Conflict of interest statement.The authors declare no competing interest.Reporting summaryFurther information on research is available in the supplementary files linked to this article.
Mutational and fitness landscapes of an RNA virus revealed through population sequencing. A Acevedo, L Brodsky, R Andino, 10.1038/nature12861Nature. 74852014

TFIIS is required for reproductive development and thermal adaptation in barley. I Ahmad, A Kis, R Verma, I Szadeczky-Kardoss, H M Szaker, A Pettko-Szandtner, D Silhavy, Z Havelda, T Csorba, 10.1007/s00299-024-03345-1Plant Cell Rep. 202411260

UVSSA, UBP12, and RDO2/TFIIS contribute to Arabidopsis UV tolerance. Al Khateeb, W M Sher, A A Marcus, J M Schroeder, D F , 10.3389/fpls.2019.00516Front Plant Sci. 105162019

Critical role of transcript cleavage in Arabidopsis RNA polymerase II transcriptional elongation. W Antosz, J Deforges, 10.1105/tpc.19.00891Plant Cell. 322020

The composition of the Arabidopsis RNA polymerase II transcript elongation Complex reveals the interplay between elongation and mRNA processing factors. W Antosz, A Pfab, H F Ehrnsberger, 10.1105/tpc.16.00735Plant Cell. 2942017

UPF1 is required for nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) and RNAi in Arabidopsis. L Arciga-Reyes, L Wootton, M Kieffer, B Davies, 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02802.xPlant J. 4732006

Heat stress transcription factors as the central molecular rheostat to optimize plant survival and recovery from heat stress. A Bakery, S Vraggalas, B Shalha, H Chauhan, M Benhamed, S Fragkostefanakis, 10.1111/nph.20017New Phytol. 20241

A ratchet mechanism of transcription elongation and its control. G Bar-Nahum, V Epshtein, A E Ruckenstein, R Rafikov, A Mustaev, E Nudler, 10.1016/j.cell.2004.11.045Cell. 12022005

The nuclear exosome subunit HEN2 acts independently of the core exosome to assist transcription in Arabidopsis. S S Bhat, M Asgari, S Mermet, P Mishra, P Kindgren, 10.1093/plphys/kiae503Plant Physiol. 20244

K L Bokszczanin, Solanaceae Pollen Thermotolerance Initial Training Network. SPOT-ITN

Perspectives on deciphering mechanisms underlying plant heat stress response and thermotolerance. Fragkostefanakis S Consortium, 10.3389/fpls.2013.00315Front Plant Sci. 43152013

Maintenance of abiotic stress memory in plants: lessons learned from heat acclimation. Y-Y Charng, Mitra S Yu, S-J , 10.1093/plcell/koac313Plant Cell. 20231

FLOWERING LOCUS T mRNA is synthesized in specialized TFIIS and NMD ensure heat stress survival | 17 companion cells in Arabidopsis and Maryland mammoth tobacco leaf veins. Q Chen, R S Payyavula, L Chen, J Zhang, C Zhang, R Turgeon, 10.1073/pnas.1719455115Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 115112018

Evolutionary conservation of the fidelity of transcription. C Chung, B M Verheijen, Z Navapanich, E G Mcgann, S Shemtov, G-J Lai, P Arora, A Towheed, S Haroon, A Holczbauer, 10.1038/s41467-023-36525-wNat Commun. 202311547

The fidelity of transcription in human cells. C Chung, B M Verheijen, X Zhang, B Huang, A Coakley, E Mcgann, E Wade, O Dinep-Schneider, J Lagosh, M-E Anagnostou, 10.1073/pnas.2210038120Proc Natl Acad Sci. 1205e2210038120

A program for annotating and predicting the effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms. P Cingolani, A Platts, L L Wang, M Coon, T Nguyen, L Wang, S J Land, X Lu, D M Ruden, 10.4161/fly.19695SnpEff: SNPs in the genome of Drosophila melanogaster strain w1118; iso-2; iso-3. Fly (Austin). 2012

Heat shock induces premature transcript termination and reconfigures the human transcriptome. S Cugusi, R Mitter, G P Kelly, J Walker, Z Han, P Pisano, M Wierer, A Stewart, J Q Svejstrup, 10.1016/j.molcel.2022.01.007Mol Cell. 20228

Signaling pathways differentially affect RNA polymerase II initiation, pausing, and elongation rate in cells. C G Danko, N Hah, X Luo, A L Martins, L Core, J T Lis, A Siepel, W L Kraus, 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.02.015Mol Cell. 5022013

Open source clustering software. M J De Hoon, S Imoto, J Nolan, S Miyano, 10.1093/bioinformatics/bth078Bioinformatics. 200420

The feedback control of UPF3 is crucial for RNA surveillance in plants. E Degtiar, A Fridman, D Gottlieb, K Vexler, I Berezin, R Farhi, L Golani, O Shaul, 10.1093/nar/gkv237Nucleic Acids Res. 82015

NTR1 is required for transcription elongation checkpoints at alternative exons in Arabidopsis. J Dolata, Y Guo, A Kołowerzo, D Smolin ́ski, G Brzyżek, A Jarmołowski, S Świeżewski, 10.15252/embj.201489478EMBO J. 20154

Nonsense-mediated decay of alternative precursor mRNA splicing variants is a major determinant of the Arabidopsis steady state transcriptome. G Drechsel, A Kahles, A K Kesarwani, E Stauffer, J Behr, P Drewe, G Ratsch, A Wachter, 10.1105/tpc.113.115485Plant Cell. 102013

ASpli: integrative analysis of splicing landscapes through RNA-Seq assays. M Estefania, R Andres, Javier I Marcelo, Y Ariel, C , 10.1093/bioinformatics/btab141Bioinformatics. 2021

Global impact of unproductive splicing on human gene expression. B Fair, Buen Abad Najar, C F Zhao, J Lozano, S Reilly, A Mossian, G Staley, J P Wang, J Li, Y I , 10.1038/s41588-024-01872-xNat Genet. 20249

Transcription elongation of the plant RNA polymerase IV is prone to backtracking. C Fang, K Huang, X Wu, H Zhang, Z Gu, J Wang, Y Zhang, 10.1126/sciadv.adq3087Sci Adv. 2024103087

Plant autoimmunity-fresh insights into an old phenomenon. M Freh, J Gao, M Petersen, R Panstruga, 10.1093/plphys/kiab590Plant Physiol. 20223

Genome-wide surveillance of transcription errors in eukaryotic organisms. C Fritsch, J P Gout, M Vermulst, 10.3791/57731J Vis Exp. 139577312018

Nuclear sorting of RNA. W Garland, T H Jensen, 10.1002/wrna.1572Wiley Interdiscip Rev RNA. 20202e1572

Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay modulates immune receptor levels to regulate plant antibacterial defense. J Gloggnitzer, S Akimcheva, A Srinivasan, B Kusenda, N Riehs, H Stampfl, J Bautor, B Dekrout, C Jonak, J M Jimenez-Gomez, 10.1016/j.chom.2014.08.010Cell Host Microbe. 1632014

Light regulates plant alternative splicing through the control of transcriptional elongation. Godoy Herz, M A Kubaczka, M G Brzyżek, G Servi, L Krzyszton, M Simpson, C Brown, J Swiezewski, S Petrillo, E Kornblihtt, A R , 10.1016/j.molcel.2018.12.005Mol Cell. 52019

The landscape of transcription errors in eukaryotic cells. J-F Gout, Li W Fritsch, C Li, A Haroon, S Singh, L Hua, D Fazelinia, H Smith, Z Seeholzer, S , 10.1126/sciadv.1701484Sci Adv. 201710e1701484

Transcript elongation factor TFIIS is involved in Arabidopsis seed dormancy. M Grasser, C M Kane, T Merkle, M Melzer, J Emmersen, K D Grasser, 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.12.066J Mol Biol. 38632009

Nuclear UPF1 is associated with chromatin for transcription-coupled RNA surveillance. D Hong, T Park, S Jeong, 10.14348/molcells.2019.0116Mol Cells. 72019

Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) in animal embryogenesis: to die or not to die, that is the question. J Hwang, L E Maquat, 10.1016/j.gde.2011.03.008Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2142011

Fidelity of RNA polymerase II transcription controlled by elongation factor TFIIS. C Jeon, K Agarwal, 10.1073/pnas.93.24.13677Proc Natl Acad Sci. 241996

PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 2A B'η drives spliceosome subunit dephosphorylation to mediate alternative splicing following heat stress. S H Jo, H J Park, H Jung, G S Lee, J H Moon, H-S Kim, H-J Lee, C Jung, H S Cho, 10.1093/plcell/koaf117Plant Cell. 20255117

The Arabidopsis cyclophilin CYP18-1 facilitates PRP18 dephosphorylation and the splicing of introns retained under heat stress. S H Jo, H J Park, A Lee, H Jung, J M Park, S-Y Kwon, H-S Kim, H-J Lee, Y-S Kim, C Jung, 10.1093/plcell/koac084Plant Cell. 20226

Genome-wide dynamics of Pol II elongation and its interplay with promoter proximal pausing, chromatin, and exons. I Jonkers, H Kwak, J T Lis, 10.7554/eLife.02407Elife. 2014:3:e02407. 

Alternative splicing and nonsense-mediated decay modulate expression of important regulatory genes in Arabidopsis. M Kalyna, C G Simpson, N H Syed, D Lewandowska, Y Marquez, B Kusenda, J Marshall, J Fuller, L Cardle, J Mcnicol, 10.1093/nar/gkr932Nucleic Acids Res. 62012

BLAT-the BLAST-like alignment tool. W J Kent, 10.1101/gr.229202Genome Res. 1242002

Inter-kingdom conservation of mechanism of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Z Kerenyi, Z Merai, L Hiripi, A Benkovics, P Gyula, C Lacomme, E Barta, F Nagy, D Silhavy, 10.1038/emboj.2008.88EMBO J. 27112008

Both introns and long 3′-UTRs operate as cis-acting elements to trigger nonsense-mediated decay in plants. S Kertesz, Z Kerenyi, Z Merai, I Bartos, T Palfy, E Barta, D Silhavy, 10.1093/nar/gkl737Nucleic Acids Res. 212006

Architecture of the RNA polymerase II-TFIIS complex and implications for mRNA cleavage. H Kettenberger, K-J Armache, P Cramer, 10.1016/S0092-8674(03)00598-1S0092-8674(03) 00598-1Cell. 11432003

HISAT: a fast spliced aligner with low memory requirements. D Kim, B Langmead, S L Salzberg, 10.1038/nmeth.3317Nat Methods. 20154

Novel RNA polymerase II mutation suppresses transcriptional fidelity and oxidative stress sensitivity in rpb9Δ yeast. H Koyama, T Ueda, T Ito, K Sekimizu, 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01372.xGenes Cells. 22010

Circos: an information aesthetic for comparative genomics. M Krzywinski, J Schein, I Birol, J Connors, R Gascoyne, D Horsman, S J Jones, M A Marra, 10.1101/gr.092759.109Genome Res. 1992009

Genome-wide suppression of aberrant mRNA-like noncoding RNAs by NMD in Arabidopsis. Y Kurihara, A Matsui, K Hanada, M Kawashima, J Ishida, T Morosawa, M Tanaka, E Kaminuma, Y Mochizuki, A Matsushima, 10.1073/pnas.0808902106Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 72009

Quality and quantity control of gene expression by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. T Kurosaki, M W Popp, L E Maquat, 10.1038/s41580-019-0126-2Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 72019

The RNA helicases AtMTR4 and HEN2 target specific subsets of nuclear transcripts for degradation by the nuclear exosome in Arabidopsis thaliana. H Lange, H Zuber, F M Sement, J Chicher, L Kuhn, P Hammann, V Brunaud, C Berard, N Bouteiller, S Balzergue, 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004564PLoS Genet. 10e10045642014

Nucleo-cytoplasmic distribution of SAP18 reveals its dual function in splicing regulation and heat-stress response in Arabidopsis. A S Larran, J Ge, G Martin, J C De La Concepcion, Y Dagdas, J I Questa, 10.1016/j.xplc.2024.101180Plant Commun. 20251101180

Evidence for the widespread coupling of alternative splicing and nonsense-mediated mRNA decay in humans. B P Lewis, R E Green, S E Brenner, 10.1073/pnas.0136770100Proc Natl Acad Sci. 10012003

The sequence alignment/Map format and SAMtools. H Li, B Handsaker, A Wysoker, T Fennell, J Ruan, N Homer, G Marth, G Abecasis, R Durbin, 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp352Genome Project Data Processing Subgroup. 1000. 2009

A narrow range of transcript-error rates across the Tree of. W Li, S Baehr, M Marasco, L Reyes, D Brister, C S Pikaard, J-F Gout, M Vermulst, M Lynch, 10.1126/sciadv.adv9898Life. Sci Adv. 2025289898

Thermopriming triggers splicing memory in Arabidopsis. Y Ling, N Serrano, G Gao, M Atia, M Mokhtar, Y H Woo, J Bazin, A Veluchamy, M Benhamed, M Crespi, 10.1093/jxb/ery062J Exp Bot. 102018

Common and distinct functions of Arabidopsis class A1 and A2 heat shock factors in diverse abiotic stress responses and development. H-C Liu, Y-Y Charng, 10.1104/pp.113.221168Plant Physiol. 16312013

Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway in plants under stress: general gene regulatory mechanism and advances. R Luha, V Rana, A Vainstein, V Kumar, 10.1007/s00425-023-04317-7Planta. 2024351

Cooperative condensation of RNA-DIRECTED DNA METHYLATION 16 splicing isoforms enhances heat tolerance in Arabidopsis. J Ma, S Li, T Wang, Z Tao, S Huang, N Lin, Y Zhao, C Wang, P ; Li, S Marguerat, A Schmidt, S Codlin, Chen W Aebersold, R Bahler, J , 10.1016/j.cell.2012.09.019Nat Commun. 202512012Cell

Class I and II small heat shock proteins together with HSP101 protect protein translation factors during heat stress. F Mcloughlin, E Basha, M E Fowler, M Kim, J Bordowitz, S Katiyar-Agarwal, E Vierling, 10.1104/pp.16.00536Plant Physiol. 17222016

HSP101 interacts with the proteasome and promotes the clearance of ubiquitylated protein aggregates. F Mcloughlin, M Kim, R S Marshall, 10.1104/pp.19.00263Plant Physiol. 18042019

RNA editing of nuclear transcripts in Arabidopsis thaliana. Y Meng, D Chen, Jin Y Mao, C Wu, P Chen, M , 10.1186/1471-2164-11-s4-s12BMC Genomics. 2010S4S12

RNA polymerase II speed: a key player in controlling and adapting transcriptome composition. L Muniz, Nicolas E Trouche, D , 10.15252/embj.2020105740EMBO J. 202115e105740

XRN 5′->3′ exoribonucleases: structure, mechanisms and functions. V K Nagarajan, C I Jones, S F Newbury, P J Green, 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.03.005Biochim Biophys Acta. 6-72013

NTP-driven translocation by human RNA polymerase II. Y A Nedialkov, X Q Gong, S L Hovde, Y Yamaguchi, H Handa, J H Geiger, H Yan, Z F Burton, 10.1074/jbc.M301103200J Biol Chem. 2003. 20

Expression of the eRF1 translation termination factor is controlled by an autoregulatory circuit involving readthrough and nonsense-mediated decay in plants. T Nyiko, A Auber, L Szabadkai, A Benkovics, M Auth, Z Merai, Z Kerenyi, A Dinnyes, F Nagy, D Silhavy, 10.1093/nar/gkw1303Nucleic Acids Res. 72017

Plant nonsense-mediated mRNA decay is controlled by different autoregulatory circuits and can be induced by an EJC-like complex. T Nyiko, F Kerenyi, L Szabadkai, A H Benkovics, P Major, B Sonkoly, Z Merai, E Barta, E Niemiec, J Kufel, 10.1093/nar/gkt366Nucleic Acids Res. 132013

TFIIS is crucial during early transcript elongation for transcriptional reprogramming in response to heat stress. S Obermeyer, R Stockl, T Schnekenburger, H Kapoor, T Stempfl, U Schwartz, K D Grasser, 10.1016/j.jmb.2022.167917J Mol Biol. 20232167917

Distinct role of subunits of the Arabidopsis RNA polymerase II elongation factor PAF1C in transcriptional reprogramming. S Obermeyer, R Stockl, T Schnekenburger, C Moehle, U Schwartz, K D Grasser, 10.3389/fpls.2022.974625Front Plant Sci. 2022974625

Transcriptional regulatory network of plant heat stress response. N Ohama, H Sato, K Shinozaki, K Yamaguchi-Shinozaki, 10.1016/j.tplants.2016.08.015Trends Plant Sci. 20171

Plant nuclear RNA polymerase IV mediates siRNA and DNA methylation-dependent heterochromatin formation. Y Onodera, J R Haag, T Ream, Costa Nunes, P Pontes, O Pikaard, C S , 10.1016/j.cell.2005.02.007Cell. 12052005

Structural biology of RNA polymerase II transcription: 20 years on. S Osman, P Cramer, 10.1146/annurev-cellbio-042020-021954Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 3612020

Epigenetic regulation of repetitive elements is attenuated by prolonged heat stress in Arabidopsis. A Pecinka, H Q Dinh, T Baubec, M Rosa, N Lettner, Mittelsten Scheid, O , 10.1105/tpc.110.078493Plant Cell. 92010

StringTie enables improved reconstruction of a transcriptome from RNA-seq reads. M Pertea, G M Pertea, C M Antonescu, T-C Chang, J T Mendell, S L Salzberg, 10.1038/nbt.3122Nat Biotechnol. 3332015

A chromosome-level sequence assembly reveals the structure of the Arabidopsis thaliana Nd-1 genome and its gene set. B Pucker, D Holtgrawe, K B Stadermann, K Frey, B Huettel, R Reinhardt, B Weisshaar, 10.1371/journal.pone.0216233PLoS One. 145e02162332019

deepTools2: a next generation web server for deep-sequencing data analysis. F Ramirez, D P Ryan, B Gruning, V Bhardwaj, F Kilpert, A S Richter, S Heyne, F Dundar, T Manke, 10.1093/nar/gkw257Nucleic Acids Res. W12016

Profiler: a web server for functional enrichment analysis and conversions of gene lists (2019 update). U Raudvere, L Kolberg, I Kuzmin, T Arak, P Adler, H Peterson, J Vilo, 10.1093/nar/gkz369Nucleic Acids Res. W12019

Alfred: interactive multi-sample BAM alignment statistics, feature counting and feature annotation for long-and short-read sequencing. T Rausch, Hsi-Yang Fritz, M Korbel, J O Benes, V , 10.1093/bioinformatics/bty1007Bioinformatics. 142019

Aberrant growth and lethality of Arabidopsis deficient in nonsensemediated RNA decay factors is caused by autoimmune-like response. N Riehs-Kearnan, J Gloggnitzer, B Dekrout, C Jonak, K Riha, 10.1093/nar/gks195Nucleic Acids Res. 122012

Relevance and regulation of alternative splicing in plant heat stress response: current understanding and future directions. Rre Rosenkranz, S Ullrich, K Lochli, S Simm, S Fragkostefanakis, 10.3389/fpls.2022.911277Front Plant Sci. 20221391127719

A plant-specific clade of serine/arginine-rich proteins regulates RNA splicing homeostasis and thermotolerance in tomato. Rre Rosenkranz, S Vraggalas, M Keller, S Sankaranarayanan, F Mcnicoll, K Lochli, D Bublak, M Benhamed, M Crespi, T Berberich, 10.1093/nar/gkae730Nucleic Acids Res. 202419

Evolution of two modes of intrinsic RNA polymerase transcript cleavage. W Ruan, E Lehmann, M Thomm, D Kostrewa, P Cramer, 10.1074/jbc.M111.222273J Biol Chem. 201121

8-Oxoguanine-mediated transcriptional mutagenesis causes Ras activation in mammalian cells. T T Saxowsky, K L Meadows, A Klungland, P W Doetsch, 10.1073/pnas.0806464105Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 482008

Arabidopsis plants having defects in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay factors UPF1, UPF2, and UPF3 show photoperiod-dependent phenotypes in development and stress responses. C Shi, I T Baldwin, J Wu, 10.1111/j.1744-7909.2012.01093.xJ Integr Plant Biol. 20122

The RNA helicase UPF1 associates with mRNAs co-transcriptionally and is required for the release of mRNAs from gene loci. A K Singh, S R Choudhury, S De, J Zhang, S Kissane, V Dwivedi, P Ramanathan, M Petric, L Orsini, D Hebenstreit, 10.7554/eLife.414442019Elife8e41444

UTR-dependent control of gene expression in plants. A K Srivastava, Y Lu, G Zinta, Z Lang, J-K Zhu, 10.1016/j.tplants.2017.11.003Trends Plant Sci. 2332018

Enhanced nucleotide analysis enables the quantification of deoxynucleotides in plants and algae revealing connections between nucleoside and deoxynucleoside metabolism. H Straube, M Niehaus, S Zwittian, C-P Witte, M Herde, 10.1093/plcell/koaa028Plant Cell. 20212

The cytosolic protein response as a subcomponent of the wider heat shock response in Arabidopsis. A Sugio, R Dreos, F Aparicio, A J Maule, 10.1105/tpc.108.062596Plant Cell. 2122009

RNA polymerase fidelity and transcriptional proofreading. J F Sydow, P Cramer, 10.1016/j.sbi.2009.10.009Curr Opin Struct Biol. 62009

The nonstop decay and the RNA silencing systems operate cooperatively in plants. I Szadeczky-Kardoss, T Csorba, A Auber, A Schamberger, T Nyiko, J Taller, T I Orban, J Burgyan, D Silhavy, 10.1093/nar/gky279Nucleic Acids Res. 462018

The No-go decay system degrades plant mRNAs that contain a long A-stretch in the coding region. I Szadeczky-Kardoss, L Gal, A Auber, J Taller, D Silhavy, 10.1016/j.plantsci.2018.07.008Plant Sci. 2752018

Elongation factor TFIIS is essential for heat stress adaptation in plants. I Szadeczky-Kardoss, H M Szaker, R Verma, E Darko, A Pettko-Szandtner, D Silhavy, T Csorba, 10.1093/nar/gkac020Nucleic Acids Res. 20224

Differential alternative splicing coupled to nonsense-mediated decay of mRNA ensures dietary restriction-induced longevity. S S Tabrez, R D Sharma, V Jain, A A Siddiqui, A Mukhopadhyay, 10.1038/s41467-017-00370-5Nat Commun. 20171306

Differential analysis of gene regulation at transcript resolution with RNA-Seq. C Trapnell, D G Hendrickson, M Sauvageau, L Goff, J L Rinn, L Pachter, 10.1038/nbt.2450Nat Biotechnol. 12013

Differential gene and transcript expression analysis of RNA-Seq experiments with TopHat and Cufflinks. C Trapnell, A Roberts, L Goff, G Pertea, D Kim, D R Kelley, H Pimentel, S L Salzberg, J L Rinn, L Pachter, 10.1038/nprot.2012.016Nat Protoc. 732012

Exosome-mediated recognition and degradation of mRNAs lacking a termination codon. A Van Hoof, P A Frischmeyer, H C Dietz, R Parker, 10.1126/science.1067272Science. 55632002

Mighty dwarfs: Arabidopsis autoimmune mutants and their usages in genetic dissection of plant immunity. R Van Wersch, X Li, Y Zhang, 10.3389/fpls.2016.01717Front Plant Sci. 717172016

Transcription errors induce proteotoxic stress and shorten cellular lifespan. M Vermulst, A S Denney, M J Lang, C-W Hung, S Moore, M A Moseley, J W Thompson, V Madden, J Gauer, K J Wolfe, 10.1038/ncomms9065Nat Commun. 201518065

The Arabidopsis NMD factor UPF3 is feedbackregulated at multiple levels and plays a role in plant response to salt stress. K Vexler, M A Cymerman, I Berezin, A Fridman, L Golani, M Lasnoy, H Saul, O Shaul, 10.3389/fpls.2016.01376Front Plant Sci. 713762016

Plant small heat shock proteins-evolutionary and functional diversity. E R Waters, E Vierling, 10.1111/nph.16536New Phytol. 22712020

Alternative splicing of TaHSFA6e modulates heat shock protein-mediated translational regulation in response to heat stress in wheat. J Wen, Z Qin, L Sun, Y Zhang, D Wang, H Peng, Y Yao, Z Hu, Z Ni, Q Sun, 10.1111/nph.19100New Phytol. 20236

Proteasome resides in and dismantles plant heat stress granules constitutively. Z Xie, S Zhao, Y Tu, E Liu, Y Li, X Wang, C Chen, S Zhai, J Qi, C Wu, 10.1016/j.molcel.2024.07.033Mol Cell. 202417

The features and regulation of co-transcriptional splicing in Arabidopsis. D Zhu, F Mao, Y Tian, X Lin, L Gu, H Gu, L Qu, -J, Y Wu, Z Wu, 10.1016/j.molp.2019.11.004Mol Plant. 1322020