Topical Focal Adhesion Kinase Inhibitor Promotes Skin Regeneration and Scar Prevention in a Preclinical Porcine Model


MDThanapoom Boonipat 
Mayo Clinic
RochesterMNUSA

MDMalke Assad 
Mayo Clinic
RochesterMNUSA

BSJason Lin 
Mayo Clinic
RochesterMNUSA

MDMitchell Stotland 
Sidra Medical
DohaQatar

Stanford University
StanfordCAUSA

MDSamir Mardini 
Mayo Clinic
RochesterMNUSA

PhDSun Hyung Kwon 
MDBritta Kuehlmann 
MDTeruyuki Dohi 
BSArtem A Trotsyuk 
MDMichael S Hu 
MDGeoffrey C Gurtner 
Topical Focal Adhesion Kinase Inhibitor Promotes Skin Regeneration and Scar Prevention in a Preclinical Porcine Model
91 PSRC Abstract Supplement 131
PURPOSE: Facial reanimation surgery outcome assessment has primarily been accomplished using traditional methods such as subjective scoring and measurement of symmetry. This does not provide information about emotional expression, which is the key function of the face, and the ultimate goal of facial reanimation surgery. Advances in deep learning and artificial intelligence have led to the development of software that can quantify the proportion of different emotions expressed during a facial expression. Using this type of software analysis, we have evaluated the outcomes of facial reanimation surgery on the emotions expressed by a sample of smiling patients. We believe this instantaneous evaluation of emotional expression will lead to a more meaningful assessment of patient function and outcomes.METHODS:Videos clips of patients who underwent facial reanimation surgery were analyzed, both preoperatively and at least 6-7 months post surgery. FaceReader software from Noldus Information Technology (Wageningen, The Netherlands) was utilized to analyze 2 second videos in which patients were instructed to smile without showing teeth, pre and post operatively. Neutral videos of the patients, and smile/neutral videos of healthy volunteers were also analyzed as controls. The classification of facial expressions by the software is done by training an artificial neural network, using over 10,000 images that have been manually annotated by trained experts. The software detects signs of the 6 cardinal expressions of emotion, and then provides data for proportion of each emotion being expressed by any given facial movement.RESULTS: Demographics data and results are shown in Exhibit 1. The average happy emotion detected in neutral videos increased from 2.47%to 3.19%(p=0.94) pre to post operatively, and in smile videos increased significantly(p=0.0006). Bilateral reconstructions had lower scores (average 2.85% preoperatively vs10% happy postoperatively with smile) compared to left(10.9%to44%), and right (12%to35%). Gracilis muscle transfer had the best reconstructive outcomes, while temporalis have almost equally good outcomes. Neutral emotions comprised the majority of the other emotion detected during smile(60%preoperatively, 40.7%postoperatively looking at all patients combined). Eight normal subjects aged 26-28 were also filmed during smile and neutral expression, and their resultant videos analyzed. Happy emotion was 53% (SD21.2) during smile vs 0.7% (SD2) during neutral, compared to the average 38% happy detected following gracilis transfer reanimation smile. There was good correlation between the changes in Terzis score and happy emotion pre and post operatively (Exhibit 1, Spearman correlation 0.5127(p=0.0208)) CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates the utility of a facial emotional recognition software to analyze the outcomes of facial reanimation surgery. We show good correlation in the increased in happy emotion detected during smile and the increase in Terzis score in the facial reanimation patients. This tool can be used to instantaneously give feedback to both surgeons and patients, allow better outcomes study on a larger scale, and inform surgeons on subtle facial movements that will lead to increased expressivity of emotions during a smile.PURPOSE:Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) plays a pivotal role in transducing mechanical signals to cells during cutaneous wound repair resulting in increased fibrosis. We have previously shown that pharmacological inhibition of FAK signaling suppresses fibrotic cellular events and attenuates hypertrophic scar (HTS) formation following deep dermal injury. Clinical translation of FAK inhibitor (FAKI) therapy has been challenging, however, due to the lack of an effective localized drug delivery system especially for extensive burn and large-sized injuries. In our previous studies, pullulan-collagen hydrogel-mediated FAKI delivery to excisional and burn wounds accelerated healing and reduced HTS formation in mice. Here we evaluated the efficacy and safety of topical FAKI hydrogel therapy in a preclinical human-like large animal model.

PURPOSE: Facial reanimation surgery outcome assessment has primarily been accomplished using traditional methods such as subjective scoring and measurement of symmetry. This does not provide information about emotional expression, which is the key function of the face, and the ultimate goal of facial reanimation surgery. Advances in deep learning and artificial intelligence have led to the development of software that can quantify the proportion of different emotions expressed during a facial expression. Using this type of software analysis, we have evaluated the outcomes of facial reanimation surgery on the emotions expressed by a sample of smiling patients. We believe this instantaneous evaluation of emotional expression will lead to a more meaningful assessment of patient function and outcomes.


METHODS:

Videos clips of patients who underwent facial reanimation surgery were analyzed, both preoperatively and at least 6-7 months post surgery. FaceReader software from Noldus Information Technology (Wageningen, The Netherlands) was utilized to analyze 2 second videos in which patients were instructed to smile without showing teeth, pre and post operatively. Neutral videos of the patients, and smile/neutral videos of healthy volunteers were also analyzed as controls. The classification of facial expressions by the software is done by training an artificial neural network, using over 10,000 images that have been manually annotated by trained experts. The software detects signs of the 6 cardinal expressions of emotion, and then provides data for proportion of each emotion being expressed by any given facial movement.


RESULTS

: Demographics data and results are shown in Exhibit 1. The average happy emotion detected in neutral videos increased from 2.47%to 3.19%(p=0.94) pre to post operatively, and in smile videos increased significantly(p=0.0006). Bilateral reconstructions had lower scores (average 2.85% preoperatively vs10% happy postoperatively with smile) compared to left(10.9%to44%), and right (12%to35%). Gracilis muscle transfer had the best reconstructive outcomes, while temporalis have almost equally good outcomes. Neutral emotions comprised the majority of the other emotion detected during smile(60%preoperatively, 40.7%postoperatively looking at all patients combined). Eight normal subjects aged 26-28 were also filmed during smile and neutral expression, and their resultant videos analyzed. Happy emotion was 53% (SD21.2) during smile vs 0.7% (SD2) during neutral, compared to the average 38% happy detected following gracilis transfer reanimation smile. There was good correlation between the changes in Terzis score and happy emotion pre and post operatively (Exhibit 1, Spearman correlation 0.5127(p=0.0208)) CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates the utility of a facial emotional recognition software to analyze the outcomes of facial reanimation surgery. We show good correlation in the increased in happy emotion detected during smile and the increase in Terzis score in the facial reanimation patients. This tool can be used to instantaneously give feedback to both surgeons and patients, allow better outcomes study on a larger scale, and inform surgeons on subtle facial movements that will lead to increased expressivity of emotions during a smile.


Topical Focal Adhesion Kinase Inhibitor Promotes Skin Regeneration and Scar Prevention in a Preclinical Porcine Model


Sun Hyung Kwon, PhD, Britta Kuehlmann, MD, Teruyuki Dohi, MD, Artem A. Trotsyuk, BS, Michael S. Hu, MD, Geoffrey C. Gurtner, MD

Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA PURPOSE: Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) plays a pivotal role in transducing mechanical signals to cells during cutaneous wound repair resulting in increased fibrosis. We have previously shown that pharmacological inhibition of FAK signaling suppresses fibrotic cellular events and attenuates hypertrophic scar (HTS) formation following deep dermal injury. Clinical translation of FAK inhibitor (FAKI) therapy has been challenging, however, due to the lack of an effective localized drug delivery system especially for extensive burn and large-sized injuries. In our previous studies, pullulan-collagen hydrogel-mediated FAKI delivery to excisional and burn wounds accelerated healing and reduced HTS formation in mice. Here we evaluated the efficacy and safety of topical FAKI hydrogel therapy in a preclinical human-like large animal model.


METHODS:

Seven female red Duroc pigs (16-20 kg) were used to create 6 to 8 deep partial-thickness dorsal wounds each of about 25 cm 2 per animal. With multiple dermatome passes, each wound depth was uniformly excised to be 0.070 in. to create near full-thickness excision in the center and deep partial-thickness in the periphery as previously described in the literature. Animals received either standard bandage dressings, blank hydrogel alone (placebo), or FAKI-releasing hydrogel dressings immediately after wounding. Dressings and hydrogels were changed every 2 days until the wounds closed and then every 4 days thereafter. Wound closure rate, HTS formation, and regrowth of hair follicles and skin appendages were evaluated over 6 months.


RESULTS:

Excisional wound healing was significantly accelerated with localized FAKI hydrogel treatment. FAKItreated wounds closed significantly faster on day 14 ± 2.3 vs. day 24 ± 1.6 for control wounds vs. 24 ± 0.8 for placebo wounds (N=8 for each group, statistical difference at p<0.01). Visually inspected scars were dramatically reduced with FAKI hydrogel treatment compared to untreated control or placebo wounds. Lower Visual Analog Scale (VAS) scores relative to untreated control wounds determined by a panel of blinded scar experts indicated improved scar appearance evaluated at Day 90 and at Day 180 (control VAS=100 vs. placebo 93 ± 4.6 vs. FAKI 58 ± 6.5, N=8 for each group, statistical difference at p<0.001). FAKI-treated wounds regenerated skin appendages including hair follicles and eccrine glands. Histology and immunoblotting analyses demonstrated that α-smooth muscle actin expression in the scar lesions was substantially attenuated with FAKI treatment suggesting that FAKI blocks myofibroblast recruitment and activation. Lastly, the collagen fibril architecture of FAKI-treated wound was very similar to the basket weave pattern of unwounded pig skin while collagen organization of untreated control and placebo wounds appeared randomly disorganized.


CONCLUSION:

Biomaterial-based topical delivery of FAKI was effective in improving wound healing, reducing scar formation, and promoting regeneration in a large animal model, and holds great potential as an effective therapeutic strategy for wound and scar management of large and deep dermal wounds.


132


Does Migraine Surgery Affect Medication Use?


Ricardo Ortiz, BSc, Lisa Gfrerer, MD PhD, Marek A. Hansdorfer, MD, Kassandra Nealon, BSc, William G. Austen, Jr., MD

Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA PURPOSE: Patients with migraine headaches (MH) suffer debilitating pain that often leads to the use of numerous medications. MH surgery has emerged as an effective treatment in select patients. The aim of this study was to describe preoperative and postoperative medication use among patients undergoing MH surgery.

METHODS: 160 patients undergoing MH surgery between 2013 and 2018 were prospectively enrolled. Information on medication use, including type, dose, and frequency of use was collected. Follow up surveys were sent to all patients twelve months postoperatively.


RESULTS

: 109 patients met inclusion criteria. Preoperatively, 95% of patients described taking prescription medication for their MH pain. Type of medication varied among patients but included abortive in 46%, preventative in 54%, rescue in 62%, and antiemetic in 18%. At twelve months postoperatively, 64% of patients reported using less prescription medication. Patients reported a 67% decrease in the number of days they took medication. Twenty percent stopped medications altogether. Fifty-two percent of patients reported that their migraine medication helped them more compared to preoperatively. CONCLUSION: MH surgery has been shown to improve symptoms in up to 90% of patients. We now show that it is also associated with a significant decrease in medication use. It is important for surgeons to be aware of this data as we continue to counsel future patients. 


133


Implant Fibrosis is Caused by a Unique Subgroup of Collagen Producing Macrophages


Britta A. Kuehlmann, M.D., PhD 1 , Clark Andrew Bonham 1 , Lukas Prantl, MD, PhD 2 , Geoffrey C. Gurtner, M.D., FACS 1
Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA, USA, 2 University Hospital