INHIBITION OF RESTRAINT ULCERS IN THE RAT


Walter R Thayer 
Department of Internal Medicine
School of Medicine
Yale University


A H Toffler 
Department of Internal Medicine
School of Medicine
Yale University


Gisele Chapo 
Department of Internal Medicine
School of Medicine
Yale University


Howard M Spirot 
Department of Internal Medicine
School of Medicine
Yale University


Pyridoxine Deficiencyt 
Department of Internal Medicine
School of Medicine
Yale University


INHIBITION OF RESTRAINT ULCERS IN THE RAT
Received for publication 27 July 1965. 257No attempt was made to count the * Assistant Professor of Medicine. Present address: Rhode Island Hospital, Eddy Street, Providence, Rhode Island. ** Research Fellow in Medicine. *** Assistant in Research. t Associate Professor of Medicine.
A rat immobilized for 24 hours will develop ulcerations in the glandular area of the stomach."'3 Although these ulcers or erosions have been attributed to stress, the mechanism that causes them is unknown.! Both vagotomy and anticholinergic drugs reduce the incidence of these ulcers, suggesting the role of acid in their production.2"'3 Studies to date, however, have failed to show consistently increased acid secretion in restrained animals."' Moreno and Brodie have suggested that restraint ulcers resemble those produced by high doses of histamine. Since the mucosa of the rat's stomach contains much histamine,8 and has a high histamineforming capacity (HFC),9 it seemed of interest to ascertain whether histamine is a mediator of restraint ulcers.MATERIALS AND METHODSMale Wistar rats weighing 250-400 grams, were used in all experiments. Control animals (hereafter referred to as such) were raised on a routine diet (Big Red Rat and Mouse Food, Coop Exchange, Waverly, N. Y.). The pyridoxine-deficient group were fed a pyridoxine-deficient diet (Nutritional Biochemical Corp.) for three months until all developed the typical skin lesions described by others.lc 11 Each animal was restrained after a 24-hour deprivation of food and water by wrapping in a wire-mesh screen so that it could not move. After 24 hours restraint, it was anesthetized, the stomach removed, opened along the greater curvature, and examined under 1OX magnification of the dissecting microscope for ulcerations. All stomachs were examined without prior knowledge of the animals' previous diet. Only definite erosions in the mucosal surface of the stomach as seen under the dissecting microscope were considered ulcers.

number or grade the severity of the ulcerations; only the presence or absence of ulcers was noted.

Histamine-forming capacity was measured by a revision of Schayer's method.2 Instead of crystallizing the histamine as dibenzenesulfonyl histamine, the hydrochloric acid extract of the butanol which contains the histamine was counted directly. The full procedure is as follows: The full thickness glandular area of the stomach was removed from the rat, and at once placed in a test tube and immersed in a dry ice ethanol bath for quick freezing. The tissues were then stored at -20' C. until used. The frozen glandular portion of the stomach was thawed and a 10 per cent tissue homogenate in phosphate buffer made. This was divided into three 0.4 ml. portions.

One portion was evaporated to dryness in a weighed container to be utilized for determination of the dry weight of tissue. Another portion was boiled for five minutes for use as a tissue blank. The blank and the remaining aliquot was then incubated with 2.0 ml. of phosphate buffer, pH 7.2, (containing 0.2 per cent glucose), and 7.5 gamma of C1' L-histidine (S.ACT. 21.6/ c/mm Nuclear Chicago Corp.) under nitrogen for three hours at 370 C. After incubation, 1 ml. of a solution containing 16.5 mg. L-histidine monohydrochloride and 0.5 mg. histamine dihydrochloride as carrier was added. Two milliliters of a 0.6N perchloric acid was then added, the solution was mixed and allowed to stand for 20 minutes. The solution was then transferred to a test tube, and centrifuged for 10 minutes. Two milliliters of the supernatant was then transferred into a vial containing 1.5 gm. NaCI, 10 ml. of watersaturated butanol, and 0.5 ml. 10 N NaOH. The vial was vigorously shaken for 15 minutes and then centrifuged for five minutes. A 0.7 ml. aliquot of the clear top butanol layer, which contains the histamine, was then transferred to another vial and washed twice with 2 mil. of a 0.1 N NaOH solution saturated with NaCl. After five minutes of centrifugation the bottom layer was discarded. A 5 ml. aliquot of the remaining butanol layer was then placed in a new vial containing 2 ml. of 0.1 N HCI. The solution was shaken for 15 minutes and then centrifuged for five. The top layer was aspirated and discarded; 0.2 ml. of the bottom was then removed and placed in a vial that had previously been counted containing 15 ml. of a counting solution prepared by dissolving 4 gm. of PPO* in 1,000 ml. of Toluene and 500 ml. of absolute ethyl alcohol, for counting in a liquid scintillation spectrometer (Nuclear Chicago). Spectrofluorometric analysis of the hydrochloric-acid extract confirmed full recovery of the carrier histamine. To ascertain that the observed counts actually represented newly formed C1-histamine by the tissues and not unconverted C'histidine, the histamine-forming capacity of duplicate aliquots of homogenates of two control animals were run, with and without incubation.

In samples without incubation no counts were obtained in the hydrochloric-acid extract. The difference between the count of the sample and tissue blank were expressed in terms of the dry weight of the sample as counts per minute of derived histamine per 0.1 mg. dry weight of tissue.

Gastric secretion was collected for four hours by the method described by Shay, et al.' The gastric juice was measured for volume and total acidity, titrating electrometrically to a pH of 7 with 0.1 N NaOH. Results are expressed in mEq HCl per hour. The following experiments were done:

(1) 31 pyridoxine-deficient rats and 44 control-fed rats underwent restraint. The stomachs of 11 pyridoxine-deficient, and 11 control rats were assayed for HFC.

Pyridoxine Deficiency and Ulcers THAYER, TOFFLER, CHAPO, SPIRO Histologic and histochemical studies consisting of triphosphopyridinenucleotide diaphorase, nonspecific esterase (Holt's method), monoamine oxidase (Glenner method), acid phosphatase, and lactic dehydrogenase were carried out1' on the gastric mucosa of both the normal and pyridoxine-deficient animals.

(2) Gastric secretion was measured in 16 pyridoxine-deficient rats and 24 control rats. In order to make it unnecessary to express gastric secretion in terms of weight, normal rats of weights identical to the pyridoxine-deficient rats were selected; all rats weighed between 275 and 330 gm.

(3) Six pairs of rats, litter mates, were raised on identically weighed pyridoxinedeficient diets for three months; one rat of each pair received a daily oral supplement of 25 mg. of pyridoxine. At the end of the three-month period, both members of each pair were restrained in the usual fashion. (4) Four control rats were given intra-peritoneal injections of deoxypyridoxine, 25 mg. daily for two weeks, while another four animals were given a pyridoxinedeficient diet along with the daily intra-peritoneal injections of 25 mg. of deoxypyridoxine. Three animals were fed a pyridoxine-deficient diet alone for two weeks.

(5) Eight rats were given diphenhydramine hydrochloride intraperitoneally 50 mg. pre kg. twice daily on the day before and the day of restraint.

(6) Six rats were given alpha-methyl-DOPA (alpha-methyl-3,4, dihydroxyphenylalanine, Aldomet) 250 mg. per kg. twice daily for seven days intraperitoneally. At the end of this time they underwent restraint. HFC determinations were carried out on their stomachs.

(7) Fonur rats were given intraperitoneal injections of alpha-methyl-histidine 250 mg. per kg. twice daily for seven days before being restrained. HFC determinations were carried out on their stomachs.

(8) Four rats were injected intraperitoneally with semicarbazide 75 mg. per kg. twice daily for seven days and then restrained. HFC determinations were carried out on two of the animals.


RESULTS

In experiment 1 we see that pyridoxine deficiency inhibited the development of restraint ulcers (Table 1). This was not an effect of starvation or of secondary vitamin deficiency since animals kept on the same diet but given small supplements of pyridoxine (experiment 3) were as susceptible to the development of restraint ulcers as were the control animals (Table 2). In spite of equal caloric intake the pyridoxine-supplemented group weighed 30 ± 20 gm. more than the deficient group. Similar results were reported by Boullin.' Also the incidence of restraint ulcers was reduced in animals that had been fed the pyridoxine-deficient diet for two weeks only, along with the pyridoxine antagonist, deoxypyridoxine (experiment 4). With the exception of two animals that did develop ulcers the HFC of the pyridoxine-deficient group was much lower than that of the controls (Fig. 1). In experiment 2, gastric hydrochloric acid secretion was markedly diminished in the pyridoxine-deficient rats ( Table 3).

The anti-histamine diphenhydramine hydrochloride (experiment 5) and the histidine decarboxylase inhibitors, alpha-methyl-DOPA (experiment 6), alpha-methyl histidine (experiment 7), and semicarbazide (experiment 8) all failed to prevent restraint ulcers ( Pyridoxine Deficiency and Ulcers I rIIAY ER, TOFFLER, CHAPO, SP'IRO per 0.1 mg. tissue respectively. These results are similar to those of the control animals (Fig. 1).

No structural or histochemical differences in the gastric mucosa were noted between the pyridoxine-deficient rats and their controls. 


DISCUSSION

Histamine is formed from the decarboxylation of histidine, a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme histidine decarboxylase, and its coenzyme pyridoxal-5-phosphate.NM Pyridoxine deficiency decreases histamine-forming capacity in tissues.'7 These experiments suggest that it is the pyridoxine deficiency that reduces histamine formation, and circumstantially that this reduction in histamine-forming capacity is responsible for the observed decrease in the incidence of ulcerations in the stomach. Since two pyridoxine-deficient animals with normal levels of gastric HFC were the ones that developed ulcers, histamine may be one of the mediators of restraint ulceration.

The present finding of a decreased HFC after pyridoxine deficiency is more striking than those of Kahlson, et al, whose experimental animals ate a pyridoxine-deficient diet for only two weeks.' The reduced HFC was not the result of a reduction in histidine decarboxylase, but rather of the pyridoxal-5-phosphate cofactor; when pyridoxal-5-phosphate was added to the homogenate in vitro, normal levels of activity resulted. It must be kept in mind that pyridoxal-5-phosphate is a coenzyme for many other reactions, being required for practically all the reactions involving the non-oxidative degradation and interconversion of free amino acids.l' A block in some other pathway dependent on pyridoxal-5-phosphate might be responsible for the results noted here.

Our technique for HFC determination is a modification of that of Schayer and others"' and for this reason the values of HFC in this report are not necessarily comparable to theirs. Our technique avoids crystallization of the dibenzenesulfonyl histamine and thereby shortens the procedure without apparently decreasing its accuracy.

Selye has shown that prior restraint markedly diminishes an animal's general response to a histamine liberator, 48-80.' Selye suggested that this was the result of protection by endogenous corticoids, but an alternative explanation suggested by the present experiments is that restraint so exhausted the histamine stores that there could be no further response to a histamine liberator.

The failure to prevent restraint ulcers by the use of antihistaminics was not unexpected, since these agents do not reduce the incidence of histamine ulcerations." We did not find a reduction in the incidence of ulcers with alpha-methyl-DOPA, alpha-methyl-histidine, and semicar-bazide, which are inhibitors of histidine decarboxylase ;" however, in vAvo these substances are not very potent histidine decarboxylase inhibitors and did not lead to significant depression of the HFC in the stomach of our rats.

Since histamine will not produce ulcers in the absence of acid,' it is thought that the decrease in acid secretion in these rats protected them against the restraint ulcers. The finding of a decreased gastric acid secretion in the pyridoxine-deficient rats confirms earlier work of Hawk and Hundley.' Histamine is a known gastric acid stimulant and the inhibition of restraint ulcers in the pyridoxine-deficient rats may well be related to the marked suppression of acid production. If the depressed secretion of acid in these stomachs is indeed related to a decrease in endogenous histamine, the stomachs of the pyridoxine-deficient animals should respond to exogenous histamine normally. These results are the subject of a preliminary report;' histamine in a dose of 10 mg/kg. to eight normals and eight pyridoxine-deficient animals gave volumes of 0.143 ± .026 meq H+/hr. and 0.136 ± .024 mEq H+/hr respectively showing that the pyridoxine-deficient stomach can respond normally to histamine. These results and the depression of basal gastric acid secretion in the pyridoxinedeficient rat may be taken as evidence that endogenous histamine is an important gastric secretogogue. Such a reduction in acid would then be a factor in protecting the stomach from the restraint ulcers. SUMMARY Pyridoxine deficiency in the rat definitely decreases the incidence of restraint ulcers and depresses gastric secretion. It is suggested that since pyridoxine deficiency lowers histamine-forming capacity, this reduction in endogenous histamine leads to a decrease in acid production which then protects against restraint ulcers.

FIG. 1 .
1Gastric histamine-forming capacity in normal and B. deficient rats.

TABLE 1 .
1THE EFFECT OF PYRIDOXINE DEFICIENCY ON RESTRAINT ULCERSDiet 
No. of rats 
Rats with ulcers 

Control 
44 
40 (90.9) 

Pyridoxine deficient (3 mos.) 
31 
5 (16.1) 

X-= 42.4. 
P < .001. 



TABLE 2 .
2THE EFFECT OF PYRIDOXINE DEFICIENCY, PYRIDOXINE ANTAGONISTS, AND HISTIDINE DECARBOXYLASE INHIBITORS ON RESTRAINT ULCERS 250 mg/kg. x 6 days 1P Semicarbazide 75 mg/kg. BID x 7 days IP * One animal died in restraint.Diet 

Iso caloric pyridoxine 
deficient 
(3 mos.) 

4 
Control 

Pyridoxine deficient 
(2 wks.) 
Pyridoxine deficient 
(2 wks.) 
5 
Control 

6 
Control 

7 
Control 

8 
Control 

Supplements 

None 

Pyridoxine 25 mg. P.O. 
daily 
Deoxypyridoxine 50 mg. 1 P 
daily for 14 days 

is 

None 

Diphenhydramine HCL 
50 mg. BID x 2 days 1P 
a-methyl DOPA 
250 mg/kg. BID x 7 days IP 
a-methyl-histidine 



Table 2 )
2. The results of the HFC determinations were: alpha-methyl-DOPA 445 + 140 CPM per 0.1 mg. tissue, alpha-methyl-histidine 299 + 56 CPM per 0.1 mg. tissue, and the two semicarbazide animals had counts of 963 and 211 CPM260 



TABLE 3 .
3GASTRC SECRETION IN PYRIDOXINE-DEFICIENT AND CONTROL ANIMALSGastric secretion 
(mEq/hr. H+) 
Control group 
B, deficient group 
(24 rats) 

(16 rats) 

Mean 0.121 
0.0466 
SE 0.019 
0.0211 
P < .001 (Student T test). 


Volume 38,December, 1965    Pyridoxine Deficiency and Ulcers I THAYER, TOFFLER, CHAPO, SPIRO
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSWe are indebted to Miss Karen Nilsson, the Department of Biochemistry, Yale University School of Medicine, a former associate of Dr. Kahlson, who gave generously of her time and enthusiasm in the development of the histamine-forming capacity method. We are also indebted to Dr. Jack P. Green, and Dr. Nicholas J. Giarman, Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, who gave us invaluable help. Dr. Richard A. Greenberg, Department of Biometry, gave us great aid in the statistics.
Technique nouvelle pour produire des ulcerations gastriques chez le Rat blanc; l'ulcere de contrainte. G Rossi, S Bonfils, F Lieffogh, A Lambling, C. R. Soc. Biol. 150Rossi, G., Bonfils, S., Lieffogh, F., and Lambling, A.: Technique nouvelle pour produire des ulcerations gastriques chez le Rat blanc; l'ulcere de contrainte. C. R. Soc. Biol. (Paris), 1956, 150, 2124-2126.

A study of the factors involved in the production of gastric ulcers by the restraint technique. D A Brodie, H M Hanson, Gastroenterology. 38Brodie, D. A. and Hanson, H. M.: A study of the factors involved in the produc- tion of gastric ulcers by the restraint technique. Gastroenterology, 1960, 38, 353-360.

The Physiology and Pathology of Exposure to Stress. Hans Selye, Montreal, Acta, IncSelye, Hans: The Physiology and Pathology of Exposure to Stress. Montreal, Acta, Inc., 1950.

Use of the restrained rat technique for study of the antiulcer effect of drugs. H M Hanson, D A Brodie, J. appl. Physiol. 15Hanson, H. M. and Brodie, D. A.: Use of the restrained rat technique for study of the antiulcer effect of drugs. J. appl. Physiol., 1960, 15, 291-294.

Effects of restraint stress on gastric secretion in the rat. Rene Menguy, Amer. J. dig. Dis. (N. S.5Menguy, Rene: Effects of restraint stress on gastric secretion in the rat. Amer. J. dig. Dis. (N. S.), 1960, 5, 911-916.

Effect of restraint oil gastric acidity in the rat. D A Brodie, R W Marshall, 0 M Moreno, Amer. J. Physiol. 202Brodie, D. A., Marshall, R. W., and Moreno, 0. M.: Effect of restraint oil gastric acidity in the rat. Amer. J. Physiol., 1962, 202, 812-814.

Effects of drugs on gastric hemorrhages produced by the administration of Polymixin B. 0 M Moreno, D A Brodie, J. Pharmacol. exp. Ther. 135Moreno, 0. M. and Brodie, D. A.: Effects of drugs on gastric hemorrhages pro- duced by the administration of Polymixin B. J. Pharmacol. exp. Ther., 1962, 135, 259-264.

Action of 48/80 on the mast cell population and histamine content of the wall of the gastrointestinal tract of the rat. I Mota, W Beraldo, A Ferri, L Junqueira, G E W Wolstenholme, C M Connor, Histamine. Ciba Symposium. Boston, LittleBrown and Co47Mota, I., Beraldo, W., Ferri, A., and Junqueira, L.: Action of 48/80 on the mast cell population and histamine content of the wall of the gastrointestinal tract of the rat. In, Wolstenholme, G. E. W. and O'Connor, C. M., Editors: Histamine. Ciba Symposium. Boston, Little, Brown and Co., 1956, p. 47.

Histidine decarboxylase of rat stomach and other mammalian tissues. R W Schayer, Amer. J. Physiol. 189Schayer, R. W.: Histidine decarboxylase of rat stomach and other mammalian tissues. Amer. J. Physiol., 1957, 189, 533-536.

The vitamin B2 complex. Differentiation of the antiblack-tongue and the "P.-P." factors from Lactoflavin and vitamin B. (so called "rat pellegra" factor). T W Birch, Paul Gy6rgy, L J Harris, Biochem. J. 29Birch, T. W., Gy6rgy, Paul, and Harris, L. J.: The vitamin B2 complex. Differ- entiation of the antiblack-tongue and the "P.-P." factors from Lactoflavin and vitamin B. (so called "rat pellegra" factor). Biochem. J., 1935, 29, 2830-2850.

Effect of deoxypyridoxine on signs of pyridoxine deficiency and intestinal 5-hydroxytryptamine. D J Boullin, Brit. J. Nutr. 18Boullin, D. J.: Effect of deoxypyridoxine on signs of pyridoxine deficiency and intestinal 5-hydroxytryptamine. Brit. J. Nutr., 1964, 18, 319-323.

Piroska: Increase in histidine decarboxylase activity of rat skin following treatment with compound 48/80. R W Schayer, Zuleika Rothschild, Bizony, Amer. J. Physiol. 196Schayer, R. W., Rothschild, Zuleika, and Bizony, Piroska: Increase in histidine decarboxylase activity of rat skin following treatment with compound 48/80. Amer. J. Physiol., 1959, 196, 295-298.

A quantitative method for measuring spontaneous gastric secretion in the rat. H Shay, D Sum, M Gruenstein, Gastroenterology. 26906Shay, H., Sum, D., and Gruenstein, M.: A quantitative method for measuring spontaneous gastric secretion in the rat. Gastroenterology, 1954, 26, 906.

A G Pearse, Histochemistry-Theoretical and Applied. Boston, Little, Brown, and Co2nd edPearse, A. G.: Histochemistry-Theoretical and Applied, 2nd ed. Boston, Little, Brown, and Co., 1956.

Further evidence that pyridoxal phosphate is the coenzyme of mammalian histidine decarboxylase. R W Schayer, J. biol. Chem. 199317Fed. Proc.Schayer, R. W.: Biogenesis of histamine. J. biol. Chem., 1952, 199, 245-250. 16. : Further evidence that pyridoxal phosphate is the coenzyme of mam- malian histidine decarboxylase. Fed. Proc., 1959, 18, 317.

Observations on the inhibition of histamine formation. G Kahlson, Elsa Rosengren, R Thunberg, J. Physiol. 169Kahlson, G., Rosengren, Elsa, and Thunberg, R.: Observations on the inhibition of histamine formation. J. Physiol., 1963, 169, 467-486.

Summary of known metabolic functions of nicotinic acid, riboflavin and vitamin Bo. E E Snell, Physiol. Rev. 33Snell, E. E.: Summary of known metabolic functions of nicotinic acid, riboflavin and vitamin Bo. Physiol. Rev., 1953, 33, 509-524.

The site of increased formation of histamine in the pregnant rat. G Kahlson, Rosengren, Elsa, H Westling, T White, J. Physiol. 144Kahlson, G., Rosengren, Elsa, Westling, H., and White, T.: The site of increased formation of histamine in the pregnant rat. J. Physiol., 1958, 144, 337-348.

Prevention by stress and cortisol of gastric ulcers normally produced by 48/80. Hans Selye, Pierre Jean, Marc Cantin, Proc. Soc. exp. Biol. 444Selye, Hans, Jean, Pierre, and Cantin, Marc: Prevention by stress and cortisol of gastric ulcers normally produced by 48/80. Proc. Soc. exp. Biol. (N. Y.), 1960, 103, 444.

Production experimentale d'ulcus et de perforation gastriques par des doses massives d'histamine chez le Cobaye protege par des anti-histaminiques. B N Halpern, Jean Martin, C. R. Soc. Biol. 140Halpern, B. N. and Martin, Jean: Production experimentale d'ulcus et de perforation gastriques par des doses massives d'histamine chez le Cobaye protege par des anti-histaminiques. C. R. Soc. Biol. (Paris), 1946, 140, 830-832.

The inhibition of the L-histidine decarboxylases of guinea-pig kidney and rat hepatoma. B Robinson, D Shepherd, J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 149Robinson, B. and Shepherd, D.: The inhibition of the L-histidine decarboxylases of guinea-pig kidney and rat hepatoma. J. Pharm. Pharmacol., 1962, 14, 9.

Zur Kenntnis der Histidincarboxylase. E Werle, K Heitzer, Biochem. Z. 299Werle, E. and Heitzer, K.: Zur Kenntnis der Histidincarboxylase. Biochem. Z., 1938, 299, 420-436.

Absence of histamine-reserpine ulcers in pyloric pouches free of acid. G Smith, E Howes, Surgery. 55262Smith, G. and Howes, E.: Absence of histamine-reserpine ulcers in pyloric pouches free of acid. Surgery, 1964, 55, 262.

Effect of certain B vitamin deficiencies on gastric secretion in the rat. E A Hawk, J M Hundley, Proc. Soc. exp. Biol. 78Hawk, E. A. and Hundley, J. M.: Effect of certain B vitamin deficiencies on gastric secretion in the rat. Proc. Soc. exp. Biol. (N. Y.), 1951, 78, 318-322.

The effect of pyridoxine deficiency on gastric secretion. W R Thayer, H M Spiro, Clin. Res. 263Thayer, W. R. and Spiro, H. M.: The effect of pyridoxine deficiency on gastric secretion. Clin. Res., 1965, 13, 263.