Radiologist <fc Teacher of Medical Jurisprudence, Campbell Hospital. Calcutta : December, 1918.(tyorrfspondenqe. X-RAY OBSERVATIONS TO DETERMINE THE TIME FOOD REMAINS IN THE STOMACH. To the Editor of The Indian Medical Gazette.


Sir,?The following observations are worthy of publication :?

Case I.?A Hindu male, aged 35, with old spastic paraplegia, very healthy, muscular and robust, was given an ounce and a half of bismuth carbonate with his customary full diet, consisting of rice, dal, fish and vegetables, at 11-30 a.m.

At 12 noon,?the stomach was full and of normal shape and size.

At 3 p.m.,?stomach half full; part of meal in small intestines.

At 5-30 p.m.,?about one-eighth of the total meal still left in stomach : meal reached descending colon.

Case II.?A healthy-looking, tall, well built Hindu male, aged about 40, old paraplegia. Full diet as above given at 11-30 a.m. with 1| ounce of bismuth.

At 12 woon,?stomach full : healthy. At 3 p.m.,?stomach half full : part of meal at splenic flexure of the colon.

At 5-30 p.m.,?about one sixth of the meal still in stomach : rest had passed on.

Case III.?A well-nourished, healthy boy. Hindu, aged 12: slight weakness in one leg, resulting from infantile hemiplegia. Full diet with bismuth as above given at 11-30 a.m.

At 12 noon,?stomach full : healthy. At 3 p.m.,?whole of the meal still in the stomach. At 5-30 p.m.,?stomach three-fourths full : part of meal in transverse colon.

Conclusion.?The fact that the subjects hid old hemior para-plegia, could not have mattered much, I think. They were quite normal in every other respect, and the first two were more than the average build and size. Further observations on healthy subjects are being made.

In not one of the above cases had the stomach emptied itself completely in six hours even?the boy's stomach was still practically full. Considerable individual variation exists in the matter and the Indian stomach does not empty itself completely in six hours even This is quite in consonance with the findings of Assistant-Surgeon Purno Chander Sing, reported in the Indian Medical Gazette, 1902, and at variance with the conclusion drawn by Dr. Lucean deZilwa, as reported in the Indian Medical] Gazette of December, 1918, page 463. Yours, etc., S. GANGULY,