Public good, mindful bodies and human rights: a narrative investigation of the health-related experiences of unhoused adults confined in the Strandfontein Camp during the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic in Cape Town, South Africa


Alberto Caoci alberto.caoci@gmail.com 
UCT
Cape TownSouth Africa

Lucia Knight 
UCT
Cape TownSouth Africa

UWC
Cape Town

South Africa; c Wits
JohannesburgSouth Africa

Marlise Richter 
UCT
Cape TownSouth Africa

Public good, mindful bodies and human rights: a narrative investigation of the health-related experiences of unhoused adults confined in the Strandfontein Camp during the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic in Cape Town, South Africa
51878FF308871D47FD7780EF8744387810.1080/10530789.2024.2411858Received 12 February 2024 Revised 13 September 2024 Accepted 28 September 2024Unhoused peoplepublic health policiesCOVID-19 pandemichuman rights and dignitynarrative analysis
This paper explores unhoused people's health-related experiences and perceptions of the implementation of the City of Cape Town's COVID-19 policy involving the movement of people to the "Strandfontein Camp", undertaken during the South African lockdown from March to April 2020.This policy was intended to serve as a public health measure to protect people from the spread of the virus.It ultimately resulted in the forced relocation of about 1600 people experiencing homelessness in the city to a temporary camp.A qualitative exploratory study design and the theoretical framework of the "three bodies" of the anthropologists Scheper-Hughes and Lock guided the study, which explored the perceptions of those who were moved to the Camp.The participants' narratives about their body-self, the social representations, surveillance and control of their bodies by the City were also central to navigating the complex relationship between public health interventions, human dignity and rights.The findings highlight the importance of revising the approach to shelter for people experiencing homelessness to ensure the implementation of effective and equity-focused health interventions during a global pandemic.The findings also point to the need for more consultative and nuanced public health responses in the future and for pandemic readiness.

Introduction


South Africa and inequality

According to a 2022 World Bank Report, South Africa is the most unequal country in the world, ranking first among 164 countries in the World Bank's global poverty database (Sulla et al., 2022).Inequality in access to symbolic and material resources, such as education, healthcare, housing and uneven residential patterns, which is amplified through labor and property markets, has also been highlighted by a study on the spatial segregation in Cape Town (CT) (Scheba et al., 2021).Furthermore, a 2020 study found that approximately 14,000 people lived on CT's streets in the condition of "absolute homelessness" in 2019-2020 (before the COVID-19 outbreak), of which about 60% resided in the Central Business District (CBD) (Hopkins et al., 2020).Absolute homelessness is defined as the state of sleeping "in the open" one or more nights per week and making use of shelters specifically for unhoused people.Sleeping "in the open" includes sleeping in doorways, cars, and temporary cardboard or plastic shelters, but excludes any form of permanent residential structure such as a shack (Seager & Tamasane, 2010).Hopkins and colleagues (2020) also highlighted that the average time that people experiencing homelessness sleep on the streets in CT is eight years and seven months.


The COVID-19 pandemic and the Strandfontein Camp for CT's unhoused people

On 5 March 2020, the then Minister of Health confirmed the spread of the COVID-19 virus to South Africa (SA Gov, 2020a).To curb the spread, the President of South Africa declared a national state of disaster on 15 March (SA Gov, 2020b), and on 26 March, the government implemented a stringent stay-at-home national lockdown to prevent the community spread of the virus (SA Gov, 2020c).

In response to the national regulations, the municipality of CT implemented a targeted health policy, in place from 5 April to 20 May 2020.This was intended to serve as a public health measure to protect people experiencing homelessness from the spread of COVID-19 and resulted in the forced relocation of many of CT's unhoused people into a temporary camp erected on the sports ground at Strandfontein (City of CT, 2020;Kiewit, 2020a), located in the suburb of Mitchell's Plain, about 28 km from the city center.The plan was to accommodate 2000 unhoused people at a single site during the lockdown.This was an unusual interpretation of the policy, with few other South African cities implementing anything similar (SERI, 2000). 1 It was informed by section 11D of the State Regulations issued under section 27 (2) of the Disaster Management Act (City of CT, 2020), and CT was the only city to implement it for an extended period: in this instance 45 days (Herron, 2020).

The Regulations stated that during the period of the declaration of a lockdown, "a person refusing to be evacuated from any place subject to lockdown may be evacuated by an enforcement officer to a temporary shelter, if such action is necessary for the preservation of life" (SA Gov, 2020b, p. 8).They also stated that the State shall identify: "(a) temporary shelters that meet the necessary hygiene standards for homeless people; and (b) temporary sites for quarantine and self-isolation that meet the necessary hygiene standards for people who cannot isolate or quarantine in their homes" (SA Gov, 2020b, p. 8).

Richard Bosman, Executive Director of Safety and Security City of CT -Disaster Risk Management Centre -in charge of implementing the National Regulations -clarified the City's position regarding the establishment of the Strandfontein Camp:

The site was established to provide a shelter for the homeless who would otherwise be roaming the street in an uncontrolled manner and in violation of the regulations; which in itself may pose its own risks both to the person himself and/or an existing community […] (City of CT, 2020, p. 4).

By virtue of the homeless being "isolated" on site we know that they are safe from the virus as they have been screened and tested as needed in addition to having access to the ongoing medical care that they may need (City of CT, 2020, p. 2).

Thirteen large marquees and some smaller tents were erected on the site to provide sleeping spaces, meal distribution, and medical services for the unhoused people.About 1,600 people ultimately resided in the Standfonein Camp ("the Camp") (City of CT, 2020).

The Camp was dismantled after one month and 15 days of activity because the City considered it an interim measure until permanent locations became available (City of CT, 2020).However, a number of human rights organizations contested the Camp implementation from its inception, including the Ndifuna Ukwazi Law Centre of CT, Doctors Without Borders and the South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC).These organizations argued that relocating unhoused people into temporary overcrowded shelters was a risk factor for acquiring COVID-19, Tuberculosis (TB) and other infectious diseases, and highlighted the potential infringement on the people's rights to information, freedom of movement and human dignity (MSF, 2020;Ndifuna Ukwazi, 2020;SAHRC, 2020).

While the voices of City officials and human rights organizations received prominence in the media (Kiewit, 2020b;Stent, 2020) and therefore popular consciousness, the views of unhoused people, their health-related experiences and the impact of the Camp on their lives have not been explored in adequate detail.This study aims to partly address this important gap.A qualitative exploratory study with unhoused people relocated to the Camp will provide evidence about and insight into their experiences and perspectives and could support the drafting of more responsive and appropriately sensitive public health interventions in the future.


Materials and methods

A qualitative exploratory design drawing on a narrative analysis approach guided this study.It focused on developing an in-depth understanding of the health-related experiences and perceptions of unhoused people and the social and cultural setting within which these are constituted, shaped, expressed, and enacted (Clandinin, 2019).

Research participants were recruited through a purposive heterogeneous sampling, selecting ten adults (18 years of age and above) who had experienced forced relocation to the Camp.Attention was paid to include gender representation, a range of ages, and potentially both frequenters of institutional shelters and those who do not use these services.Participants were included if they spoke English to facilitate data collection without the need for a translator.Seven males, two females and one transgender person were recruited -between 10 August and 30 November 2022 -through a Non Governmental Organisation (NGO) that ran a daily feeding scheme for people experiencing homelessness and based in the CT CBD.

Snowball sampling was used to recruit four key informants, including individuals directly involved in managing the Camp through NGOs and those who advocated for changes in the policy's implementation, to triangulate the data from participants and elicit a variety of views.

Ethical approval was received from the University of Cape Town Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC reference: 413/2022).

The lead author conducted the interviews with the research participants in person, in a private room at the NGO from which they were recruited, and in locations proposed by each of the key informants.The aim of the study was explained to the participants.They also received an information sheet explaining the research's aims with the details of the study and were included if they provided informed consent.Participants were asked about their health-related experiences and perceptions while living on the streets of CT and during their confinement in the Strandfontein Camp.Opinions regarding potential human rights infringements in the Camp and alternatives to these measures were also elicited from participants and key informants.

Narrative analysis was used to analyse verbatim transcriptions of the interviews with the support of Nvivo12 software.This method is particularly helpful when a researcher is interested in subjective information, such as a participant's experiences, views, and opinions.It involves analysing a connected sequence of narratives on events that highlight both its referential and evaluative meaning (Labov & Waletzky, 1997;Polkinghorne, 1988).

As suggested by Butina (2015), five stages characterized the narrative analysis process:

(a) Organization and preparation of the data: The interviews were transcribed with the support of a professional transcriber, supervised by the lead author, and imported into a data set in NVivo.(b) Acquiring an overall understanding of the information: Transcripts were read to obtain a general sense of the research participants' experiences and opinions.While reviewing the data, the lead researcher identified key insights that aligned with the research's objectives.(c) The coding process: At this stage, codes were assigned to sections of data that aligned with the research study's aim and the three bodies' conceptual framework by the medical anthropologists Nancy Scheper-Hughes and Margaret Lock (1987).(d) Identification of the themes and subthemes: The conceptual framework guided the identification of the themes and sub-themes and (e) interpretation of the data.This stage was characterized by comparing themes and their corresponding codes with each other, providing insights into the participants' experiences and perceptions of health and wellness on the streets of CT and at the Strandfontein Camp.Considering the circularity of qualitative research, it was crucial during the data analysis to go back and forth between the data, the research study's aim, and the conceptual framework (Pope et al., 2000).

Some study participants were able to review the transcriptions of their interviews, which supported trustworthiness during the data analysis (Birt et al., 2016).

The triangulation (Denzin, 1978;Patton, 1999) of the participants' health-related experiences and perceptions of the Camp and key informants' opinions also supported trustworthiness and rigor during the analysis.Triangulation sometimes resulted in conflicting opinions between participants and key informants.

Regular meetings and triangulation with coauthors helped distill themes from the primary data collected and contrasted potential individuals' bias (Ibid.).The lead author kept a fieldwork journal during the data collection to improve his awareness of personal feelings that could affect the research and took note of insights that contributed to improving his openness to the study and results.Self-reflexivity of the lead author helped ameliorate potential biases and enhanced the nuance and rigor of the analysis process (Denzin & Lincoln, 2018;Flick, 2007).


Conceptual framework

The three bodies' conceptual framework (Scheper-Hughes & Lock, 1987) was used to investigate participants' health-related experiences and perceptions of the Camp and its impact on them and their human rights.The framework challenges the mainstream biomedical perspective on the body and health, which is based on the Cartesian dualism assumption that separates the mind from the body and spirit from matter.Instead, the three bodies' framework holds that the body is both a physical and symbolic artefact and is produced both naturally and culturally in a specific historical moment (Ibid.).

At the first and perhaps most self-evident level is the individual body (or body-self) related to conceptions of self is what psychiatrists refer to as "body image" (Ibid.).This refers to an individual's collective and idiosyncratic representation of the body in its connections to the environment, encompassing internal and external perceptions, memories, affects, cognitions, and behaviors (Ibid.).

Body image narratives can provide valuable insights into the social and cultural significance of human existence, as well as the various health, well-being, and social integration challenges that individuals may encounter (Ibid.).The framework allowed explorations of how research participants perceived the lived experience of their body-self, specifically here concerning their health and well-being during the COVID-19 pandemic and at the Camp (Ibid.).

The second level of analysis focuses on the social body, which refers to the representational uses of the body as a natural symbol and shows an inextricable and "constant exchange of meanings between the 'natural' and the social worlds" (Ibid., p. 7).According to Scheper-Hughes and Lock (1987), cultural constructions of and about the body play a crucial role in shaping societal views and relationships.The concept of the social body allowed exploration of participants' experiences and perceptions about the social construction of their bodies in relation to health and sickness and within the social reality and interactions in the Camp.

The third level of analysis addresses the body politic, which refers to the regulation, surveillance, and control of individual and collective bodies -especially in cases of sickness, deviance, and human differencesin order to discipline populations and produce docile bodies and minds in the service of collective stability, health, and social well-being (Ibid) -particularly at a time of crisis.The concept of body politic allowed explorations of participants' experiences and perceptions related to government and city-level regulations and control during the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic, their relocation to, and time in the Camp.

The three bodies' framework represents three interrelated and often overlapping units of analysis.Of these, the third body "is the most dynamic in suggesting why and how certain kinds of bodies are socially produced" (Ibid., p. 8) and, consequently, it meaningfully contributes to defining people's images of their own bodies.Paricipants' narratives about their health and well-being at the Camp challenge any potential biomedical reductionism of the body.The three bodies' conceptual framework highlights the inextricable interrelations and overlap among the heuristic categories of the individual, social and political bodies that have guided the analysis.


Results

The first section of the paper explores the healthrelated experiences and perceptions of participants in relation to their body-self.The study's findings suggest that they perceived their bodies as vulnerable due to the daily challenges they faced in maintaining their health and well-being while living on the streets of CT.During the COVID-19 pandemic, these challenges worsened mainly due to difficulties they encountered with the City's implementation of the national and local public health regulations rather than the risk of contracting the virus.Section two shows that the Camp, despite the provision of medical services, was experienced not only as a place that posed a risk for contracting the virus but also as having potential negative impacts on their overall health and well-being.Section three focuses on participants' narratives of the control and surveillance of their bodies in the Camp and the potential infringements on their human rights.Participants' proposals for measures aimed at the protection of public health during the pandemic that would result in less severe rights infringements suggested new insights into the trade-off between health policy and human rights.


Unhoused people's lived experience of the body-self in the Camp

Participants' narratives about their body image provide a general understanding of their experiences with and perceptions of health in their daily lives on the streets of CT and at the Camp.

Although the narratives about their experiences on the street are not specific to the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic, they highlight some recurrent body-self perceptions related to health issues.For example, a participant described physical repercussions caused by the lack of access to hygiene facilities on CT's streets.

Because you don't wash every day, you get sores on your skin, and I assume it's because lots of times to make ends meet you have to scratch in the [dust] bins and so on, recycled bottles and things and your exposure to that [dirt and unclean things] is obviously detrimental to your skin and your health (P1, M, 44).

Participants explained that health issues were also caused by living in open spaces without adequate protection from the elements such as cold, rain, and wind.

I have back problems, like from the cold, especially this winter (…).It is cold and freezing, sometimes it rains, everything is wet and you have no choice, you have to go sleep under that wet blanket because you [have] got no home (P3, M, 38).Some participants highlighted difficulty accessing medical assistance, as described below:

Healthcare people [providers] sometimes will discriminate against people that's homeless.They will tell you: no, go and wash yourself before you come back to the hospital but then it means the person needs access to a tap, to water (…).It's one thing after another (…).And when you go back to the hospital and tell them now you clean, they will say: no, you smelly, we can't see to you, we can't touch this person.It happens a lot (P4, T, 28).

Healthcare is therefore experienced not as a right but as a service provided at the provider's discretion and limited by their prejudice in conflict with current deontological guidelines.As a consequence, many participants pointed out that they may only seek medical assistance in situations of absolute necessity.

Despite the burdens associated with living on the streets, and in part because of it, when asked about their perceptions of the impact of COVID-19 on their health, participants noted that they did not at the time fear illness and did not perceive themselves at risk of contracting the virus.

No one staying on the street had this COVID, not one of us.The rich people, the rich ones, get COVID (P2, F, 24).Some participants attributed their presumed lack of risk of contracting COVID-19 to the development of resistance within their bodies to potential infections due to the harsh conditions of living on the streets.

Participants' perceptions of their body-self on the streets contrasted with the narrative about their body-self in the Camp.Ironically, despite the provision of medical services in the Camp, they felt they were at higher risk of contracting the virus there.

A lot of people arrived only like a week and a half we were already there (…), so then that one first tent that was like 300 and something people.It was too much (…).But in that environment with so many people say for example the virus broke out in there, then we all sick.All the homeless people, we can just die there (P7, M, 46).

A regular theme in the narratives about their experiences in the Camp is participant fears of contracting the virus.These were mainly based on living in overcrowded tents where it was impossible, especially at night, to maintain social distancing as recommended by the National Department of Health (NHD, 2020).They perceived this negligence as a lack of genuine commitment by authorities to protect their health and well-being.


The social body of the unhoused people in the Camp

Participants' perceptions of and experiences about their bodies in the Camp showed that they were socially constructed within a narrow biomedical lens by those operating the Camp, specifically as objects to be screened, tested, and, if necessary, treated medically.

People's medical needs [in the Camp] were taken care of.I remember if you went to the medical bay they'd pretty much give you what you want and you go back to your tent (…).They had access to every type of medicine there (P5, F, 44).

Even though most participants recognized the availability of medical services within the Camp, their narratives highlighted several forms of distress they experienced and that they perceived as affecting their mental health, not addressed by the perceived focus on the biomedical approach of the medical officials.

One participant highlighted that many people in the Camp experienced emotional discomfort because of the new physical and social environment to which they had been relocated.

You were cut away from the world.It affects you mentally, absolutely.There was no nature, there was no Table Mountain, there was no ocean, it was ugly! and the people around me weren't people that I was used to socialising with at all (…).Everybody was in a bad way (P6, M, 59)

A participant also underscored the lack of support for people withdrawing from alcohol and drug addiction in the Camp.

I think if they know people are on drugs or certain drugs, put them in a different tent, look after them, make sure they are healthy and all that (…).But you can see how they went through that turkey, it's not good, I think you must have your medicine (P7, M, 46).This suggests that some residents in the Camp -and particularly those most vulnerable -did not have adequate access to health assistance according to their needs and without discrimination.Furthermore, some participants' narratives showed they felt dehumanized and regarded as sub-human.

I would say that the biggest thing is that we were confined within those perimeters and there were times when, yes, we did feel like animals (P5, F, 44).

These narratives show that despite participants' perceptions of their bodies as socially framed within the biomedical lens by those operating the Camp, they felt confined and othered.This strengthened their views that their body and health were less deserving of care than those of housed people.As shown in the next section, participants felt that the City's policy was mainly aimed at restricting their mobility to protect housed people or at least ease their fears.


The body politic of the unhoused people in the Camp

A recurring theme in participants' narratives was the extraordinary surveillance, regulation, and control of their bodies (individual and collective) implemented in the Camp.These views emerged during participants' grappling with the reasons why the City set up the Camp, their feelings about being confined there, and their opinions about the potential infringement on their human rights.Participants suggested measures to protect public health during the pandemic that would result in less severe limitations of their rights.


Why did they set up the Camp?

Participants felt that the City policy aimed to confine and control people because City officials believed that the unhoused and poor were unlikely to be in a position to comply with the national regulations about social distancing.

We just didn't think we'd end up there so my perception was that they just wanted to herd the homeless people into a place and now we've got them under control (…) (P8, M, 67).

Participants' perceptions about the City's aim to control unhoused people -suggested by the word "herd" above -were made more explicit when they highlighted that the policy's objective was to protect housed people from the risk of potential COVID-19 transmission through social contact with unhoused people.

They had to put all the homeless people in one place because they were scared they might infect other people, the homeowners, and they might spread the virus (…) (P6, M, 59).

These narratives highlight participants' perceptions that the City approaches homelessness and poverty as a public order problem, and potentially as a source of infection, rather than a socio-economic one associated with a lack of affordable housing and unequal access to material and symbolic resources.As a key informant noted, the relocations to the Camp reminded many people of the forced removals that took place within the City before and during the Apartheid era (Bickford-Smith, 2001) and also appeared to resonate with the perceived approach to homelessness of the current local government.

The excuse of using the spread of infection to forcibly remove "undesirables" from the spread to people who are residents is something that is deeply rooted in South Africa, and that's why it touches such a nerve for people.(…) They weren't doing this in protection of homeless people because everyone was so freaked out at the time that no-one wanted to be in contact with someone who is just roaming around (KS1).

The key informant's opinion highlights the huge gap in access to resources, services, and quality of life among people across the city, which is a deeply embedded historical problem in CT (Scheba et al., 2021).


"Like prisoners in a concentration Camp"

Paricipants' narratives focused on being cast out of society as a strategy to curb the spread of the virus among the general population.They perceived themselves as being isolated, like in prison or a concentration camp, with security guards and law enforcement to police them.

It felt like I was Jewish and I was in a Nazi concentration camp.(…) It was people from all over Cape Town (…).So it's like taking people from all over who don't know each other, throwing them in a pot and hoping for the best, whatever happens (P1, M, 44).

Participants' narratives highlighted that the policy did not consider the different backgrounds, social networks and needs of the people experiencing homelessness in CT.

A key informant pointed out the controversial legal implementation of the policy and the consequences for people experiencing homelessness.

I mean the regulations said that someone could get fined or imprisoned so there was definitely a penal and criminal aspect to non-compliance, but the regulations didn't say that you could use that as a threat and remove people.(…) So Strandfontein became the prison (KS1).

Based on the key informant's opinion, it appears that those designing and implementing the policy misinterpreted the national regulations and used them as a justification to confine unhoused people in the Camp.


Infringement on human rights

Participants highlighted that the policy should have been explained to them prior to implementation.Therefore, implementing it without adequate consultation infringed on their rights to information, freedom of movement, and security.

It's an infringement of human rights when you don't explain to somebody why we taking you from point A to point B, for why we taking away your freedom of movement (P1, M, 44).

A key informant also confirmed the infringement on the right to information and freedom of movement, underlining that people were falsely incentivised to relocate.

I think the people weren't too happy because they wanted their freedom, but at the same time they weren't too happy because some of them were lied to, saying that you'll go to Strandfontein, they'll do medical checks and then you'll come out again.That wasn't the truth.They were kept there under false pretences (KS2).

Other participants' narratives referred to the infringement of the right to privacy because of overcrowded tents and a lack of respect for people.

I would say definitely for myself as a woman, one of the most difficult things in the tent was definitely privacy.It was privacy and respect for others (P5, F, 44) Participants' narratives also highlighted that treatment by service providers and those in charge of the Camp constituted an infringement on their human dignity.

In general, this is the thing about shelters […] you feel like your dignity's been taken away from you […].Psychologically, with their mouth, instead of helping you up they pushing you down.They don't respect you as a person, that is my argument, no matter who you are (P6, M, 59).This infringement of dignity was also mentioned by one of the policy implementers:

Our objective is to restore the dignity of people.But unfortunately there in the Camp due to circumstances and the total numbers, I don't think the clients could meet all of them -their dignity (KS3).


Participants' proposals to protect unhoused people in case of a new pandemic

Participants were invited to share their ideas on what better policies could have been implemented during the first wave of the pandemic to protect both people experiencing homelessness and the general population without confining the former in a one-site Camp.Participants suggested leaving them in their original location and providing support there would have been more prudent.

They should rather just give people the tools, the survival kit, to say here is all the essentials you need.When you feel really sick, this is where you come, but here is your sanitiser, here's your mask, this is what you do.Stick to that.Stay in your place.Because to take people there, you're going to traumatise people (P4, T, 28).

Others highlighted the importance of informing and educating people to respect their right to choice as adult decision-makers.

The City had to be blatant, clear, transparent (…).We not going to rebel against the system because no expectations, no disappointments, you know, and manage us like adults.We are not children, we are decision-making adults (P1, M, 44) Among the alternatives suggested by key informants, it is worth noting the proposal to set up smaller camps that would host fewer people.

I think it's a learning process each time, so I'm sure the City realises now if only they had made this big programme into smaller pockets that was possibly more manageable (KS2).

Most participants highlighted the need to be treated with dignity and respect in the design and implementation of future policies as a fundamental condition to ensure compliance.

We got our meals, and yes our medical needs were taken care of, but people were not happy, people were very angry.Very angry and very hurt.So do I think it would work again in the future?No. (…)!We're human beings.So even though I said this and that in the interview and medical needs and food needs were met and so and so, it's how people are treated with dignity and respect (P5, F, 44).

Participants' narratives suggest meaningful alternatives to protect their health in case of another pandemic.They underline the importance of regarding people experiencing homelessness as adult decisionmakers and upholding their human dignity and rights to improve the acceptability of public health policies.


Discussion

The study, through the analysis of the participants' narratives about their body-self image on the streets of CT and in the Strandfonein Camp, suggests that they "share at least some intuitive sense of the embodied self as existing apart from other individual bodies" (Scheper-Hughes & Lock, 1987, p. 7) who do not experience homelessness.The lack of shelter, hygiene facilities, safety on the streets and, in general, poverty and social discrimination produce vulnerable bodies that, regardless of the circumstances surrounding the pandemic, struggle to access public health services.The body-self was experienced by participants as if it had a "second skin," one that is less human, which embodies the material and symbolic signs of life on the street and, because of that, is perceived to deserve less respect.

The social representation of their body in the Camp, which was informed by a largely biomedical lens enforced by health care providers, undoubtedly facilitated access for unhoused people to both knowledge about their health -specifically the COVID-19 virus and potentially other diseases -and access to medical care.

However, this positive impact of the policy is outweighed by the limitations to healthcare access described by the participants in their daily lives on CT's streets during and beyond the first wave of the pandemic.In addition, while the policy implementation provided not only for some healthcare and basic needs, including accommodation, food and hygiene, the services failed to address the high levels of mental distress that resulted from the experience of confinement and other infringements of their rights.Participants explained that significant distress was caused by the removal from their usual environment, routine and relationships and the conditions characterized by confinement and control in the Camp.They also experienced challenges with coping in a new social and physical environment and infringements of their rights to information, freedom of movement and privacy.Among the participants' narratives about human rights violations, the infringement on human dignity, linked to notions of respect, autonomy and free will, was a recurrent theme.It should be considered that, in many cases, coercive policies harm, not enhance, public health (Gostin & Mann, 1994)." [P]olicies that adversely affect fundamental rights and freedoms create significant burdens on people.A decision to imprison, isolate or otherwise restrict a person's liberty substantially impacts the person's life" (Gostin & Mann, 1994, p. 71).Furthermore, some participants relocated to the Camp and key informants raised concerns about the inadequacy of the policy design and its implementation in protecting people experiencing homelessness from the risk of contracting the virus.This resulted from overcrowding in the tents, which limited physical-social distancing.Compared to their life on CT's streets, participants felt at higher risk of contracting the COVID-19 virus in the Camp.

For the participants, the trade-off between the policy's public good -the protection of the health and well-being of the general population -and the infringement on their human rights was fundamentally skewed.Exploring the participants' narratives about their health-related experiences and perceptions of the Camp has also been crucial for identifying alternative policies that would consider and uphold the human rights of unhoused people while protecting the general population's health. 2 Meaningful proposals were made by both participants and key informants.These included providing support and services to unhoused people while allowing them to remain where they were based, therefore avoiding a high concentration of people in a single space.The relationship and potential synergies between public health policies and human rights are critical to consider in the development of all interventions and require all affected people's participation in the decision-making as a pillar of the acceptability of the policy (London, 2002;2008).


Conclusion

This study highlights the necessity of considering the views of people experiencing homelessness on their bodies, human dignity and rights to assess the impact of a public health intervention on their health and well-being during a global pandemic.In addition, it highlights the importance of revising the way that unhoused people are treated and sheltered to ensure the implementation of effective and equity-focused health interventions.Although the findings are not generalizable, they alert policymakers, implementers and public health professionals to the particular challenges and needs of the disenfranchized and other vulnerable people in South Africa.And highlight the need to draft far-reaching public health interventions in respectful consultation with those most affected by these.


Notes

1.The City of Tshwane also set up a temporary camp at the Caledonian Stadium.At the height of lockdown there were a reported 2,000 people housed at the Camp, which was only intended to shelter 340.1966b), may be considered the source from which the human rights framework is derived.These documents list human rights, identify the duties of individuals to the community, state non-derogable rights that may not be infringed even in times of public emergency, and provide criteria for the limitation of other rights (Gostin & Mann, 1994).


Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author (s).


Notes on contributors


ORCID

Lucia Knight http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9938-6887



The City dismantled the Camp on 6 April, after it had been open for a week, citing the need to house people experiencing homelessness in spaces that enabled conditions for successful social distancing measures (SERI, 2020).2. The International Bill of Human Rights, which includes the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948), the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (UN, 1966a), and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (UN,




Dr Alberto Caoci (PhD), Faculty of Health Sciences, is a candidate for the Master of Public Health, School of Public Health & Family Medicine, University of Cape Town.He has lectured in Cultural Anthropology at the University of Cagliari (IT).His research interests include health activism, social justice and human rights, with a particular focus on people experiencing homelessness.Associate Professor Lucia Knight (PhD), Faculty of Health Sciences, Head of the Division of Social and Behavioural Sciences, School of Public Health & Family Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, Western Cape, South Africa; School of Public Health, Faculty of Community and Health Sciences, University of the Western Cape, Belville, Western Cape, South Africa.She is a family demographer with particular experience in the study of HIV, families, poverty and social protection in Southern Africa.Dr Marlise Ritcher (PhD), Faculty of Health Sciences, visiting researcher at the School of Public Health & Family Medicine, University of Cape Town and at the African Centre for Migration & Society, Wits University, where she pursues her research and advocacy interests in feminism, human rights and HIV/AIDS, with a particular focus on sex work and gender-based violence.


Mapping Cape Town: From slavery to apartheid. V Bickford-Smith, Lost communities, living memories: Remembering forced removals in Cape Town. S Field, David Phillips Publishers2001

Member checking: A tool to enhance trustworthiness or merely a Nod to validation?. L Birt, S Scott, D Cavers, C Campbell, F Walter, 10.1177/104973231665487027340178Qualitative Health Research. 26132016 Nov. 2016 Jul 10

A narrative approach to qualitative inquiry. M Butina, 10.29074/ascls.28.3.190American Society for Clinical Laboratory Science. 2832015

Re: Temporary Shelter Established at Strandfontein Sport Complex to Combat Spread of COVID-19. Letter to Ndifuna Ukwazi. 2020. 14 April 2020

Journeys in narrative inquiry: The selected works of D. Jean clandinin. Taylor and Francis. D J Clandinin, 10.4324/97804292738962019

Sociological methods: A sourcebook. N K Denzin, 1978McGraw-Hill

The SAGE handbook of qualitative research. N K Denzin, S L Lincoln, 2018Sage

Designing qualitative research. U Flick, 2007

Towards the development of a human rights impact assessment for the formulation and evaluation of public health policies. L Gostin, J M Mann, 10.2307/4065262Health and Human Rights. 111994

Cape Town's approach to homeless people is cruel and expensive. B Herron, GroundUp. 1st September. 2020

B J Hopkins, J Reaper, S Vos, G Brough, The cost of homelessness Cape Town. U-Turn. 2020

Homeless exposed to COVID-19. L Kiewit, 2020a. 14th May. Mail&Guardian, 14 April

Inside Strandfontein: Cape Town's Covid-19 homeless site, Mail&Guardian. L Kiewit, 2020b. 16 April

Narrative analysis: Oral versions of personal experience. W Labov, J Waletzky, 10.1075/jnlh.7.02narJournal of Narrative and Life History. 711997

Human rights and public health: Dichotomies or synergies in developing countries? Examining the case of HIV in South Africa. L London, 10.1111/j.1748-720X.2002.tb00435.xMedicine & Ethics. 3042002Journal of Law

What is a human-rights based approach to health and does it matter?. L London, 10.2307/20460088Health and Human Rights. 101652008

Msf, Medecin sans Frontiere. 2020

COVID-19 Disease: Infection Prevention and Control Guidelines, Version 1. 2020. April 2020National Health Department of SA.

Temporary Shelter Established at Strandfontein Sport Complex to Combat Spread of COVID-19. Letter to the City of CT. Ndifuna Ukwazi, 2020. 9th April

Enhancing the quality and credibility of qualitative analysis. M Q Patton, Health Sciences Research. 341999

Narrative knowing in the human sciences. D Polkinghorne, 1988State University of New York Press

Qualitative research in health care. Analysing qualitative data. C Pope, S Ziebland, N Mays, 10.1136/bmj.320.7227.11410625273PMC1117368BMJ. 872272000. Jan

Sa Gov, COVID-19- coronavirus-5-mar-2020-0000Minister Zweli Mkhize reports first case of coronavirus COVID-19. Media Statements. 2020a

Disaster management act: Regulations relating to COVID-19. Sa Gov, Government Gazette No. 431072020b

President Cyril Ramaphosa: Escalation of measures to combat coronavirus COVID-19 pandemic. Sa Gov, South African Government. 2020c

Independent report submitted to the South African Human Rights Commission concerning the City of Cape Town's COVID-19 Shelter For Street-based People -Strandfontein. Sahrc, 2020. 11th AprilCape Town

Inequality and urban density: Socio-economic drivers of uneven densification in Cape Town. A Scheba, I Turok, J Visagie, 10.1177/0975425321998026Environment and Urbanization Asia. 121_suppl2021

The mindful body: A prolegomenon to future work in medical anthropology. N Scheper-Hughes, M Lock, 10.1525/maq.1987.1.1.02a00020Medical Anthropology Quarterly, New Series. 111987

Health and well-being of the homeless in South African cities and towns. J R Seager, T Tamasane, 10.1080/03768350903519358Development Southern Africa. 2712010

Submission on the impact of the COVID-19 Crisis on Housing Rights to the Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner. Rights Institute of South Africa (SERI). UN2020, July

COVID-19: Cape Town's homeless camp: some answers, more questions. J Stent, 2020. 10 AprilCity aims to keep 2,000 people at Strandfontein site

V Sulla, P Zikhali, P F Cuevas, Inequality in Southern Africa: An assessment of the southern African customs union (English). 2022World Bank Group

The universal declaration of human rights (UDHR). U N , 1948United Nations General Assembly

International covenant on civil and political rights. U N , Human Rights Office. 1966aUnited Nations

International covenant on economic, social and cultural rights. U N , Human Rights Office. 1966bUnited Nations