INTRODUCTION

The Medicare Current Beneficiar y Survey is a powerful tool for analyzing the Medicare population. Based on a stratified random sample of about 16,000 beneficiaries, the Access to Care File provides detailed information on types of supplemental insurance held by Medicare beneficiaries. The insurance counts are a point in time estimate based on interviews conducted with community-dwelling beneficiaries in fall 1999. Beneficiaries' insurance policies and drug coverage status are selfreported.


FINDINGS

• Over 10 million beneficiaries residing in the community had an employer-sponsored supplemental insurance plan in 1999 ( Figure 1). Of those, nearly 8 1/2 million had plans that covered prescription drugs. • While nearly 8 million beneficiaries had a medigap plan, only about 2 million of those beneficiaries had drug coverage. • Over 6 million beneficiaries belonged to a Medicare risk health maintenance organization (HMO) and over 90 percent of those beneficiaries reported having drug coverage.

• In contrast to the Medicare population as a whole, over one-third of the disabled population receives Medicaid assistance and nearly one-quarter have no supplemental insurance ( Figure 2). Less than 10 percent of the disabled are in a Medicare risk HMO and only 5 percent have a medigap plan. • Employer-sponsored supplemental plans are held by a large percentage of the aged population as are medigap plans. Nearly 20 percent of the aged belong to a Medicare risk HMO • While roughly the same percentage of disabled and aged beneficiaries have drug coverage they receive their coverage through different sources (Figure 3). • Nearly one-half of the drug coverage for disabled beneficiaries is provided through the Medicaid program. • Aged beneficiaries receive their drug benefits primarily through employersponsored plans and Medicare risk HMOs.    


Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services: Data from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey Access to Care File 1999.

Figure 2 Percent
2of Beneficiaries, by Type of Insurance and Eligibility Status: 1999 Reprint Requests: Lauren A. Murray, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 7500 Security Boulevard, C3-17-07, Baltimore, MD 21244-1850. E-mail: lmurray@cms.hhs.gov HEALTH CARE FINANCING REVIEW/Spring 2002/Volume 23, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services: Data from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey Access to Care File 1999.

Figure 3
3Source of Drug Coverage for Community Beneficiaries, by Insurance Type and Eligibility Status: 1999


SOURCE: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services: Data from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey Access to Care File 1999.HEALTH CARE FINANCING REVIEW/Spring 2002/Volume 23, Number 3 
161 

Supplemental Insurance for Community Aged and Disabled 
Beneficiaries: 1999 

Lauren A. Murray and Franklin J. Eppig 

M MC CB BS S H 
Hi ig gh hl li ig gh ht ts s 

The authors are with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services (CMS). The views expressed in this article are those of 
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of CMS. 

0 

4 

8 

Medicare Risk 
Plan 

Fee-for-Service 
Only 

Medicaid 
Employer 
Sponsored 

No Drug Coverage 

Drug Coverage 

Medigap 
Other 

Insurance Type 

12 

10 

6 

2 
Number in Millions