Towards a concept of responsibility for economics


Ioana Negru 
Department of Management, Marketing and Business Administration
University Lucian Blaga of Sibiu
SibiuRomania

Wilfred Dolfsma 
Business Management & Organisation
Wageningen University & Research
WageningenNetherlands

Towards a concept of responsibility for economics
10.1080/13563467.2022.2038116Responsibilityeconomicseconomists
Actors, including economists, carry a responsibility for their actions and the consequences thereof seems obvious. In economics and among large numbers of economists this notion that economists should be responsible for their actions and the consequences thereof is not shared widely, as the financial crisis of 2007-8 and its aftermath indicated. We address related issues: economics has not really allowed conceptual space for the concept of responsibility. Responsibility, as commonly understood, is a duty or obligation of one particular individual towards others, such as individuals or institutions including the state. Individuals can thus be 'held responsible' for how their (lack of) actions affect others in a broad sense. We define responsibility as one's self-limiting and self-assumed obligation towards others to be aware of how one's actions have consequences for othersconsequences which one is obliged to factor in when deciding upon an action. In this sense, we build on the work of Young ([2006]. Responsibility and Global Justicea social connection model. Social Philosophy and Policy, 23 (1), 102-130.). Failure to factor in the consequences of one's actions on others trying to avoid damage to others, even more than seeking others' benefit, is a failure to behave responsibly. We discuss what this entails for the discussion about a professional code of conduct for economists. A code of conduct (rather than a law), i.e. a set of agreed upon rules to guide preferred behaviours of economists about what it means to act responsibly, will only prescribe to the extent that economists choose to have it affect their behaviour.

Introduction

Economics, inward-looking, and focused on mathematization and model-building with an adoration of technical instruments, has become in some sense separate from society (Hoevel 2013), and is not wont to assume responsibility for its analyses and advice. Technical qualities of research focuses on a small part of the system prevails, rather than an overall view of the system and the societal impact of economics research and concomitantly the profession's responsibilities (DeMartino 2011a, p. 16). If economists, as Ronald Coase and Deirdre McCloskey argued, would have taken part in public discourse more, they would have been less focused on ends, as Paretian welfare economics induces them to do, but also on the means to any end. Professionals acting responsibly, we would urge, are to consider means as well as ends. Academic as well as professional economists should thus clarify their ethical position and also what they believe this position entails for their responsibility towards society (Bruni andSugden 2013, Sandel 2013).

The economics profession has been under intense criticisms for three major flaws: intellectual (failure to predict the crisis), ideological (biased by an attitude towards free-markets and laissezfaire that, unconstrained, has been argued to have led to the crisis) and ethical (furthering special interests at the expense of public interest) flaws (Boettke and O'Donnell 2016). These criticisms imply that there must be an awareness of responsibility as well as a self-assumed responsibility on the part of the economics profession. What this responsibility entails or constitutes in is not interrogated, however. What is more, the concept of responsibility does not exist in economic theory. In this paper, we suggest what conceptual space there might be for a concept of responsibility in economic theory.

This paper will provide an elaborate but not exhaustive review of the concept of responsibility. The paper discusses how the concept of responsibility has developed in the philosophical literature where its roots can be found and also how the concept of responsibility is largely ignored in economics. The concept of responsibility does appear in the literature on Corporate Social Responsibility, but without elaborate acknowledgement of its conceptual roots and intricacies. Commonly understood, responsibility is a duty of one particular individual towards others, such as individuals, institutions or a state. With the emphasis on interconnected actors, we build on the work of Young (2006). Individuals can be held responsible for their actions, or lack thereof, that affect others. Building on this conceptual discussion, the paper explores responsibility in the context of a code of conduct for both academic and professional economists for instance in the banking and finance industry. The concept of responsibility, we submit, conceptually bridges the at times highly abstract discussions in ethics on the one hand, and assessment of the sometimes mundane behaviours of agents on the other hand. While bankers have been urged to live according to an 'oath similar … to a Hippocratic oath … to exhibit a duty of care above and beyond what is required by law' (cf. Aldrick and Wilson 2014, Times;Wildman 2014), a better understanding of the conceptual underpinnings of such an oath would allow us to understand what to expect and what not to expect of oaths and codes of conduct.


The concept of responsibility

The concept of responsibility has multiple roots that date back to early Greek philosophy amongst others. Exploring the roots, as well as its evolution, of the concept helps understand its full meaning and potential for guiding present-day analysis of codes of professional conduct. In doing so, Clark's observation from 1916 remains true: our understanding of responsibility changed from 'narrow individualism' until well into the nineteenth century to a broader 'sense of solidarity and social-mindedness' in the twentieth century. A whole ethos of care for others and love has come into being (Clark 1916, p. 210). If we are to develop thoughts on a conceptualisation of responsibility for economics, it needs connecting to these roots. This paper, to be sure, does not do full justice to the richness of the philosophical discussions around the concept of responsibility. We focus on those aspects that relate most immediately to economic theories.

For Aristotle (1984), individual actions and choices aim at 'some good', such as happiness. Individual choices and actions can be complete or self-sufficient, searching for good for its own sake, in which case actions are voluntary rather than involuntary. A voluntary individual act is due to a power and a capacity that exists in the agent 'to do or not to do' (Nicomachean Ethics, 1752-53, Aristotle 1984. Involuntary actions 'take place under compulsion or owing to ignorance' (Nicomachean Ethics, 2014). If actions are voluntary -'praise and blame is bestowed to them' (Nicomachean Ethics 1752) whilst forgiveness and pity may at most be attributed to involuntary acts. When acting towards an end, individual actions involve reasoned choices and thought and therefore must be voluntary 1758). Thus for Aristotle, responsibility entails freedom and voluntary actions (actions caused by the individual's will). The individual is accountable for his voluntary acts. But actors may be limited in awareness, knowledge, will or affectivity of the other and of the universe broadly and we may not be able to control the consequences of our actions.

Indeed, stoic philosophers such as Epictet and Marcus Aurelius interpret responsibility as a duty of the individual towards the whole universe and equally of the whole universe towards the individual (see Marcus Aurelius, Towards One's Self, 1999). Individuals are fragments of the Universe and all the citizens of Universe are rational creatures that derive from the same cause (Marcus Aurelius 1999, Book 4, 4 and book 4, 14); the Universe is connected as One (Marcus Aurelius 1999, Book 4: 40). Individuals have the duty of not acting contrary to Divinity and universal laws. For Epictet, freedom is interior. We are each responsible for our actions, for what is in our control. Things, opinions, actions that are not in our control do not represent our own actions, but they belong to others as they are in the control of others (Epictet, Enchiridion, 1948). Epictet (Enchiridion, 1948) thus concedes that there are constraints and determinants in the world that limit the things, opinions and actions for which we can be held responsible.

The stoic idea of responsibility as duty has strongly influenced Immanuel Kant. Kant introduces the idea of free will as spontaneity. In Critique of Pure Reason (1998), Kant distinguishes two types of causality: natural causality (conditioned by natural laws and time) and causality derived from freedom. Freedom is seen as a self-moving principle, a cause in itself, the cause of all causes, but not determined itself nor submitted to natural laws or time (Kant 1998, pp. 424-37). Kant argues that natural causation co-exists with causality from freedom. For Kant, the exact degree of responsibility and self-accountability is unknown, i.e. whether a degree of responsibility derives from spontaneity, freedom or from our constitution and the natural laws (Kant 1998, Note, 433). Reason and will, however, are permanent conditions of the manifestations of freedom through all our actions.

For Schlick (1962Schlick ( [1939) ethics has three dimensions, as a science seeking to understand the 'whys' of moral behaviour; as a normative science, seeking to discover the moral norms and principles that explain; and as a factual science focusing on 'human nature and the actual' (20-21). According to Schlick 'the central problem of ethics concerns the causal explanation of moral behavior ' (1962 [1939], p. 28) and psychology, as an empirical science of the soul and mind, can help with the discovery of motives and laws of human behaviour. Causes reflect objective laws, motives of actions are strictly subjective (1962[1939], pp. 27-8). Moral responsibility presupposes freedom, i.e. the conscience or the awareness of acting according to one's own desires, and actions due to internal rules and mechanisms. Freedom is outside the causal chain and so an individual exercising their free-will is fully responsible for their actions and partly for the consequences (1962[1939], pp. 150-1). Punishment is an educational measure intended to redress the motives in the 'wrongdoer' to repeat an act or to prevent others from performing or repeating an act. According to Schlick '[t]hus the feeling of responsibility assumes that I acted freely, that my own desires impelled me ' (1962[1939], p. 155). Nietzsche (1996), famously, rejects this conception of responsibility as duty and of accountability. For Nietzsche (1996) responsibility is not a quality in action, but, on the other hand, a burden that derives from a long history of canonic ethics and dogma that impose upon individuals. While not denying the existence in society of responsibility as a powerful norm, for Nietzsche it takes a negative connotation.

For Sartre (2001Sartre ( [1956), conceiving of responsibility as a burden too, albeit an inescapable one, an intentional, deliberative act presupposes freedom of being. Freedom makes action possible; for Sartre (2001Sartre ( [1956), humans are 'condemned to be free' and this freedom brings with it (huge) responsibility. The author of an action, is responsible both for themselves and for the surrounding world. Responsibility refers to individual action; when we act we influence or affect the other and the consequences can be good or bad. The individual assumes a relationship between the self and the other, as well as with the Universe. Sartre refers to this as 'absolute responsibility' (2001 [1956], p. 530). Each time a choice is made, an individual assumes responsibilityrefusal to choose is an act as well for which an actor is responsible too.

With Derrida (1995) and Levinas (2015), who submit the idea of an 'aporia of responsibility', responsibility becomes the centre of ethics. Responsibility means to respond, to answer to the other, 'a call to explain oneself [repondre de soi], one's thoughts, to respond to the other and answer for oneself before the others' (Derrida 1995, p. 3). The individual is seen in historical circumstances as responsible for past, present and future actions; the individual cannot be separated from historical conditions or circumstances. Responsibility is an act of faith and freedom (Derrida 1995). Responsibility is not determined but also, contentiously, not constrained. Responsibility means exposing the self to the 'gaze of another person, of a person as transcendent Other' (Derrida 1995, p. 25). Responsibility is activated 'before and beyond any theoretical or thematic determination' thus individuals can have no excuse or regret as decision comes before and beyond knowledge, predicated on freedom (Derrida, 1995, p. 26).

For both Derrida and Levinas responsibility thus is inalienable. While we are responsible for others, responsibility is an asymmetrical and unequal relation with the other, which cannot expect reciprocity (Levinas 2015). Levinas speaks of responsibility as the essential, primary and fundamental structure of subjectivity, stressing the individual 'I' (Levinas 2015, p. 95).

As implicitly argued by Sartre and Levinas, the concept of responsibility assumes a relation between an 'I' and an 'Other', as well as an active exercise of care for the other (cf. Bigo 2010). The concept of responsibility relates to others much as the concepts of accountability and liability do as well. These latter concepts have come to be more specifically defined in the (legal) contexts in which they are often employed (Bierhoff andAuhagen 2001, Pesquex 2003). The term responsibility seems the more comprehensive concept. While legal responsibility may be imposed by society on individuals or firms, moral responsibility can only be self-imposed as an outcome of individual autonomy or freedom (Birnbacher 2001). Responsible behaviour is behaviour that is freely self-constraining or self-limiting in relation to the good for the self as well as the other. While social pressure might be involved to entice an individual to take responsibility, the assumption of responsibility is an act that an individual must be assumed to freely choose to undertake. When seeking to make actors show behaviours that could be seen to be responsible behaviours, for instance by enshrining these behaviours in law, the behaviours may well cease to have the moral power that voluntarily entering into a behaviour holds. 1 In line with Isaiah Berlin's (1969) argument that individuals have both positive and negative freedom, responsibility relates to positive freedom, about an actor assuming full responsibility of their choices. The concept of responsibility implies a negative freedom as wella choice should not impact the freedom of others to act. The well-being of others must not be curtailed by an actor's exercise of their positive freedom.

In conclusion, core to the concept of responsibility are ideas that should resonate in economics as well. Economics too is about individuals voluntarily and in freedom 2 making (rational) choices that imply a relation (exchange with) an other or society broadly (the universe 3 ). Responsibility presupposes the notion of freedom, a notion assumed if not neglected by much of economics (Dierksmeier 2011). The choice is made with a view to the consequencesthe consequences may be weighed differently in economics compared to philosophy. Responsibility entails a level of altruism that can prioritise the other over the self, at least sometimes, but. Responsible behaviour could but need not be detrimental to an actor's self-interest. Mainstream economics with its utilitarian focus on maximising the actor's utility can be argued, however, to be a branch of the larger tree of exchange theories in the social sciences (Ekeh 1974, Boulding 1981. Another branch of exchange theory is that of gift exchange theory where a larger set of motivations an actor can have is assumed. The notion of responsibility does not seem entirely alien to economic theory. Yet, the concept of responsibility is under-theorised, however, in both mainstream and heterodox economics.


Corporate social responsibility

Economics has traditionally neglected the analysis of the concept of responsibility. Economic analysis tends to portray firms as maximising wealth and promoting their own interests and similarly consumers as maximising their utility. Friedman (1970) famously stated that the only 'social responsibility of business is to increase its profits', while conceding that 'individuals can have responsibilities'. Some economists portray governments and non-profit organisations as promoting social goods, but many others especially from the public choice school see politicians and political parties as maximising their reign of a country. At worst the notion of responsibility is rejected, at best it is ignored. Therefore, we argue that clarifying and developing responsibility as a concept inside economics for the use in the economics discipline is overdue (cf. Beckmann and Pies 2007).

The notion of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) has recently been advocated in some parts of the economics and particular the management literature. While the CSR literature can be criticised (cf. Jennings 2012), it offers in inroad for this overdue discussion and contribution. CSR depicts responsibility as a duty, not to specific other individuals or society (the universe) broadly, but notably only to a firm's shareholders (Friedman 1970, Carroll 1979, McGuire 1988. Anything beyond this tends to be seen as a divergence from the 'real purpose' of a firm (profit maximisation) at the expense of owners and shareholders of the firm (Friedman 1970). While much of the CSR literature touches upon the notion of responsibility, the concept of responsibility is ill-explained, stripped from much of its moral acumen as laid out in the previous section.

There is an essential division in the CSR literature (cf. Driver 2006) between advocates of an economic model of CSR who dominate the debate, on the one hand, and on the other hand those in favour of an ethical model of CSR that argues that CSR actions should have ethical reasons only (Carroll 1979). The European Commission (2002, cited in Kitzmueller and Shimshack 2012, p. 53, emphasis added) however defines CSR as a 'concept whereby companies integrate social and environmental concerns in their business operations and in their interaction with their stakeholders on a voluntary basis'. The word 'voluntary' relates to the concept of freedom that underlies responsibility. According to the World Bank CSR is a 'commitment of businesses to behave ethically and to contribute to sustainable economic development by working with all relevant stakeholders to improve their lives in ways that are good for business, the sustainable development agenda, and society at large' (cited in Kitzmueller and Shimshack 2012, p. 53). In an attempt to give the concept wide scope, the World Bank leaves unclear how committed firms should be, what constitutes ethical behaviour, and who might be relevant stakeholders. To Crifo and Forget (2015, p. 112) CSR means "firms go beyond the law and integrate social, environmental, ethical, human rights and consumer concerns into their business operations and their core strategy with the double aim of maximizing the creation of shared value for their shareholders and stakeholders; and identifying, preventing and mitigating their possible adverse impacts". McWilliams and Siegel (2001, p. 117) concur.

From a neoclassical economics point of view, however, taking the view of a perfect market as the default, a situation where social welfare is believed to be maximised, companies should engage in CSR activities only if doing so redresses market failures (Henderson 2001). The heterodox economics views on CSR ranges from the Marxist view that it is not possible for companies to practice CSR under capitalism (Tae-Hee Jo 2011) to Keynesian and institutionalist economics' views. For Keynesian economists, CSR is a solution to social and environmental problems, to problems of capitalism ultimately and they point the need of firms to exert better links with the community and exercise actions such as philanthropy, sustainable development and so on (Ndhlovu 2011). New Institutionalist economists conceive of capitalism and markets as founded on institutions, including those around CSR, and see CSR as reducing transactions costs and solving conflicts in society (McGuire 1988; Ndhlovu 2011). On the broader theme, original institutional economists would argue that values are implicit in economic analyses and so economists have a responsibility to explicitly address the implications of their work on society (Ayres 1944;Tool 2001Tool [1979, Dolfsma and Verburg 2008). 4 There thus is some consensus on what CSR means, if not what the concept of responsibility for economics broadly should mean and what it means for economists to behave responsibly.

As we can see from this brief review of the CSR literature, while the literature on CSR helps our understanding of the concept of responsibility, responsibility remains an assumed, colloquial concept rather than an explicitly theorised one.


Moral responsibility and economic responsibility

What we would argue, in line with the broader literature on the concept of responsibility reviewed in sections 2 and 3, is that behaving responsibly from an economic point of view can lead to better firm performance (see Besley and Ghatak 2007), but that should not be the intent when choosing to act responsibly. Intentions matter as they reflect the actor's freedom and moral stance. Responsible behaviour being voluntary, it should go beyond a firm's 'legal duties' for instance towards employees, stakeholders and society. Responsible behaviour then adds to public goods or curtails public bads (Besley and Ghatak 2007).

Considering the link between actions and their outcomes, Beckmann and Pies (2007) discuss responsibility as a 'Kantian' and stoic duty in the context of economic decisions. Responsibility invokes 'moral duties that call on the addressee [actor] to behave in such a way that he can justify his actions [to others]' (2007, p. 1), yet 'one can only be held responsible for that over one has control' (2007, p. 5). When outcomes are the direct results of an individual's 'generating deed' (Pesqueux 2003, p. 24) and the individual controls the outcome, the behaviour deemed as normal is that of a 'good family man' or a person who is normally cautious and well advised in their choices and behaviours.

It would seem reasonable to argue that when an individual's acts and their interactions with others co-determine the outcome but the individual does not (fully) control the outcome, the individual cannot be held (fully) responsible. Following through on this logic around the concept of responsibility, however, we would submit that if an individual:

(a) could have foreseen that a start for a train of events induced by him may lead to a situation that would negatively impact the well-being of others, and (b) in addition, if this individual has done nothing even subsequently to mitigate the consequences, this individual can still be held responsible in part for the emerging situation.

We would like to refer to this as responsibility's unforgiving nature. Responsibility assumes freedom (choice), rationality (foresight), and reverence to the other (caution). Responsibility is usually thought of as implying ex-ante considerations and future-oriented action (Birnbacher 2001;see Pesqueux 2003, p. 24). An individual cannot hope to always escape being held responsible ex-post ('is the kind of responsibility one incurs by being held responsible'; Birnbacher 2001, pp. 9-10) by referring to unintended consequences, or by claiming not to be in a position to control a train of events. Like for ex-ante responsibility, ex-post responsibility is, to wit, ascribed for both individual and collective actions. Ex-post responsibility is, more pertinently, ascribed to actions as well as to non-actions (Pesqueux 2003, p. 23) thus claims that 'the concept of responsibility in public matters fulfills not just one, but two functions: a disciplinary function towards the person responsible, one the one hand, … [and] on the other hand, a function of compensation towards the victims'.

We submit that economic responsibility is the active (and efficient) involvement of an individual or a firm (and their ongoing commitment to) in seeking that others' (broadly defined) well-being and potential for provisioning is enhanced or at least maintained. Economic responsibility entails respect for the other and their means of providing for themselves. Well-beings as the key to economic responsibility has two components: one material, and the other spiritual. Additionally, economic responsibility has as one ontological premise that uncertainty is endemic especially to present-day economy and society (cf. Kavka 1990) and so taking risks is unavoidable. It is imperative on those who have relevant expertise to take responsibility for others, in particular when others have approached them for a task and they have accepted that task. In accepting a task as a banker for instance, the discussion of responsibility we develop here suggest that someone can be seen to have self-imposed the commitment to behave responsibly.

As society benefits from behaviours becoming predictable, or institutionalised (see Dolfsma and Verburg 2008), it may be imperative for a group of kindred individuals to seek to develop joint views or a code on what responsible behaviours that go beyond legal requirements and that would be selflimiting could look like. 5 Beckmann and Pies (2007) submit that for that to happen, there is a need for morally interlocked individuals to develop a discourse responsibility, or a discourse of joint rule finding and implementing. Next comes the joint acceptance of governance responsibility. Moral dilemmas and conflicts may thus be overcome, and responsible behaviours shown by using formally or informally institutionalised 'rules of the game', and possibly meta-rules to change the rules of the game. While one may ask if all parties are equally contributing to the process of determining the rules, many industries have moved to adopt codes of conduct with a view to being seen to behave responsibly (Boatright 2013). We will review one such, for economists, in view of the discussion about responsibility we stage in this paper.


Responsibility and codes of conduct

Codes of conduct have been instated in some countries for professionals in finance and banking in particular (cf. Boatright 2013). Professionals in banking and finance generally, tend to be trained as economists or to at least have adopted the reasoning of economists (Colander 2008). DeMartino's The Economist's Oath (2011a) makes a compelling case for professional economics ethics as 'economists affect the life chances of countless people across the globe, not least through their impact on economic policy' (DeMartino 2011b). In the view of DeMartino, responsibility in economists is a precondition to professional economic ethics because of the overwhelming impact the economic discipline has on society. The influence of economists is due to their concern and impact on social welfare and the (perception of the) collective good. DeMartino defines professional economics ethics as 'intellectual and pedagogical practices and traditions, not a list of rules that can be tacked to the cubicle wall' (2011a, p. 14). The purpose of such rules would be to make responsible economists aware of the moral issues that come out from their practices, the conflict situations, the moral dilemmas, etc.

Due to economists' role in society and science, the economics profession needs to put more effort in instilling responsible behaviour into economists towards customers, clients, citizens, as well as institutions and society. DeMartino argues that codes of conduct focus on specific obligations at the individual level, while a professional economics ethics deals with obligations both faced by professionals and by the profession itself (2011a, p. 15)obligations that can be achieved only at the professional and institutional level. He argues against the 'premature adoption of a code of ethics [conduct] in economics' because some economists might enforce a`certain ethics`upon the profession whilst there are no clear-cut solutions to some ethical issues. In other words, according to DeMartino, 'professional ethics must come first, codes may or may not properly follow'. DeMartino seems to be overemphasising the differences of opinion rather than the common ground. What is more, waiting for a consensus on economics ethics to emerge might take some timethere is no consensus in the broader domain of ethics either. 6 Boettke and O'Donnell (2016) concur. They argue, 'we do not necessarily need moral scientists to produce good science' (Boettke and O'Donnell 2016, p. 119): signing a professional code of conduct would be symbolic and highly irrelevant to the practice of economics, when what is actually needed is the 'open and continuous contestation of ideas within the profession' (2016, p. 119). The corruption of economics does not depend on the 'ethics of the individual economists' but on the 'institutional structure' within which economists practice economics. Rather than individuals, institutions should be responsible for generating collective good. It is unclear who is to design and implement these institutions, however, if not in part economists, and why professionals with another background can be trusted more to do a good job than economists.

We thus submit that the economics profession needs a professional code that elaborates on the responsibilities that economists can be expected to adopt. For instance, the code should include responsibilities towards clients and society and principles such as honesty, sincerity, correct information and non-discrimination of customers. We define a professional code of conduct as a set of commonly and freely agreed upon principles, rules, and values. A professional code refers to a well-defined group of people active in a particular practice that assume a central position for instance because of their expertise. A code of conduct that is clear about the responsibilities actors are to assume voluntarily and freely should ideally be self-perpetuating. Voluntarily and collectively restricting the actions that actors can enter into engenders trust in other actors and customers in particular, and brings trust into the system generally. How broad would the remit of a code of conduct that defines responsible actions be? The more invisible irresponsible behaviours are, or the less traceable the consequences of irresponsible actions are, the less likely it is that such behaviours are usefully included in a code of conduct unless there is a policing authority with appropriate powers. The latter, a policing authority, negates the voluntary nature of assuming responsibility, however, and would thereby change the 'logic of action' (Etienne and Schnyder 2014) away from the code being self-perpetuating. The need for a code to be voluntary, and the differences of opinion about what should be its remit might lead to such a code taking long to become established and be implemented. A code of conduct would provide guidance as to what the consensus of economists regarded as ethical behaviour. But, some lead player, having the necessary formal or informal authority may need to take the lead. The general public can also identify players in the system to adopt an appropriate code of conduct that is sufficiently clear about responsibilities (Gilman 2005), even while acknowledging that there might be a logic of collective action that pits against the general public playing an overly substantive role.

A code of conduct is not a law and adherence to it may not be legally binding. However, individuals form responsible institutions and we contend that such institutions (e.g. a professional code of conduct for economists) derive more authority from these responsibilities. The sanctions of breaking a norm and not following the code are more drastic and accountability is clearer. In addition, a code of conduct does not draw directly and compellingly from an ethical theory. A code of conduct thus may not appear to have the moral weight that draws from an established ethical theory as it comes across as ad hoc. A code of conduct, however, is concrete and specifies consequences for not living up to it that an ethics theory does not contain. A code of conduct thus, paradoxically, perhaps, is also strong because it is self-perpetuating on account of its voluntary nature. While the lure of not living up to what a code of conduct actors voluntarily subscribe to be always there, being seen to do so brings huge reputational damage because of the collective, voluntary nature of the code. Not behaving to a code that is clear and precise is an act whereby an actor consciously places themselves outside the realm of clearly eligible partners to collaborate with (i.e. to contract with) (cf. Ekelund et al. 1996). Adherence to a code of conduct that clearly specifies what constitutes responsible behaviour, offers a sense of pride and belonging to a professional statement which comprises a set of moral standards the profession ascribes and through feed-back from a profession's members and stakeholders, professionals can develop a sense of authenticity and that they are part of the institution's decision making processes (Gilman 2005). Obviously, a code of conduct cannot solve all the existing problems of the economics profession and clearly not from the outset.


Conclusion

Economics professionals, in banking and finance in particular, perhaps, we argue, carry responsibilities many of which economists have not been aware of or willing to accept. Economists have a responsibility towards society as well as to the full range of actors in it. While a number of professions have developed codes of conducts to guide the actions of their professional members, and the discussion of CSR have led to more attention to responsibility as a perspective in economics, we argue that there is no conceptual space for responsibility as a core idea.

In this paper, we have explored and further developed the concept of responsibility in the history of thought, and related it conceptually to the conceptual domain of economics. Responsibility is an under-theorised concept with moral overtones from ethics. We discuss what implications an improved understanding of the concept of responsibility has for an understanding of codes of conduct (for actors in the world of finance). The world of finance, and economics generally, cannot function without actors behaving responsibly. Actors in the world of finance have found that voluntarily adhering to a self-constraining code of conduct that indicate the kind of behaviours that are deemed permissible can be important for trust in the profession.

Responsibility in an economic context means acting towards the good of the other as well as the collective good. Others may be individuals and institutions including society. In that sense, responsibility for others, in practice and conceptually as well, moves beyond the realm of care (cf. Tronto 1993), and indeed rather encompasses care. Care is the concern that one has toward the individuals close to a focal actorit is more difficult to extend care to distant others or to impersonal others such as (representatives of) institutions. While care is more inclined towards emotions and routed in virtue ethics, responsibility is both emotional and rational as it occupies the middle ground between the concrete nature of individuals interacting on the one hand and the abstract nature of ethics theories on the other hand. Responsibility, crucially, we argue, implies voluntary acts and cannot be imposed but must rather be self-assumed. From this it derives its (moral) strength, paradoxically. Notes 1. There might be a consequentialist ethics argument in favour of legalisation, but the points about the consequences for the moral sway of the behaviour still deserves being made. 2. No outside causes on the self are involved; behaviours mandated by law cannot be behaviours for which an actor can be responsible in this argument. 3. One may also ask, however, how far an individual's or a firm's responsibility extends: how global or universal can or should one's responsibility be? (Biefnot 2013, p. 17) Global responsibility means, "that whoever takes an action has to evaluate the possible impact on the rest of the world and is accountable for it" (Biefnot 2013, p. 18). 4. William Waller has suggested in comments on a previous version of this paper that accounting for an economists' responsibility is best explicitly addressed when elaborating on the methodology of their research. 5. Because of the possible attractiveness of being seen to adhere to a code for responsible behaviours in the eyes of economic partners such as consumers, in line with Baumol and Quandt (1967) one could perhaps argue that firms may maximise long term surplus as a result of an 'optimally imperfect rule of thumb', such as behaving in accordance to a CSR code of conduct, but not trying to maximise the surplus connected to each decision. 6. Dow (2016) sees this as a reason not to develop code of conduct defining what the responsibilities of economists are.


Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).


Funding

Project financed by Lucian Blaga University of Sibiu & Hasso Plattner Foundation research grants LBUS-IRG-2020-06.
 
Bankers are urged to do their duty to employer and country. The Times. P Aldrick, Wilson , H , 3Aldrick, P., and Wilson, H. 2014. Bankers are urged to do their duty to employer and country. The Times, 29 July, p. 3.

The complete works of aristotle. Aristotle , Jonathan BarnesPrinceton, NJ; Princeton UPNicomachean ethicsAristotle, 1984. Nicomachean ethics. In: Jonathan Barnes, ed. The complete works of aristotle. Princeton, NJ: Princeton UP, 1729-1867.

Nicomachean ethics. Aristotle ; , C D C Reeve, Indianapolis, Hackett Publishing CoAristotle, 2014. Nicomachean ethics, C.D.C. Reeve. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Co.

Towards One self. Bucharest: Vestala (in Romanian). M Aurelius, Aurelius, M., 1999. Towards One self. Bucharest: Vestala (in Romanian).

The Theory of economic progress. C Ayres, University of New Carolina PressChapel Hill, NCAyres, C., 1944. The Theory of economic progress. Chapel Hill, NC: University of New Carolina Press.

Rules of thumb and optimally imperfect decisions. W J Baumol, R E Quandt, American economic review. 71Baumol, W.J., and Quandt, R.E., 1967. Rules of thumb and optimally imperfect decisions. American economic review, 71, 23-46.

Responsibility and economics. Working Paper Nr. M Beckmann, I Pies, Wittenberg, HalleDes Lehrstuhls fur Wirtschaftsethik Martin Luther-Universitat HalleBeckmann, M., and Pies, I. 2007. Responsibility and economics. Working Paper Nr. 2007-6, Des Lehrstuhls fur Wirtschaftsethik Martin Luther-Universitat Halle, Wittenberg, Halle.

Four essays on liberty. I Berlin, Oxford: Oxford UPBerlin, I., 1969. Four essays on liberty. Oxford: Oxford UP.

Retailing public goods: the economics of corporate social responsibility. T Besley, M Ghatak, Journal of public economics. 91Besley, T., and Ghatak, M., 2007. Retailing public goods: the economics of corporate social responsibility. Journal of public economics, 91, 1645-1663.

Investigating the concept of global responsibility: viewpoint: global responsibility. Corporate governance. Y Biefnot, 3Biefnot, Y., 2013. Investigating the concept of global responsibility: viewpoint: global responsibility. Corporate govern- ance, 3 (3), 10-20.

Responsibility as a funademntal human phenomenon. Responsibility: the many faces of a social phenomenon. Bierhoff, H.W. and Auhagen, A.E. edsBierhoff, H.W. and Auhagen, A.E. eds. 2001. Responsibility as a funademntal human phenomenon. In Responsibility: the many faces of a social phenomenon. London: Routledge, 1-8.

From gross misconduct to responsible behaviour: a dream that necessitates realisticness. Revue de la Philosophie Economique. V Bigo, 11Bigo, V., 2010. From gross misconduct to responsible behaviour: a dream that necessitates realisticness. Revue de la Philosophie Economique, 11 (1), 81-112.

Responsibility: the many faces of a social phenomenon. D Birnbacher, London: Routledge. H.W. Bierhoff, and A.E. AuhagenPhilosophical foundations of responsibilityBirnbacher, D., 2001. Philosophical foundations of responsibility. In: H.W. Bierhoff, and A.E. Auhagen, eds. Responsibility: the many faces of a social phenomenon. London: Routledge, 9-22.

Swearing to be virtuous: the prospect of a banker's oath. J R Boatright, Review of Social Economy. 712Boatright, J.R., 2013. Swearing to be virtuous: the prospect of a banker's oath. Review of Social Economy, 71 (2), 140-165.

The Social responsibility of economists. Peter J Boettke, K Donnell, The Oxford handbook of professional economic ethics. G.E. DeMartino, and D.N. McCloskeyOxford; Oxford UPBoettke, Peter J., and O'Donnell, K., 2016. The Social responsibility of economists. In: G.E. DeMartino, and D.N. McCloskey, eds. The Oxford handbook of professional economic ethics. Oxford: Oxford UP, 116-136.

A preface to grants economics -the economics of love and fear. K E Boulding, PraegerNew YorkBoulding, K.E., 1981. A preface to grants economics -the economics of love and fear. New York: Praeger.

Reclaiming virtue ethics for economists. L Bruni, R Sugden, Journal of economic perspectives. 274Bruni, L., and Sugden, R., 2013. Reclaiming virtue ethics for economists. Journal of economic perspectives, 27 (4), 141-164.

A three dimensional conceptual model of corporate performance. A Carroll, Academy of management review. 4Carroll, A., 1979. A three dimensional conceptual model of corporate performance. Academy of management review, 4, 497-505.

The changing basis of economic responsibility. J M Clark, Journal of political economy. 243The making of an economist, reduxClark, J.M., 1916. The changing basis of economic responsibility. Journal of political economy, 24 (3), 209-229. Colander, D., 2008. The making of an economist, redux. Princeton, NJ: Princeton UP.

The economics of corporate social responsibility: a firm-level perspective survey. P Crifo, V D Forget, Journal of Economic Surveys. 291Crifo, P., and Forget, V.D., 2015. The economics of corporate social responsibility: a firm-level perspective survey. Journal of Economic Surveys, 29 (1), 112-130.

The economist' oath: on the Need and content of professional economic ethics. G Demar Tino, Oxford University PressOxfordDeMar tino, G., 2011a. The economist' oath: on the Need and content of professional economic ethics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

It's time for economists to address the conflicts at the heart of the profession. G Demartino, The Economist. On the need for professional economic ethicsDeMartino, G. 2011b. On the need for professional economic ethics. It's time for economists to address the conflicts at the heart of the profession. The Economist, 6 January. Available from: http://www.economist.com/blogs/ freeexchange/2011/01/economics_1 [Accessed 26 February 2017].

The gift of death. J Derrida, Chicago: Chicago UPDerrida, J., 1995. The gift of death. Chicago: Chicago UP.

The freedom-responsibility nexus in Management Philosophy and Business ethics. C Dierksmeier, Journal of business ethics. 1012Dierksmeier, C., 2011. The freedom-responsibility nexus in Management Philosophy and Business ethics. Journal of business ethics, 101 (2), 263-283.

Structure, agency and the role of values in processes of institutional change. W Dolfsma, R Verburg, Journal of economic issues. 424Dolfsma, W., and Verburg, R., 2008. Structure, agency and the role of values in processes of institutional change. Journal of economic issues, 42 (4), 1031-1054.

Codes of Ethics for economists, pluralism, and the nature of economic knowledge. S Dow, G.E. DeMartino, and D.N. McCloskeyOxford; Oxford UPThe Oxford handbook of professional economic ethicsDow, S., 2016. Codes of Ethics for economists, pluralism, and the nature of economic knowledge. In: G.E. DeMartino, and D.N. McCloskey, eds. The Oxford handbook of professional economic ethics. Oxford: Oxford UP, 750-763.

Beyond the stalemate of economics versus ehics: corporate social responsibility and the discourse of organizational self. M Driver, Journal of Business Ethics. 664Driver, M., 2006. Beyond the stalemate of economics versus ehics: corporate social responsibility and the discourse of organizational self. Journal of Business Ethics, 66 (4), 337-356.

Social exchange theory: the two traditions. P Ekeh, Harvard University PressCambridge, MassEkeh, P., 1974. Social exchange theory: the two traditions. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.

Sacred trust: the medieval church as an economic firm. R B Ekelund, Oxford; Oxford UPEkelund, R.B., et al., 1996. Sacred trust: the medieval church as an economic firm. Oxford: Oxford UP.

New York: The Liberal Arts Press. Epictetus, EnchiridionEpictetus, 1948. Enchiridion. New York: The Liberal Arts Press. Available from: https://www.gutenberg.org/files/45109/ 45109-h/45109-h.htm [Accessed 20 August 2017].

Logics of action and models of capitalism: explaining bottom-up non-liberal change. J Etienne, G Schnyder, Swiss political science review. 203Etienne, J., and Schnyder, G., 2014. Logics of action and models of capitalism: explaining bottom-up non-liberal change. Swiss political science review, 20 (3), 365-387.

The social responsibility of business is to increase its profits. The New York Times. M Friedman, Friedman, M. 1970. The social responsibility of business is to increase its profits. The New York Times, 13 September.

Ethics codes and codes of conduct as tools for promoting an ethical and professional public service: comparative successes and lessons. C S Gilman, 13Gilman, C.S. 2005. Ethics codes and codes of conduct as tools for promoting an ethical and professional public service: comparative successes and lessons. Available from: http://www.oecd.org/mena/governance/35521418.pdf [Accessed 13 February 2017].

Misguided virtue: false notions of corporate social responsibility. London: Institute of Economic Affairs. Henderson, Henderson, 2001. Misguided virtue: false notions of corporate social responsibility. London: Institute of Economic Affairs.

The call for responsibility and the crisis. C Hoevel, Responsible economics. H. OpdebeeckOxfordVerlagHoevel, C., 2013. The call for responsibility and the crisis. In: H. Opdebeeck, ed. Responsible economics. Oxford: Verlag, 151-165.

Planning horizons, conscience and the ethics of externalities: organizational theory and the emergence of social responsibility. F Jennings, Ipswich, MACenter for Ecological Economics and Ethical EducationJennings, F., 2012. Planning horizons, conscience and the ethics of externalities: organizational theory and the emergence of social responsibility. Ipswich, MA: Center for Ecological Economics and Ethical Education.

Heterodox critiques of corporate social responsibility. Paper nr. 35367, Munich Personal Repec Archive. Tae-Hee Jo, Jo, Tae-Hee. 2011. Heterodox critiques of corporate social responsibility. Paper nr. 35367, Munich Personal Repec Archive. Available from: https://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/35367/ [Accessed 19 August 2017].

Critique of pure reason. Bucharest: IRI. (The Collection Cogito. I Kant, in RomanianKant, I., 1998. Critique of pure reason. Bucharest: IRI. (The Collection Cogito) (in Romanian).

Some social benefits of uncertainty. Midwest studies in philosophy. G S Kavka, 15Kavka, G.S., 1990. Some social benefits of uncertainty. Midwest studies in philosophy, 15 (1), 311-326.

Economic perspectives on corporate/social responsibility. M Kitzmueller, J Shimshack, Journal of economic literature. 501Kitzmueller, M., and Shimshack, J., 2012. Economic perspectives on corporate/social responsibility. Journal of economic literature, 50 (1), 51-84.

Ethics and infinity. E Levinas, Duquesne University PressPittsburghLevinas, E., 2015. Ethics and infinity. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press.

Corporate social responsibility and firm financial performance. J B Mcguire, Academy of management journal. 314McGuire, J.B., 1988. Corporate social responsibility and firm financial performance. Academy of management journal, 31 (4), 854-872.

Corporate social responsibility: a theory of the firm perspective. Academy of management review. A Mcwilliams, D Siegel, 26McWilliams, A., and Siegel, D., 2001. Corporate social responsibility: a theory of the firm perspective. Academy of man- agement review, 26 (1), 117-127.

Corporate social responsibility and corporate social investment: the South African case. Tidings P Ndhovlu, Journal of African business. 12Ndhovlu, Tidings P, 2011. Corporate social responsibility and corporate social investment: the South African case. Journal of African business, 12, 72-92.

On the genealogy of morals: a polemic. F Nietzsche, Oxford: Oxford UPNietzsche, F., 1996. On the genealogy of morals: a polemic. Oxford: Oxford UP.

Viewpoint: questions on the theme of global responsibility. Y Pesquex, Corporate governance. 33Pesquex, Y., 2003. Viewpoint: questions on the theme of global responsibility. Corporate governance, 3 (3), 21-38.

Market reasoning as moral reasoning: why economists should RE-engage with political philosophy. M J Sandel, Journal of economic perspectives. 274Sandel, M.J., 2013. Market reasoning as moral reasoning: why economists should RE-engage with political philosophy. Journal of economic perspectives, 27 (4), 121-140.

Being and nothingness: a phenomenological essay on ontology. J P Sartre, Kensington Publishing CorpNew YorkSartre, J.P., 2001[1956]. Being and nothingness: a phenomenological essay on ontology. New York: Citadel Press, Kensington Publishing Corp.

Problems of ethics. M Schlick, Dover PublicationsNew YorkSchlick, M., 1962[1939]. Problems of ethics. New York: Dover Publications.

The discretionary economy: a normative theory of political economy. M R Tool, Transaction PublishersNew BrunswickTool, M.R., 2001[1979]. The discretionary economy: a normative theory of political economy. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers.

Moral boundaries: a political argument for an ethic of care. J C Tronto, RoutledgeNew YorkTronto, J.C., 1993. Moral boundaries: a political argument for an ethic of care. New York: Routledge.

Virtuous banking: placing ethos and purpose at the heart of finance. A Wildman, ResPublica ReportWildman, A. 2014. Virtuous banking: placing ethos and purpose at the heart of finance. ResPublica Report. Available from: http://www.respublica.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/ueq_Virtuous-Banking-Final-new.pdf [Accessed 26 February 2017].

Responsibility and global justice -a social connection model. Social philosophy and policy. I M Young, 23Young, I.M., 2006. Responsibility and global justice -a social connection model. Social philosophy and policy, 23 (1), 102- 130.