A His tory of Tropic al Medicin e , based on the Fitzpatrick Lectures, delivered before the Royal College of Physicians of Lon- don, 1937-38


c .m.g ., m .dH Harold Scott 
Vols Baltimore 
Williams 
Wil-Kins 
A His tory of Tropic al Medicin e , based on the Fitzpatrick Lectures, delivered before the Royal College of Physicians of Lon- don, 1937-38



In his preface to these two large volumes the author directs attention to the difficulty of defining "Tropical Medicine," since diseases of tropical climates, such as undulant fever, amebic dysentery, and so forth, now are known to occur in northerly latitudes, and diseases supposedly peculiar to the latter, occur in subtropical regions, and many diseases such as filariasis, Rocky Mountain fever, and others are now widespread in more north-erly regions, although usually ascribed to tropical origin. In his book, he states, therefore, that his object is to deal with the rise and development of tropical medicine, the study on the causation and management of diseases which are generally regarded as arising in the tropics although now met with elsewhere.

Tropical medicine, as an effort to study and control diseases incident to tropical climates, really began with the efforts of governments and trading companies to safeguard the health of the employees and other Europeans in their settlements. This, of course, led to efforts to better sanitation in the native populations and, in seaports to quarantine and other regulations to prevent the import of disease. Later philanthropic motives led to a great extension of hygienic regulation to native communities, and in comparatively recent years to great efforts to eliminate foci of epidemics which might become spread worldwide. There also arose the necessity for providing suitable hygienic surroundings for the crews of ships engaged in the long voyages to tropical countries. The problem of the prevention of so-called tropical diseases involves questions of irrigation, deforestation and other measures of an agricultural nature, which may have the greatest importance in their relation to the spread or restriction of diseases.

Dr. Scott's first two chapters deal with the development of proper hygiene in the navy and army. He describes concisely but sufficiently the work of Sir Gilbert Blane, James Lind, Sir John Pringle, and others, whose labors resulted in great improvements in the diet and living conditions of sailors and soldiers in the eighteenth century, and he recounts the quite wonderful results achieved by Cooke in the care of his men on his long voyages in the South Seas. In the two following chapters Dr. Scott surveys the conditions which prevailed in the early years of exploration and settlement in Africa, Australasia, and India. Chapter v begins the individual discussion of the various so-called tropical diseases, malaria, yellow fever, and so forth. The chapters devoted to leprosy, cholera and plague are particularly valuable for the light they throw on some disputed points. Chapter xix is given over to a very full consideration of the tropical diseases connected with food, beriberi, pellagra, scurvy and avitaminoses. The sanitation problems and achievements in connection with the construction of the Suez and Panama Canals are very thoroughly studied. Then follows an important and quite fascinating study of the slave trade and the diseases incident to it.

Chapter xxm is devoted to brief biographies of some of the most outstanding figures in the development of the study of tropical diseases, from Jacobus Bontius to Ronald Ross. A very full bibliography and an excellent index divided into authors and subjects, complete these two authoritative and most interesting volumes.