John Radcliffe Hospital
NeurologyOxfordUnited Kingdom


Shaheed Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto Medical University
Psychiatry, LarkanaPakistan


Dorothy Pattison Hospital
Adult Mental Health
WalsallUnited Kingdom


Department Of Psychiatry Ii
Ulm University
Bezirkskrankenhaus GünzburgGünzburgGermany


Institute Of Epidemiology And Medical Biometry
Ulm University
UlmGermany



Introduction: Psychiatric services in LEDCs face a tripartite challenge: (i) limited financial capital; (ii) scarcity of professionals; (iii) restrictive health beliefs. Inevitably, services developed for the first-world are ill-suited here. Psychiatric services must be designed from the ground up: inspired by but not a replica of best practices in the developed world. The SOUL project in Larkana, Pakistan provides home based assessment by a psychiatrist and fortnightly treatment by a mobile nursing team for schizophrenic patients. Psychoeducation of carers and the community as well as facilitation of work for patients are core aims. This mixed-methods study evaluates the experiences of primary stakeholders -patients and their carers. Objectives: 1.Are patients and carers satisfied with the care received? 2.Has SOUL been successful in changing health beliefs? 3.How could the programme be improved?


Methods:

The principal investigator accompanied the team for 4-weeks. Purposive sampling was employed. Satisfaction was assessed quantitatively using the likert based PSQ-18 questionnaire. Thereafter, qualitative data was gathered using semi-structured interviews and analysed using a grounded theory approach. A total of 27 interviews were conducted before data saturation. Results: 100% of interviewees answered 'Satisfied' or 'Very' Satisfied to all elements of the PSQ-18. Above all, stakeholders valued that treatment was free and highly accessible (home visits), promoting treatment adherence. They felt psychoeducation events significantly reduced community stigma and made families more likely to seek psychiatrists over faith healers. Provision of respite care was suggested as a future improvement. Conclusions: SOUL is highly valued by stakeholders and offers an excellent example of LEDC psychiatric care. Introduction: Despite the limited evidence about the efficacy and safety of dietary supplement use for mental health, people tend to use them quite often. Generally the use of supplements among Saudi population shown to be prevalent, although limited studies that assessed their use for the improvement of mental health. Objectives: Identify the prevalence of dietary supplements use for mental health among the population in Saudi Arabia and also determine the factors that affect the use of dietary health supplements for mental health. Methods: A cross-sectional study of a convenience sample of 443 participants from various regions in Saudi Arabia. Questionnaire includes demographics, dietary use supplement assessment, and mental health assessment via the patient health questionnaire (PHQ-9), generalized anxiety disorder questionnaire (GAD-7), and insomnia severity index (ISI). Results: The prevalence of DS among the Saudi population reached 44%. Vitamin D and Melatonin were the most commonly reported DS used for mental health among the study population. The use of DS was associated with three times higher odds in patients who had previous mental health disorder diagnoses (OR 2.972; 95%CI; 1.602-5.515). The chance of using DS almost doubled in patients with subthreshold and moderate-severe insomnia (OR 1.930;95% CI 1.191-3.126) and (OR 2.485; 95% CI 1.247-4.954) respectively.

Introduction: Although integrated community care programs specifically tailored to patients with severe mental illness (SMI) are available, recent studies show that these programs are not always provided to the population which would benefit the most from it. Objectives: Aims of this study were the selection of clinical and psychosocial characteristics and the development of a screening algorithm indicating the need for integrated community care services in people with mental disorders. Methods: Data of an observational longitudinal study including N=511 participants has been used to examine the hypothesized determinants. At baseline, self-reported empowerment has been assessed via the EPAS and psychosocial impairment and perceived needs have been rated by research workers via the HoNOS and the CAN, respectively. Use of integrated community care services was defined as at least four appointments with service providers over six months and has been recorded via the CSSRI twelve to 18 months after baseline. Mixed-effects regression analyses have been performed to test the predictive value of the hypothesized determinants and marginal predictions were used to define cut-offs for the assessment tool. Results: EPAS, HoNOS and CAN scores each proved to be significant predictors for using integrated community care services. Cutoff scores for each predictor are presented, forming practical assessment guidelines for future studies. Conclusions: A screening tool and an algorithm for the identification of mentally ill patients who can be expected to benefit from integrated community mental health care programs is available for the German health care system. Introduction: Previous studies have found long lasting cognitive delays among children with early childcare experience, especially institutionalised experience. However, little is known about institutions' effect in late childhood. Objectives: Our goal is to identify the characteristics of cognitive functions in connection to attachment related anxiety among adopted children and children living in institutional care. Methods: The participants' (N=68,Mage=14.20,29  Introduction: Measurement-Based Care (MBC) is an emerging healthcare model with a number of potential advantages over traditional approaches for the treatment of substance use disorder (SUD). Despite SUD treatment programs being theoretically well suited for the implementation of MBC, its uptake has been minimal, which in turn limits further research, knowledge synthesis, and translation into clinical practice. Objectives: The goal of this knowledge synthesis project is to stimulate greater consideration of MBC models in addictions programs, with three interrelated objectives: 1. To summarize the


Disclosure: No significant relationships. Keywords: schizophrénia; Outreach; Mixed Methods; LEDC Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, College Of Medicine, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; 2 King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz University Hospital, Department Of Internal Medicine, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; 3 Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, Department Of Pharmacy Practice, College Of Pharmacy, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; 4 King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz University Hospital, Pharmaceutical Care Services, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia and 5 Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, Health Sciences Research Center (hsrc), Riyadh, Saudi Arabia *Corresponding author. doi: 10.1192/j.eurpsy.2022.1571EPV0812 

The Use of Dietary Supplements for Mental Health 
Among the Saudi Population 

D. Alateeq 1,2 , G. Korayem 3,4 , M. Alsubaie 1 *, F. Alsafi 4 and 
S. Alsulaiman 5 

1 


Disclosure: No significant relationships. Keywords: severe mental illness; Community-based mental health care; Integrated community care; AssessmentEPV0815 

The impact of early and late childcare experience on 
cognitive functions 

A.Z. Békefi*, J. Kárpáti and J. Futó 

Eötvös Loránd University, Department Of Developmental And 
Clinical Child Psychology, Budapest, Hungary 
*Corresponding author. 
doi: 10.1192/j.eurpsy.2022.1573 




boys and 39 girls) cognitive functions were measured with the following tests: Rey15 Memory Task, Knock And Tap Task, Simon Says Test, Verbal Fluency Task, D-KEFS 20 Questions Test. Participants completed two questionnaires: the Family Affluence Scale and the Experiences In Close Relationships Revised Scale. The results from the adopted children (N=19) and children living in institutional care (N=18) were compared to the matched control group: children living with their biological parents (N=31). Results: Children living in institutional care did not differ significantly from their (SES-based) matched controls. Children adopted after the age of 2 years (N=7, M =56,57month) and the low SES control group (N=14) differed from the high SES control group on tests of attention (Verbal Fluency Task, Mhigh.c.=212.50, Mad. aft.2=193.50, U=59.50, z=-2.62, p=0.009) and verbal memory (Rey15, Mhigh.c.=17.94, Mad.aft.2=9.18, U=35.00, z=-2.79, p=0.005). Children adopted before the age of 2 years differed from the high SES control as well, in inhibition (Simon Says Test, Mhigh. c.=12.26, Mad.bef.2=18.88, U=55.55, z=-2.23, p=0.026). Conclusions: Our findings suggest that only in the early years is child protection experience associated with long-lasting cognitive delays and attachment related anxiety. Disclosure: No significant relationships. Keywords: childcare; Executive functions; institutionalisation; attachment security EPV0816 Measurement-Based Care in Treatment of Substance Use Disorders A. Samokhvalov 1 *, E. Levitt 2 and J. Mackillop 2
Homewood Health Centre, Asu/cpc, Guelph, Canada and 2 McMaster University, Department Of Psychiatry And Behavioral Neurosciences, Hamilton, Canada *Corresponding author. doi: 10.1192/j.eurpsy.2022.1574
Conclusions:Despite the limited evidence about the efficacy and