Novel Roles for ␣ 3 ␤ 1 Integrin as a Regulator of Cytoskeletal Assembly and as a Trans-dominant Inhibitor of Integrin Receptor Function in Mouse Keratinocytes
September 7. 1998

Kairbaan M Hodivala-Dilke 
Center for Cancer Research and Department of Biology
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
02139CambridgeMassachusetts

C Michael Dipersio 
Center for Cancer Research and Department of Biology
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
02139CambridgeMassachusetts

Jordan A Kreidberg 
Division of Nephrology and Newborn Medicine
Department of Pediatrics
Children's Hospital
Harvard Medical School
02115BostonMassachusetts

Center for Cancer Research and Department of Biol-ogy
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
02139Cambridge, . TelMA

Richard O Hynes 
Center for Cancer Research and Department of Biology
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
02139CambridgeMassachusetts

Novel Roles for ␣ 3 ␤ 1 Integrin as a Regulator of Cytoskeletal Assembly and as a Trans-dominant Inhibitor of Integrin Receptor Function in Mouse Keratinocytes

The Journal of Cell Biology
1425September 7. 19980021-9525/98/09/1357/13 $2.00 1357␣ 3 ␤ 1 integrintrans-dominant inhibitionkeratinocytewound healing
Previously we found that ␣ 3 ␤ 1 integrin-deficient neonatal mice develop micro-blisters at the epidermal-dermal junction. These micro-blisters were associated with poor basement membrane organization. In the present study we have investigated the effect of ␣ 3 ␤ 1-deficiency on other keratinocyte integrins, actinassociated proteins and F-actin organization. We show that the absence of ␣ 3 ␤ 1 results in an increase in stress fiber formation in keratinocytes grown in culture and at the basal face of the basal keratinocytes of ␣ 3-null epidermis. Moreover, we see a higher concentration of actin-associated proteins such as vinculin, talin, and ␣ -actinin at focal contact sites in the ␣ 3-deficient keratinocytes. These changes in focal contact composition were not due to a change in steady-state levels of these proteins, but rather to reorganization due to ␣ 3 ␤ 1 deficiency. Apart from the loss of ␣ 3 ␤ 1 there is no change in expression of the other integrins expressed by the ␣ 3-null keratinocytes. However, in functional assays, ␣ 3 ␤ 1 deficiency allows an increase in fibronectin and collagen type IV receptor activities. Thus, our findings provide evidence for a role of ␣ 3 ␤ 1 in regulating stress fiber formation and as a trans-dominant inhibitor of the functions of the other integrins in mouse keratinocytes. These results have potential implications for the regulation of keratinocyte adhesion and migration during wound healing.

T he epidermis is composed of multiple layers of cells known as keratinocytes. In normal skin, keratinocyte proliferation is restricted to the basal layer of the epidermis and cells undergo differentiation as they migrate up through the suprabasal layers. Basal keratinocytes adhere to the underlying basement membrane via the extracellular matrix receptors known as integrins, a family of heterodimeric glycoproteins each composed of an ␣ -and a ␤ -subunit. Heterodimer composition confers extracellular matrix ligand specificity (Hynes, 1992). Keratinocytes express a subset of integrins. These include: ␣ 2 ␤ 1, a receptor for collagen; ␣ 3 ␤ 1, a receptor for laminin 5; ␣ 5 ␤ 1, a fibronectin receptor; ␣ v ␤ 5, known to be a receptor for various substrates including vitronectin and fibronectin; ␣ 6 ␤ 4, another laminin-5 receptor known to be important in hemidesmosome formation (for review see Watt and Hertle, 1994); and ␣ 9 ␤ 1, a tenascin receptor (Palmer et al., 1993).

Cultured keratinocytes adhere to substrates via at least two structures: focal contacts and stable anchoring contacts (SACs), 1 the in vitro "equivalent" of hemidesmosomes (Carter et al., 1990 b ;Stepp et al., 1990). Focal contacts are defined as clusters of integrins whose extracellular domains adhere to the extracellular matrix and whose cytoplasmic tails are linked to a concentration of actin-associated proteins that in turn link to actin filament bundles (Burridge et al., 1988). The ␤ 1 and ␣ v integrins link the extracellular matrix outside the cell with the actin cytoskeleton inside the cell via a network of focal contactassociated proteins including talin, vinculin, and ␣ -actinin (Otey et al., 1993;Clark and Brugge, 1995;Johnson and Craig, 1995). On the other hand, hemidesmosomes can be defined as electron-dense units containing a high concentration of ␣ 6 ␤ 4 integrins whose cytoplasmic tails associate with cytoplasmic plaque proteins that in turn link to keratin filaments (Carter et al., 1990 b ;Borradori and Sonnenberg, 1996). So, although focal contacts and SACs are distinct structures on the keratinocyte surface both are essential for effective adhesion to a common ligand, laminin 5.

In addition to being a receptor for laminin 5, ␣ 3 ␤ 1 has been implicated as a weak receptor for fibronectin (FN), collagen type IV (Coll IV), and laminin 1 (Gelson et al., 1988;Elices et al., 1991) and is recruited to focal contacts in cells cultured on these proteins (Grenz et al., 1993;DiPersio et al., 1995). Adhesion-blocking assays using antibodies specific for ␣ 3 ␤ 1 have suggested a variety of functions for ␣ 3 ␤ 1 (Wayner and Carter, 1987;Wayner et al., 1988;Carter et al., 1990 a ). For example, it has been reported that function-blocking antibodies to ␣ 3 ␤ 1 can inhibit long-term keratinocyte-substrate adhesion and cellcell contact (Carter et al., 1990 a ), and that blocking ␣ 3 ␤ 1 function induces keratinocyte differentiation (Symington and Carter, 1995). It has also been shown that antibodies to ␣ 3 ␤ 1 may increase migration on FN and Coll IV (Kim et al., 1992). Studies in vivo have indicated changes in ␣ 3 ␤ 1 integrin expression patterns during wound healing (Hertle et al., 1992;Cavani et al., 1993), psoriasis (Hertle et al., 1992;Pellegrini et al., 1992), and tumorigenesis (Bartolazzi et al., 1994). Taken together, these data suggest multiple roles for ␣ 3 ␤ 1.

In this report we have used ␣ 3 integrin-deficient mice to address directly the roles of ␣ 3 ␤ 1 in keratinocytes. ␣ 3deficient mice suffer kidney and lung abnormalities with basement defects in the kidney (Kreidberg et al., 1996). We have shown that the ␣ 3-deficient mice form epidermal-dermal blisters that are associated with basement membrane defects (DiPersio et al., 1997). Mice deficient in ␣ 6 (Georges- Labouesse et al., 1996) or ␤ 4 integrin subunits (Dowling et al., 1996;van der Neut et al., 1996) also display blistering at the epidermal-dermal junction and are models for the human blistering disease Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa with pyloric atresia Ruzzi et al., 1997). These mice have normal basement membranes, but hemidesmosomes are absent with alterations in associated keratin cytoskeletal morphology. Since ␣ 3 ␤ 1 links to the actin cytoskeleton, we hypothesized that there might be alterations in the actin filament morphology in the ␣ 3-deficient mice.

We have analyzed the skin and isolated keratinocytes from the ␣ 3-deficient mice to explore further the roles of ␣ 3 ␤ 1 in keratinocytes. Here we show that the absence of ␣ 3 ␤ 1 results in a change in filamentous actin (F-actin) bundling both in keratinocytes grown in culture and in basal keratinocytes of ␣ 3-null epidermis. Moreover, we see a higher concentration of actin-associated proteins at focal contact sites in the ␣ 3-deficient keratinocytes. In addition, there is an increase in FN and Coll IV receptor activity in the ␣ 3-null keratinocytes. Our results suggest a role for ␣ 3 ␤ 1 as a regulator of the actin cytoskeleton, focal contact composition, and as a trans-dominant inhibitor of fibronectin and collagen type IV integrin receptors in keratinocytes.


Materials and Methods


Antibodies

Rabbit sera against the cytoplasmic domains of human ␣ 5, ␤ 1, and chicken ␣ 3A integrin subunits were prepared as described (Marcantonio and Hynes, 1988;Hynes et al., 1989;DiPersio et al., 1995). Rabbit antiserum against ␣ 9 was a donation from Dr. D. Sheppard (University of California, San Francisco, CA) and the rabbit polyclonal antibodies to the cytoplasmic domain of ␣ 2 and ␣ 6 were gifts from Drs. M. Hemler (Dana-Farber, Boston, MA) and V. Quaranta (Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA), respectively. Rabbit antiserum against the ␣ v integrin subunit cytoplasmic domain was purchased from Chemicon International (Temecula, CA). Rat mAbs against mouse ␣ 5 and ␤ 1 extracellular domains were kind donations from Dr. B. Chan (University of Western Ontario, Canada), and rat mAb against mouse ␤ 4 was donated by S. Kennel (Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee). The rat anti-mouse ␣ 6 extracellular domain-specific mAb GoH3 was purchased from Immunotech (Westbrook, ME), and the mouse anti-human ␣ 3 mAb P1B5 was purchased from Gibco Laboratories, (Grand Island, NY).

The anti-mouse keratin 14 antibody was a donation from Dr. E. Fuchs (University of Chicago, Chicago, IL). The anti-actin rabbit antibody (751.1) was a generous donation from P. Matsudaira (Whitehead Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA). Anti-vinculin and talin antibodies were obtained from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO) and the anti-␣ -actinin antibody was obtained from ICN Biochemicals (Costa Mesa, CA). All fluorescently conjugated secondary antibodies were obtained from TAGO BioSource (Camarillo, CA). The FITC-conjugated phalloidin was obtained from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO).


Extracellular Matrix Components

Purified human laminin 5 was a generous donation from Dr. R. Burgeson (Harvard/Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA). Rat fibronectin was obtained from Gibco Laboratories and human collagen type IV and mouse laminin 1 were obtained from Collaborative Biomedical Products (Bedford, MA).


Preparation of Tissue for Histology

Animals were killed by CO 2 narcosis and limbs removed. Tissue for paraffin embedding was fixed in 4% formaldehyde solution for 24 h at room temperature. Tissue for cryosectioning was snap frozen in OCT. Microscopy was carried out on a Zeiss Axiophot microscope (Carl Zeiss, Inc., Thornwood, NY).


Isolation and Culture of Primary Mouse Keratinocytes

Epidermal keratinocytes were prepared from neonatal mice essentially as described previously (Dlugosz et al., 1995). In brief, newborn mice were killed by CO 2 narcosis, washed in 0.01 N iodine in PBS for 10 min, rinsed with PBS, washed in 70% ethanol for 10 min, and then rinsed in PBS. Tails were used for genotyping by PCR (as described in DiPersio et al., 1997), and limbs were prepared for frozen skin sections (see above). Skins were removed from the torso and head, and then floated on 0.25% trypsin solution (Gibco Laboratories) overnight at 4 Њ C, with the epidermis facing upward. Skins were then transferred to a dry, sterile surface with the epidermis facing down, and the dermis was separated from the epidermis. The epidermis was minced, suspended in growth medium (see below), and then agitated to release keratinocytes. Suspensions were passed through a sterile, 70m nylon filter (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ) to remove cornified sheets. Keratinocytes were seeded onto tissue culture plates coated with 30 g/ml denatured rat tail collagen (Collagen Corp., Palo Alto, CA) at a density of ‫ف‬ 2-4 ϫ 10 5 cells/cm 2 . To prevent differentiation of keratinocytes, cultures were grown in low calcium medium consisting of MEM (BioWhittaker, Walkersville, MD) supplemented with 4% FBS (Intergen Co., Purchase, NY) from which Ca 2 ϩ had been removed by chelation (Brennen et al., 1982), 0.05 mM CaCl 2 , "HICE" mix (5 g/ml insulin [Sigma Chemical Co.], 0.5 g/ml hydrocortisone [Calbiochem-Novabiochem Corp., La Jolla, CA], 10 Ϫ10 M cholera toxin [ICN Biomedicals, Costa Mesa, CA], 10 ng/ml EGF [Upstate Biotechnology Inc., Lake Placid, NY], 2 ϫ 10 Ϫ9 M T3 [Sigma Chemical Co.]), 100 units/ ml penicillin, and 100 g/ml streptomycin (Gibco Laboratories). Mouse keratinocytes were cultured at 33ЊC, 7.5% CO 2 .


Immunofluorescence Microscopy

Unfixed neonatal mouse limbs were embedded in OCT and snap-frozen in chilled isopentane in liquid nitrogen. The following procedure was used for the immunostaining of 8-m cryosections. Sections were fixed either in 4% formaldehyde in PBS for 20 min at room temperature when staining for F-actin, ␣3, ␣6, or ␤4 integrin subunits or in 100% acetone for 10 min at Ϫ20ЊC when staining for ␤1, ␣5, or ␣9 integrin subunits. When staining for ␣v integrin subunits, sections were treated with 0.1% NP-40 in PBS for 10 min at room temperature, and then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS for 20 min at room temperature. All sections were blocked with 0.1% BSA, 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS for 1 h before 1-h incubations with primary antibodies. Sections were washed in PBS and incubated with secondary antibodies at a 1:200 dilution in block solution. Finally, sections were washed in PBS, and then distilled water and mounted in Gelvatol containing the anti-bleaching agent, DABCO.

When staining for integrins at focal contacts, keratinocyte cultures were first cross-linked in 0.4 mM BS 3 (Pierce Chemical Co., Rockford, IL) 10 min at room temperature, washed in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, in PBS, extracted in 0.5% NP-40 in PBS for 10 min and fixed in 4% PFA in PBS for 10 min before blocking and antibody incubations as described above (Enomoto-Iwamoto et al., 1993;DiPersio et al., 1995). To stain for filamentous actin, keratinocyte cultures were first permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 min followed by 20 min in 4% formaldehyde in PBS before incubating in a 1:1,000 dilution of rhodamine-conjugated phalloidin. To stain keratinocyte cultures for cytoplasmic focal contact proteins, cells were fixed in 4% PFA for 20 min, permeabilized with 0.5% NP-40 for 10 min, and then blocked for 1 h before incubation with the appropriate antibodies.


Interference Reflection Microscopy

Keratinocytes were cultured on glass coverslips coated with denatured rat tail collagen (Vitrogen, Palo Alto, CA) and were photographed for interference reflection microscopy on a Zeiss Photo Microscope III (Carl Zeiss, Inc.).


Transfection of Primary Keratinocytes

An ␣3 expression plasmid was constructed by inserting an XbaI restriction fragment encompassing the cDNA for the human ␣3 integrin subunit (provided by M. Hemler, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA) into the XbaI site of the plasmid pcDNA3.1/Zeo(ϩ) (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA). Primary keratinocytes were transfected using Lipofect-ACE reagent according to the manufacturer's directions (Gibco Laboratories). In brief, 2 g of the ␣3 expression plasmid was mixed with 12 l of LipofectACE reagent (Gibco Laboratories) in 1 ml of Optimem and added to subconfluent cultures of keratinocytes on 35-mm plates. After a 6-h incubation at 33ЊC, the cells were fed with normal culture medium and grown for an additional 48 h, and then prepared for immunofluorescence as described above.


Adhesion Assays

96-well bacteriological plates (Nunc Inc., Naperville, IL) were coated with 10 g/ml of fibronectin, collagen type IV, EHS laminin (laminin 1), or laminin 5 in PBS overnight at 4ЊC. The plates were washed briefly and then blocked in 10 mg/ml BSA in PBS for 2 h at 37ЊC. Cells were trypsinized, washed in MEM medium containing 10% serum, and then resuspended at 3 ϫ 10 4 cells/100 l of serum-free medium containing 25 M cycloheximide. 3 ϫ 10 4 cells were plated per well for 1 h at 37ЊC. Nonadherent cells were washed off in PBS and the remaining adherent cells were fixed and stained in 0.1% methylene blue in H 2 O and counted.


Phagokinetic Assays

Phagokinetic assays were carried out as described by Albrecht-Buehler (1977). In brief, 8-chamber Nunc slides were coated in BSA and colloidal gold (prepared from gold chloride from Sigma Chemical Co.). The colloidal gold was then coated in 50 g/ml of either fibronectin, collagen type IV, EHS laminin, or laminin 5 overnight at 4ЊC. 10 3 cells were plated in serum-free medium overnight at 33ЊC (the temperature of mouse keratinocyte culture), fixed in 4% formaldehyde, and then viewed under dark field on an inverted Zeiss IM35 microscope. Using a Hamamatsu CCD camera linked to a Hamamatsu Argus 10 image processor (Hamamatsu Phototonics, Bridgewater, NJ) the area translocated per cell per hour was calculated.


FACS ® Analysis of Surface Integrins

Keratinocytes were trypsinized, washed in medium containing serum, and then resuspended in PBS containing a 1:100 dilution of antibody for 30 min at 4ЊC. Cells were then washed three times in PBS and incubated with a suitable FITC-conjugated secondary antibody for 30 min at 4ЊC, washed three times in PBS and resuspended in PBS-containing propidium iodide, and then analyzed on a FACScan ® from Becton Dickinson.


Surface Iodination and Immunoprecipitation of Integrins

Monolayers of mouse keratinocytes that had been passaged once were surface labeled with 1 mCi/10 cm plate of Na-[ 125 I] (New England Nuclear, Boston, MA) using the lactoperoxidase-glucose oxidase method (Hynes, 1973). Cells were washed four times with 50 mM NaI in PBS/ Ca 2ϩ /Mg 2ϩ and lysed for 15 min on ice in 1 ml of a detergent buffer containing 200 mM octyl-␤-d-glucopyranoside (Calbiochem-Novabiochem Corp.), 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM PMSF (Sigma Chemical Co.), 0.02 mg/ml aprotinin (Sigma Chemical Co.), and 0.0125 mg/ml leupeptin (Calbiochem-Novabiochem Corp.). Lysates were sedimented for 10 min at 10,000 g. Supernatants were preincubated with 100 l of protein A-Sepharose (1:1 slurry; Pharmacia Biotech, Inc., Piscataway, NJ) for 1 h and the beads sedimented for 2 min at 10,000 g. Protein concentrations of supernatants were determined using a Bio-Rad kit. To compare the relative amounts of each integrin between wild-type and ␣3-null cells an equal amount of lysate was immunoprecipitated with each anti-integrin antibody as described (Marcantonio and Hynes, 1988). In brief, BSA was added to lysates (60-100 g total protein) to a final concentration of ‫5ف‬ mg/ml, followed by 5-10 l of antiserum. After incubation at 4ЊC for 1 h, 50 l of protein A-Sepharose (1:1 slurry preabsorbed with 10 mg/ml BSA in lysis buffer) were added, and reactions were incubated overnight at 4ЊC. Samples were washed extensively with cold lysis buffer plus protease inhibitors, and then suspended in sample buffer (5% SDS, 80 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 2 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol and bromophenol blue) and boiled for 5 min. Non-reducing SDS-PAGE was performed by the method of Laemmli (1970) using 5% acrylamide and a 3% stacking gel.


Analysis of the Levels of F-Actin in Keratinocyte Cultures

Keratinocytes from wild-type or ␣3-null mice were grown to 75% confluency in 60-mm dishes as described above. Cells were stained for F-actin as described in "Immunofluorescence Microscopy." The adherent cells were then washed in PBS and extracted in 600 l of 100% methanol for 2 h at room temperature in a humidified box. The extract was then read on a fluorescent plate reader (Titertek Fluoroskan II). Unstained, equivalent plates were fixed in 4% formaldehyde, stained in 0.1% crystal violet, extracted in 10% acetic acid, and then read at 600 nm on a Titertek Multiscan Plus plate reader. These readings were used to determine protein concentrations of the samples and indicate relative cell numbers. Results were calculated as fluorescent units for equal cell numbers from wild-type or ␣3-null cells.


Western Blotting

Keratinocytes were grown in 10-cm dishes, extracted in 1 ml of radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (2% Triton X-100, 2% NaDOC, 0.2% SDS, 316 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.3, 2 mM EDTA with protease inhibitors (as for surface iodinations) on ice for 10 min, extracts were centrifuged and protein concentration assessed by Bio-Rad "D c " Protein Assay. 5 g of each sample mixed with non-reducing sample buffer were boiled and run on a 7.5 or 5% acrylamide gel (Laemmli, 1970). Samples were then transferred onto nitrocellulose (Schleicher & Schuell, Keene, NH), blocked (5% "Marvel," 0.1% Tween-20 in PBS) overnight at 4ЊC, incubated with primary antibody in block solution for 2 h at room temperature, washed in 0.1% Tween-20 in PBS, incubated with appropriate HRP-conjugated secondary antibody, washed again, and then bands detected by chemiluminescence (Renaissance NEN, Life Science Products).

For Western blotting of integrin immunoprecipitations, unlabeled lysates from wild-type or ␣3-null keratinocyte cultures were prepared in 200 mM octyl-␤-d-glucopyranoside buffer, preabsorbed, and then immunoprecipitated as described above. For each immunoprecipitation, 565 g of lysate were incubated with 5-10 l of rat mAb against the ␤1 (PharMingen, San Diego, CA), ␣6 (GoH3), or ␤4 integrin subunit, followed by 100 l of goat anti-rat IgG conjugated to Sepharose-4B (ICN Biomedicals, Costa Mesa, CA); 1:1 slurry preabsorbed with 20 mg/ml BSA in lysis buffer; control reactions contained Sepharose beads only. Immunoprecipitates were resolved on non-reducing, 7% polyacrylamide gels, and assayed by Western blotting, as described above, with an antiserum against the cytoplasmic domain of the ␣6 integrin subunit.


Results


␣3 Integrin Deficiency Is Associated with Changes in F-Actin Localization in Basal Keratinocytes

Previous work showed that deficiency in ␣3␤1 integrin resulted in areas of disorganized basement membrane and microblister development at the epidermal-dermal junc- Figure 1. ␣3 integrin deficiency leads to blister formation at the epidermal-dermal interface and reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. (A and B) Low power photographs of foot pads from newborn wild-type (A) and ␣3-null (B) mice. 18% of the ␣3-null mice display blood-filled blisters (arrowheads in B). (C-F) Hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections of neonatal skin from wildtype (C), heterozygous (D), and ␣3-null mice (E and F). Blisters were not observed in either wildtype or heterozygous animals. However, they were seen in 80% of ␣3-null feet (E) and some of these were filled with blood (arrow in F). (G-K) Immunofluorescence staining using antibodies to keratin 14 (G and H) or F-actin using phalloidin (I-K) of skin cryosections; wild-type (G and I) and ␣3-null skin (H, J, and K). Keratin 14 expression was normal in the ␣3-deficient skin (H). However, F-actin showed increased concentration at the basal face of basal keratinocytes in both blistering (J) and non-blistering (K) areas of ␣3-deficient skin. Double-headed arrows, blisters; arrowheads, dermal-epidermal junction. Bar, 50 m. tion (DiPersio et al., 1997). Here, we examine the nature of the skin defects in further detail with a focus on the expression and function of integrins, cytoskeleton, and focal contact proteins in the ␣3-null keratinocytes.

Newborn mice from ␣3ϩրϪ crosses were examined immediately after birth for skin defects. At the microscopic level micro-blisters were observed in 80% of ␣3-null neonate feet and ‫%51ف‬ of these were blood-filled blisters (Fig. 1, A-F). From previous work it was not clear whether the blisters in the ␣3-null mice were caused by handling the pups during examination. The presence of blood-filled blisters on live newborn mice demonstrates that the blisters observed in the ␣3-null mice are not due to post-mortem trauma (Fig. 1, A and B). Wild-type and heterozygous ␣3-knockout mice had indistinguishable and normal skin morphology (Fig. 1, C and D). However, in the ␣3-knockout mice, microblisters were evident at the epidermal-dermal interface (Fig. 1, E and F). Note the presence of blood in the blister shown in Fig. 1 F. We did not observe any abnormalities in epidermal stratification or proliferation in the ␣3-deficient mice.

The cytoplasmic tails of ␣6␤4 integrins are linked via hemidesmosomal proteins to the keratin cytoskeleton. Mice deficient in ␣6 and ␤4 integrins develop blisters that are associated with altered keratin expression (Dowling et al., 1996;Georges-Labouesse et al., 1996;van der Neut et al., 1996). Since the cytoplasmic tail of ␣3␤1 is associated with focal contact-associated proteins such as talin, vinculin, Figure 2. Loss of ␣3 integrin enhances formation of stress fibers and focal contacts. Wild-type (A, C, E, G, I, and K) and ␣3-deficient (B, D, F, H, J, and L) keratinocytes were grown under normal culture conditions and examined for F-actin (A and B); by interference reflection microscopy for focal contacts (C and D) and by immunofluorescence for vinculin (E and F), talin (G and H), ␣-actinin (I and J) and phosphotyrosine (K and L). Staining of F-actin with phalloidin showed larger stress fibers in the ␣3-null keratinocytes (B) than in the wild-type (A) cells (basal-most confocal images).

Interference reflection microscopy shows darker and larger focal contacts in the ␣3-null cells (D) than in the wild-type cells (C). The levels of vinculin, talin, ␣-actinin, and phosphotyrosine were all increased in the focal contacts of the ␣3-null keratinocytes (F, H, J, and L) when compared with the wild-type cells (E, G, I, and K). Bars, 10 m. and ␣-actinin, which link integrins with the actin cytoskeleton, we explored the possibility that ␣3 deficiency would be associated with changes in actin cytoskeletal morphology. In Fig. 1, G-K we show that there are no changes in keratin 14 localization in the basal keratinocytes, but that there are changes in the actin cytoskeleton.

Immunostaining of cryosections from skin showed that expression of keratin 14 (Fig. 1, G and H) and keratin 5 (data not shown) were restricted to the basal keratinocytes and appeared normal in both non-blistering and blistering regions of the skin of ␣3-null mice. Since keratin 14 or 5 were not observed in suprabasal layers, or split between the roof and the floor of the blisters, the results show that neither hyperproliferation nor basal keratinocyte lysis occurred in the ␣3-null blisters and that cleft formation was truly at the epidermal-dermal interface.

Using rhodamine-conjugated phalloidin, F-actin had a pericellular distribution in all layers of the epidermis of both wild-type (Fig. 1 I) and ␣3-deficient skin (Fig. 1, J and  K). In addition, F-actin staining was also concentrated at the basal face of the basal keratinocytes in the ␣3-null skin but not in the wild type. Increased concentration of F-actin in the basal keratinocytes was observed not only over blistering regions of the ␣3-nulls (Fig. 1 J), but also in intact areas of skin ( Fig. 1 K, arrowheads). These results suggested that ␣3␤1 integrin regulates the expression pattern of F-actin in the epidermis.


␣3 Integrin Deficiency Results in Enhanced F-actin Stress Fibers and Focal Contacts

Since F-actin localization was altered in ␣3-null skins, we investigated the effect of ␣3 integrin deficiency on the distribution of F-actin and focal contact proteins in keratinocytes grown in culture (Fig. 2). In wild-type cells, phalloidin-stained actin bundles appeared thin and cobweb-like (Fig. 2 A). In contrast, F-actin in the ␣3-null keratinocytes was arranged into thick stress fibers especially at the basal face of the cells (Fig. 2 B). This was reminiscent of the altered F-actin staining seen in skin sections, where it also appeared to be concentrated at the basal face of the basal keratinocytes in the ␣3-null mice (see Fig. 1, J and K).

F-actin stress fibers in cultured cells are known to terminate at focal contact sites. Therefore, we asked whether the increase in stress fiber thickness in the ␣3-null keratinocytes was associated with any changes in focal contacts. Interference reflection microscopy revealed that focal contact sites in the ␣3-null keratinocytes (Fig. 2 D) were darker and larger than those observed in the wild-type cells (Fig. 2 C). This result implies that ␣3␤1 deficiency leads to closer apposition of the ventral cell surface to the substrate at focal contact sites and also suggests that the focal contacts in the ␣3-null keratinocytes may be structurally different from wild-type focal contacts.

Consistent with the increased stress fiber formation and focal contact apposition to substrate in the ␣3-null keratinocytes, all the focal contact-associated proteins tested, including vinculin (Fig. 2, E and F), talin (Fig. 2, G and H), and ␣-actinin (Fig. 2, I and J), were more concentrated in the focal contacts of the ␣3-null keratinocytes than in the wild-type cells. In addition, PY20 staining for phosphotyrosine in the focal contacts was stronger in the ␣3-null keratinocytes than in wild-type cells (Fig. 2, K and L). Thus, in the ␣3-null keratinocytes there is a change in focal contact composition. The increase in phosphotyrosine expression in the focal contacts of the ␣3-null keratinocytes likely reflects a change in focal contact signaling activities.

To verify that the change in actin cytoskeletal organization observed in ␣3-null keratinocytes was due to a deficiency in ␣3␤1 integrin, ␣3-null primary keratinocytes were transiently transfected with a recombinant plasmid expressing the ␣3 subunit. Double-label immunofluorescence revealed that ‫%08ف‬ of cells expressing the exogenous ␣3 (Fig. 3, A and C), no longer displayed the thick stress fibers typical of ␣3-null keratinocytes (Fig. 3, B and  D). These ␣3-transfected keratinocytes also showed reduced vinculin staining in focal contacts (Fig. 3, E and F). These results support a role for ␣3␤1 integrin in regulating the organization of the actin cytoskeleton.


The Enhancement in Stress Fibers and Focal Contacts in the ␣3-null Keratinocytes Is Due to Redistribution and Not Elevated Levels of Proteins

We wished to determine whether the altered F-actin and focal contact protein staining patterns observed in the ␣3null keratinocytes were due to changes in protein levels.

To compare the levels of F-actin in the ␣3-deficient and wild-type keratinocytes, cultures were stained with fluorescently conjugated phalloidin, washed, and then the bound phalloidin extracted and quantified. The results showed that for equal protein concentrations of wild-type and ␣3-null keratinocytes the levels of F-actin were the same (Fig. 4 A). Combined with the immunofluorescence staining of F-actin (Fig. 2), this result indicated that the increased stress fiber formation in ␣3-null keratinocytes is not due to an increase in F-actin assembly, but rather to a redistribution of existing F-actin.

Western blot analyses of protein extracts from ␣3-deficient (Ϫ) and wild-type (ϩ) keratinocyte cultures showed that, although the ␣3-null cells were indeed ␣3 integrin deficient, the levels of total actin, vinculin (Vn), talin (Tn), and ␣-actinin (␣-act) were each the same in the ␣3-null and wild-type keratinocytes (Fig. 4 B). Once again, these results, in combination with the immunofluorescence studies of focal contact-associated proteins (Fig. 2), demonstrate that ␣3 integrin deficiency results in a redistribution of existing proteins rather than increased steady state levels of these proteins.


Expression of Other Integrins Is Normal in ␣3-deficient Skin and Keratinocytes in Culture

Since integrins are known to be critical in regulating focal contact functions, one might predict that ␣3-deficiency could result in changes in other integrins that may compensate for the absence of ␣3␤1. The effect of ␣3 integrin deficiency on the expression patterns of other integrins in the skin was investigated by immunofluorescence microscopy. Cryosections from wild-type and ␣3-null mice were stained with antibodies to various integrin subunits including ␣3, ␣v, ␤1, and ␤4 (Fig. 5, A-H). As expected, ␣3 was present on all surfaces of the basal keratinocytes in wildtype epidermis (Fig. 5 A) and was completely absent from ␣3-null skin (Fig. 5 E). There were no detectable differences in distributions of the other integrins tested in the skins of the wild-type or ␣3-null mice. ␣v and ␤1 subunits were confined to the basal keratinocytes in both wild-type (Fig. 5, B and C, respectively) and ␣3-null skin (Fig. 5, F and G). ␤4 integrins were concentrated at the basal face of the basal keratinocytes in both wild-type (Fig. 5 D) and ␣3-null skin (Fig. 5 H). It should be noted that, although ␣6␤4 expression was strongest on the basal face of the basal keratinocytes, faint ␣6␤4 staining was occasionally also observed on the lateral faces of basal keratinocytes in the ␣3-deficient mice.

The distributions of integrin subunits were also tested on keratinocytes grown in culture (Fig. 5, I-P). ␣3 integrin was present in the focal contacts of wild-type (Fig. 5 I), but not ␣3-null cells (Fig. 5 M, nuclei showed background staining). The expression of all the other integrins tested was normal in the ␣3-null cells. ␣v and ␤1 subunits both localized to focal contacts (Fig. 5, J and N, and K and O, respectively). ␣6␤4 distribution was also normal in the ␣3null keratinocytes, localizing to structures known as SACs.

Cells were also stained for ␣2, ␣5, and ␣9. ␣2 and ␣5 showed very low or undetectable levels of expression with no differences between wild-type and ␣3-null cells in vivo and in vitro (data not shown). ␣9 staining was confined to the basal layer of keratinocytes and was normal in wildtype and ␣3-null skin (data not shown). However, ␣9 was not detectable in wild-type or ␣3-null cells in culture. The distribution of the ␣6-subunits was identical with the ␤4 staining patterns both in vivo and in vitro.


␣3 Integrin Deficiency Does Not Result in Changes in the Surface Expression of Other Integrins

To investigate whether there were any changes in processing and surface expression levels of other integrins, primary and secondary passage mouse keratinocyte cultures from wild-type and ␣3-null mice were either stained with anti-integrin antibodies and used in flow cytometric assays (Fig. 6 A) or were surface iodinated and immunoprecipitated with anti-integrin antibodies (Fig. 6, B and C).

In FACS ® analysis (Fig. 6 A) pools of either wild-type or ␣3-null cultured keratinocytes were labeled with anti-integrin extracellular domain-specific antibodies to ␤1, ␤4, or ␣v, or with IgG2a as a negative control. The levels of ␤1 expression were considerably reduced in the ␣3-null cells. This reflects the fact that ␣3␤1 constitutes a large proportion of the ␤1 integrins on the keratinocyte cell surface. ␤4 and ␣v showed no consistent changes in levels of surface expression (Fig. 6 A).

Surface iodination and immunoprecipitation with antibodies to integrin subunits ␣3, ␤1, ␣2, ␣5, ␣v, or ␣6 was carried out on wild-type (ϩ) and ␣3-null (Ϫ) keratinocytes (Fig. 6 B). Immunoprecipitations with anti-␣3 and anti-␤1 antibodies confirmed the absence of ␣3␤1 in the ␣3-null keratinocytes and the expected reduction of ␤1. There were no detectable differences in surface expression of ␣2, ␣5, ␣v, or ␣6␤4 between the wild-type and ␣3-null cells.

Thus, the surface iodination and immunoprecipitation data confirm the absence of detectable differences between wild-type and ␣3-null cells in the surface expression of the different integrin subunits. The ␣6 integrin subunit can also pair with the ␤1 subunit in some cell types, and ␣6␤1 can function as a weak receptor for laminin 5. Western blot analysis demonstrated that the loss of ␣3␤1 from the surfaces of ␣3-null keratinocytes resulted in an increase in the intracellular pool of ␤1 (data not shown); therefore, it seemed possible that some of the excess ␤1 might dimerize with endogenous ␣6 (normally dimerized with ␤4) and cause an upregulation of ␣6␤1 on the cell surface. Although the immunoprecipitation data in Fig. 6 B do not support this idea, we addressed this possibility directly by immunoprecipitation of ␤1 integrins followed by immunoblotting with antiserum against the ␣6 subunit. For both wild-type and ␣3-null keratinocytes ␣6 was present in immunoprecipitates of either ␣6 or ␤4 integrins, but was not detected in immunoprecipitates of ␤1 integrins or in control immunoprecipitations lacking antibody (Fig. 6 C). Similar immunoblots with antiserum against the ␤1 subunit confirmed the presence of ␤1 in immunoprecipitates of ␤1 integrins, and the absence of ␤1 from immunoprecipitates of ␣6 integrins (data not shown). These results confirm the absence of detectable levels of ␣6␤1 in both wild-type and ␣3-null keratinocytes. Thus, although ␣3 deficiency affects F-actin and focal contact protein recruitment to focal contact sites, it has no effect on the expression patterns or levels of the other integrins in keratinocytes. 


The Presence of ␣3␤1 Inhibits Fibronectin and Collagen Type IV Receptor Functions

We have demonstrated that ␣3 integrin deficiency enhances accumulation of actin-associated proteins to focal contacts, but does not change other integrin expression patterns. To examine the effect of ␣3 integrin deficiency on keratinocyte behavior, secondary passage wild-type and ␣3-null keratinocytes were tested in adhesion and migration assays. The numbers of ␣3-null or wild-type keratinocytes able to adhere to laminin 1 (LM-1) or laminin 5 (LM-5) were the same. This result implied that, in the absence of ␣3 integrins, ␣6␤4 (another receptor for LM-5) was sufficient to allow cell attachment to LM-5. Saturating concentrations of GoH3 (an anti-␣6 integrin functionblocking antibody; Sonnenberg et al., 1987) had no effect on the number of wild-type cells adherent to LM-5 since ␣3␤1 is sufficient for adhesion (Delwel et al., 1994;DiPersio et al., 1997). In the presence of GoH3, ␣3-null keratinocytes were completely inhibited from adhering to LM-5 (Fig. 7 A) demonstrating that either ␣3␤1 or ␣6␤4 is sufficient for adhesion to LM-5. Surprisingly, the numbers of ␣3-null cells able to adhere to FN and Coll IV were significantly higher than the numbers of wild-type cells able to adhere (P ϭ 0.01 and 0.05, respectively) (Fig. 7 A). That is, the fibronectin and collagen receptors are more active in the ␣3-null cells.

To compare the migration of wild-type and ␣3-null keratinocytes, phagokinetic assays were performed (Fig. 7  B). The phagokinetic assays involved plating cells on an even field of matrix-coated, colloidal gold particles and allowing the cells to attach and migrate over the substrate. As the cells migrate they phagocytose the gold particles; Figure 6. Expression levels of integrin subunits in wild-type and ␣3-null keratinocytes. (A) FACS ® profiles of wild-type (solid line) and ␣3-null (dotted line) keratinocytes stained with antibodies to various integrins. The negative control shows background levels of staining. ␤1 levels were reduced in the ␣3-null keratinocytes, probably corresponding to deficiency of ␣3-subunits in the mutant cells. ␤4 and ␣v levels were normal. (B) Surface iodination and immunoprecipitation of integrins from wild-type (ϩ) and ␣3-null (Ϫ) keratinocytes. There was no ␣3␤1 detectable on the ␣3-null keratinocytes. The ␤1 immunoprecipitation showed decreased levels of surface ␤1 and coprecipitating ␣-subunits corresponding to the loss of surface ␣3. The surface expression of ␣2, ␣5, ␣v, and ␣6␤4 remained the same in the ␣3-null keratinocytes. (C) Immunoprecipitation and Western blots illustrate the absence of detectable ␣6␤1 in wild-type and ␣3-null keratinocytes. Immunoprecipitation and Western blotting of ␣6 integrins from wild-type and ␣3-null keratinocytes. Whole cell lysates were immunoprecipitated either with mAbs specific for the ␤1, ␣6, or ␤4 integrin subunits as indicated, or without primary antibody (Ϫ), separated on a non-reducing, 7% polyacrylamide gel, and then immunoblotted with a rabbit antiserum against the cytoplasmic domain of the ␣6 subunit. The ␣6 subunit ‫051ف(‬ kD, arrow) was detected in immunoprecipitations for the ␣6 and ␤4 subunits, but not in that for ␤1 or in the control reaction, indicating the absence of ␣6␤1 from these cells. Positions for 147-kD and 241-kD MW markers are indicated at left. Figure 7. Adhesive and migratory behavior of ␣3-null and wild-type keratinocytes on various substrates. (A) Adhesion assays. Cell adhesion was measured as the percentage of cells adherent compared with the number of ␣3-null cells adherent to fibronectin (FN). A significantly higher number of ␣3-null keratinocytes adhered to fibronectin (FN), and collagen type IV (Coll IV) when compared with wild-type keratinocytes (P ϭ 0.01 and P ϭ 0.05, respectively). The numbers of wild-type and ␣3-null keratinocytes that adhered to either laminin 1 or laminin 5 were indistinguishable. When adhesion to laminin-5 was carried out in the presence of an ␣6␤4 blocking antibody (GoH3), adhesion of the ␣3-null keratinocytes was significantly reduced whereas adhesion of the wild-type cells was not (P Ͻ 0.005). Results are an average of four experiments each done in triplicate. (B) Migration assays. Cell migration was measured as the area cleared by a single cell per hour. The ␣3-null keratinocytes migrated significantly further than wild-type cells on FN (P Ͻ 0.005) and Coll IV (P Ͻ 0.005). The migration of ␣3-null keratinocytes and wild-type cells on laminin 1 was not significantly different. In contrast, wild-type keratinocytes migrated significantly better than ␣3-null keratinocytes on laminin 5 (P Ͻ 0.005). the area of the particle-free traces was measured and quantitated as described in Materials and Methods. The ␣3-null keratinocytes migrated significantly further on FN and Coll IV than did the wild-type cells (P ϭ 0.005 and 0.005, respectively). In contrast to the migration on FN the average area cleared by the ␣3-null keratinocytes on LM-1 was not significantly different between the ␣3-deficient and wild-type keratinocytes. The ␣3-null keratinocytes showed a significantly reduced level of migration on LM-5 when compared with wild-type cells (P ϭ 0.005). This was consistent with our previous observation that ␣3-null keratinocytes do not spread well on LM-5, but the wild-type cells do (DiPersio et al., 1997). Thus, although the ␣3-null cells can adhere as well as the wild-type cells to LM-5, they do not migrate as well.

Taken together, these data suggest that the changes in focal contact protein composition observed in the ␣3-null keratinocytes may be associated with the functional upregulation of fibronectin and collagen type IV receptors in these cells.


Discussion

␣3␤1 is an abundant integrin on the surfaces of keratinocytes. However, to date, the precise roles of ␣3␤1 in skin biology have been unclear. The generation of ␣3 integrin knockout mice has permitted us to isolate ␣3-deficient keratinocytes, which we have used to investigate the roles of ␣3␤1. Comparison of the characteristics and functional behaviors of these cells with those of wild-type keratinocytes has shed light on novel functions of ␣3␤1 as a regulator of cytoskeletal organization and as a trans-dominant inhibitor of other integrins. Our major findings are as follows: (a) ␣3␤1-deficient mice show an enhanced concentration of F-actin at the basal face of the basal keratinocytes; (b) in ␣3-null keratinocytes there is an increase in stress fiber formation and actin-associated protein localization to focal contacts, and this is associated with increased levels of phosphotyrosine in focal contacts, and (c) in functional assays the absence of ␣3␤1 in the ␣3-null keratinocytes permits increased function of fibronectin and collagen receptors when compared with wild-type cells, implying a novel role of ␣3␤1 as a trans-dominant inhibitor of other integrins.

The blisters observed in the ␣3-null mice are small compared with the extensive blistering found in the ␣6- (Georges-Labouesse et al., 1996) or ␤4-knockout mice Dowling et al., 1996) and are particularly evident on the foot pads where they are sometimes filled with blood ( Fig. 1). Mutations in ␣6␤4 and laminin 5 have been shown to be causes of severe human blistering disorders such as Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa with pyloric atresia (for review see Burgeson and Christiano, 1997). However, the etiologies of many other human blistering diseases are still unknown. It will be of interest to determine whether mutations in ␣3␤1 may also contribute to human blistering disorders.


␣3␤1 Deficiency Results in F-Actin Reorganization That Is Reminiscent of Wound Healing

Although ␣6␤4 and ␣3␤1 integrins are both receptors for laminin 5, they differ in that the cytoplasmic tails of ␣6␤4 interact with the keratin cytoskeleton, whereas the ␣3␤1 cytoplasmic tails interact with the F-actin cytoskeleton. At the ultrastructural level, the ␣6and ␤4-knockout skins have altered keratin filament organization (Dowling et al., 1996;Georges-Labouesse et al., 1996;. Our immunofluorescence studies show that, although keratin 14 expression patterns are similar in ␣3-null and wild-type skin, the pattern of F-actin changes. In the ␣3-null epidermis F-actin was concentrated at the basal face of the basal keratinocytes in both blistering and non-blistering areas (Fig. 1, I-J). These observations were reflected in cultured keratinocytes where thin fibers of F-actin became concentrated into thick bundles in the absence of ␣3␤1 integrins (Fig. 2, A and B). Reconstitution of ␣3␤1-expression in ␣3-null keratinocytes reduced the thick actin bundles typically presented in these cells (Fig. 3).

Our findings both in vivo and in vitro show a striking resemblance to the patterns of reorganized F-actin seen during epithelial and corneal endothelial wound healing (Gabbiani et al., 1978;Brock et al., 1996;Gordon and Buxar, 1997) and suggest that the basal keratinocytes in the ␣3-null skin may be mimicking some kind of wound healing process. We postulate that deficiency for ␣3␤1 results in a wound healing-like response, which in turn is manifested by the repeated deposition of basement membrane proteins during epidermal development, thus giving rise to the "layered" appearance of the basement membrane in the ␣3-null skin (DiPersio et al., 1997).


␣3␤1 Is a Trans-dominant Inhibitor of Fibronectin and Collagen Type IV Receptor Function

In the ␣3-null keratinocytes the changes seen in F-actin organization are also associated with an increased recruitment of actin-associated proteins such as vinculin, talin and ␣-actinin to focal contacts (Fig. 2). Immunochemical data show that this increased recruitment is not due to an increase in production of these proteins, but rather to changes in localization (Fig. 4). A similar change in actin organization was also observed in corneal epithelial cells during wound healing with no change in actin synthesis (Gordon and Buxar, 1997). The phenomenon of enhanced focal contacts in the ␣3-null keratinocytes implies that, when ␣3␤1 is present, it prevents these events from occurring (Fig. 2, C-L). This is a novel function for ␣3␤1, but the mechanism is unclear.

Since ␣3␤1 is such an abundant integrin on the surface of keratinocytes and most of it is not concentrated in focal contact sites (DiPersio et al., 1995), it is possible that ␣3␤1 competes for certain proteins thereby regulating focal contact composition. Hence, when ␣3␤1 is absent, actin-associated proteins may be "free" to localize more readily to focal contact sites. The increase in PY20 staining at the focal contacts in the ␣3-null keratinocytes demonstrates that there is an increase in tyrosine phosphorylation at these sites. Elevated tyrosine phosphorylation is associated with activation of focal adhesion proteins and this in turn with integrin-mediated cell binding to the extracellular matrix (Hynes, 1992;Juliano and Haskill, 1993). Thus, in the absence of ␣3␤1 integrin, such an increase in phosphotyrosine at focal contacts may reflect a change in the signaling of other integrins.

Another way in which ␣3␤1 might regulate stress fiber and focal contact assembly is via effects on cell polarization and cadherin function. Antibodies to ␣3␤1 inhibit cell-cell adhesion (Carter et al., 1990a), so loss of ␣3␤1 could similarly affect cadherin function including recruitment of F-actin and certain focal contact proteins to cellcell adherens junctions. This in turn would release these components for assembly at the basal surface in response to other integrins. We have observed that E-cadherin is poorly organized in ␣3-null epidermis that overlies "diffuse" areas of basement membrane (data not shown). This preliminary evidence supports the idea that ␣3 deficiency may affect keratinocyte polarization in skin and is in accordance with the disorganized cadherins observed in immortalized kidney epithelial cells (Wang, Z., J.M. Symons, and J.A. Kreidberg, personal communication). Whatever the precise mechanism, it is clear that the absence of ␣3␤1 allows greater recruitment of cytoskeletal components by other integrins.

Functional assays revealed that ␣3-null keratinocytes adhere and migrate better on fibronectin and collagen type IV than do wild-type controls (Fig. 7). Using P1B5, a function-blocking anti-␣3 antibody, Kim et al. (1992) showed evidence that blocking ␣3 integrin function enhanced the migration of keratinocytes on FN. However, they and others (Carter et al., 1990a) have suggested that P1B5 blocked keratinocyte adhesion to FN. Our data instead support a role for ␣3␤1 as a trans-dominant inhibitor of FN and Coll IV receptor function.

Previous work suggests that occupancy of one integrin can suppress the functions of other integrins in the same cell. For example, anti-␣v␤3 antibodies suppress ␣5␤1dependent phagocytosis (Blystone et al., 1994) and ligation of ␣4␤1 inhibits ␣5␤1-dependent expression of metalloproteinases (Huhtala et al., 1995). Diàz-Gonzàlez et al. (1996) showed that ligand-specific ligation of a "suppressor" integrin such as ␣IIb␤3 is associated with a blockade in functioning of "target" integrins such as ␣5␤1. Diàz-Gonzàlez's work also indicates that ␣llb␤3 is dependent on ligand interaction to inhibit ␣5␤1 function. Our in vitro results show that the trans-dominant role of ␣3␤1 can be independent of ligation with LM5 and relies on the presence of ␣3␤1. It should be noted that unlike ␣llb␤3, ␣3␤1 appears to be constitutively active in cultured cells in that focal contact localization may be ligand-independent in some cases (DiPersio et al., 1995). It is quite possible that ligation of ␣3␤1 with laminin 5 may enhance ␣3␤1 activity to send an inhibitory signal to the FN and Coll IV receptors on the surface of the cell and thus inhibit their functions further.


Potential Implications for Trans-dominant Inhibition During Wound Healing

Given the results reported here, one can make some hypotheses about the role of ␣3␤1 in regulating keratinocyte behavior in resting skin and during wound healing. In resting skin ␣3␤1 is prevalent and is engaged with LM5 in the basement membrane and the cells are sessile. This situation would be predicted to lead to ␣3␤1-dependent suppression of the functions of other migratory integrins. At the time of wounding, ␣5␤1 and ␣v integrins are upregulated and are believed to promote keratinocyte migration on the provisional matrix, which is rich in ligands for these integrins (fibronectin, fibrin, and vitronectin). ␣2␤1-collagen interactions could also play a role (Larjava et al., 1993). Our results suggest that migration would be enhanced if trans-dominant inhibition by ␣3␤1 were relieved (Fig. 8). There are several ways in which this could arise. Metalloproteinases, which are upregulated on wounding (for review see Clark, 1996) could cleave constituents in the basement membrane such as LM5 or ␣3␤1 itself. This might cause uncoupling of the ␣3␤1-LM5 adhesion system, allowing efficient functioning of migratory integrins (including ␣5␤1, ␣2␤1, and ␣v) and epithelial closure of the wound. Relief of ␣3␤1 trans-dominant inhibition could also occur by some form of inactivation of ␣3␤1 from inside the cell (i.e., inside-out signaling). Then, once the wound is closed, reestablishment of a newly formed basement membrane and of functional ␣3␤1-LM5 interactions, could be hypothesized to restore trans-dominant inhibition of the other integrins, bringing migration to an end and returning the keratinocytes to their sessile state.

In addition to the above hypothesis, ␣3␤1-LM5 interactions may occur in two different modes. The first would be as a trans-dominant inhibitor just as in the model above Figure 8. A model for ␣3␤1 integrin as a trans-dominant inhibitor during wound healing. In resting skin ␣3␤1 engages LM5 and this results in trans-dominant inhibition of ␣5␤1 and ␣2␤1 functions. This confers an adherent non-migratory state on the keratinocytes. When skin is wounded, the ␣3␤1-LM5 interactions are altered, due to changes in ␣3␤1 and/or LM5, relieving trans-dominant inhibition of the functions of other integrins. ␣3␤1 and/or LM5 may show changes in conformation switching ␣3␤1 form an adherent, inhibitory mode to a migratory, noninhibitory mode. Once the wound is closed, a normal basement membrane is reestablished, ␣3␤1 binds resting LM5 and inhibits ␣5␤1 and ␣2␤1 functions again. and we would suggest that this is the role of this interaction in resting skin and after completion of healing. However, during migration, ␣3␤1-LM5 interactions could also play a role in migration. This change from a resting, adhesive, and trans-dominant inhibitory state of ␣3␤1 to a migratory and non-inhibitory state could occur by alterations in LM5 and/or in intracellular regulation of ␣3␤1 function. Such a model would accommodate a role for the high levels of LM5 during re-epithelialization (Larjava et al., 1993;Zhang and Kramer, 1996;Lotz et al., 1997).

Either model invokes ␣3␤1 as a suppressor of keratinocyte migration in non-wounded skin and could explain the apparent formation of multiple layers of basement membrane in the ␣3-null skin (DiPersio et al., 1997). The models also lead to testable predictions about the behavior of ␣3-null skin before and after wounding; such predictions could be tested by transplanting neonatal skin (Medalie et al., 1996) from ␣3-null pups to immuno-deficient recipient mice. These hypotheses also raise questions about ␣3␤1 signaling processes which will be readily investigated using keratinocytes established from wild-type and ␣3-null mice and transfected with ␣3 cDNAs.

In conclusion, using ␣3-deficient mice and keratinocytes, we have uncovered a novel role for ␣3␤1 in the regulation of focal contact composition, F-actin organization and as a trans-dominant inhibitor of FN and Coll IV receptor functions. This new role for ␣3␤1 may be important in understanding more about the regulation of keratinocyte migration in wound healing physiology.

Figure 3 .
3Reconstitution of ␣3␤1-expression in ␣3-null keratinocytes reduces the thick actin bundles. ␣3-null primary keratinocytes were transiently transfected with a recombinant plasmid expressing the ␣3-subunit. Two examples of cells transfected with ␣3 are given. Cells were double labeled for ␣3 integrin (mAb P1B5) and F-actin (A and C, and B and D, respectively), or for ␣3 integrin (polyclonal antiserum) and vinculin (E and F, respectively). Arrows, transfected cells. Untransfected cells (arrowheads) served as controls within the same fields. Transfection with ␣3 reduced both the thick actin bundles and vinculin localization to focal contacts.

Figure 4 .
4The expression levels of focal contact-associated proteins in the ␣3-null keratinocytes are normal. (A) The levels of fluorescent-phalloidin-labeled F-actin in the ␣3-null and wildtype keratinocytes were the same. Student's t test showed no statistical difference in three experiments for a total of 11 samples. (B) Western blots of ␣3 integrin, actin, vinculin, talin, and ␣-actinin. The ␣3-subunit (␣3, 150 kD) was absent in the ␣3-null keratinocytes. The levels of total actin (actin, 42 kD), vinculin (Vn, 110 kD), talin (Tn, 220 kD), and ␣-actinin (␣-act, 100 kD) were all the same in the wild-type (ϩ) and ␣3-null keratinocytes (Ϫ). Molecular weight markers represented in kD (kD). All cells were grown on vitrogen-coated plates.

Figure 5 .
5Immunofluorescence patterns of integrins in vivo and in vitro. Integrin expression patterns were examined by immunofluorescence microscopy in wild-type (A-D and I-L) and ␣3-deficient (E-H and M-P) skin sections (A-H) and in keratinocytes grown in culture (I-P). Immunofluorescence staining of ␣3 (A, E, I, and M), ␣v (B, F, J, and N), ␤1 (C, G, K, and O), and ␤4 (D, H, L, and P). Apart from the loss of ␣3, the staining patterns for other integrins in the ␣3-deficient skin and cells were normal. Bars: (H) 100 m; (P) 10 m.
The authors are grateful to K. Mercer for her excellent help with histology. Thanks also to all those who kindly provided antibodies and reagents. And finally, thanks to B. Burgeson, E. Clark, and M. Borowsky for their valuable comments while preparing this paper.This work was sponsored in part by The Human Frontiers Science Programme and The Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association, by a grant from the National Cancer Institute (RO1 CA7007), and by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI). R.O. Hynes is an Investigator of the HHMI.Received for publication 11 March 1998 and in revised form 20 July 1998.
The phagokinetic tracks of 3T3 cells. G Albrecht-Buehler, Cell. 11Albrecht-Buehler, G. 1977. The phagokinetic tracks of 3T3 cells. Cell. 11:395-404.

Transformation and tumor progression are frequently associated with expression of the ␣3/␤1 heterodimer in solid tumors. A Bartolazzi, C Cerboni, M R Nicotra, M Mottolese, A Bigotti, P Natali, Int. J. Cancer. 58Bartolazzi, A., C. Cerboni, M.R. Nicotra, M. Mottolese, A. Bigotti, and P. Na- tali. 1994. Transformation and tumor progression are frequently associated with expression of the ␣3/␤1 heterodimer in solid tumors. Int. J. Cancer. 58: 488-491.

Integrin ␣v␤3 differentially regulates adhesive and phagocytic functions of the fibronectin receptor ␣5␤1. S D Blystone, I L Graham, F P Lindberg, E J Brown, J. Cell Biol. 127Blystone, S.D., I.L. Graham, F.P. Lindberg, and E.J. Brown. 1994. Integrin ␣v␤3 differentially regulates adhesive and phagocytic functions of the fi- bronectin receptor ␣5␤1. J. Cell Biol. 127:1129-1137.

TGF␤1 promotes actin cytoskeleton reorganisation and migratory phenotype in epithelial tracheal cells in primary culture. S Boland, E Boisvieux-Ulrich, O Houcine, A Baeza-Sqiban, M Pouchelet, D Schoëvaërt, F Marano, J. Cell Sci. 109Boland, S., E. Boisvieux-Ulrich, O. Houcine, A. Baeza-Sqiban, M. Pouchelet, D. Schoëvaërt, and F. Marano. 1996. TGF␤1 promotes actin cytoskeleton re- organisation and migratory phenotype in epithelial tracheal cells in primary culture. J. Cell Sci. 109:2207-2219.

Hemidesmosomes: roles in adhesion, signalling and human diseases. L Borradori, A Sonnenberg, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 8Borradori, L., and A. Sonnenberg. 1996. Hemidesmosomes: roles in adhesion, signalling and human diseases. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 8:647-656.

Inproved methods for reducing calcium and magnesium concentrations in tissue culture medium. J K Brennen, J Mansky, G Roberts, M A Litchman, In Vitro. 11Brennen, J.K., J. Mansky, G. Roberts, and M.A. Litchman. 1982. Inproved methods for reducing calcium and magnesium concentrations in tissue cul- ture medium. In Vitro. 11:693-703.

Healing of incisional wounds in the embryonic chick wing bud: Characterization of the actin purse-string and demonstration of a requirement for Rho activation. J Brock, K Midwinter, J Lewis, P Martin, J. Cell Biol. 135Brock, J., K. Midwinter, J. Lewis, and P. Martin. 1996. Healing of incisional wounds in the embryonic chick wing bud: Characterization of the actin purse-string and demonstration of a requirement for Rho activation. J. Cell Biol. 135:1097-1107.

The dermal-epidermal junction. R E Burgeson, A M Christiano, Curr. Biol. 9Burgeson, R.E., and A.M. Christiano. 1997. The dermal-epidermal junction. Curr. Biol. 9:651-658.

Focal adhesions: transmembrane junctions between the extracellular matrix and the cytoskeleton. K Burridge, K Fath, T Kelly, G Nuckolls, C Turner, Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 4Burridge, K., K. Fath, T. Kelly, G. Nuckolls, and C. Turner. 1988. Focal adhe- sions: transmembrane junctions between the extracellular matrix and the cy- toskeleton. Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 4:487-525.

The role of integrins ␣2␤1 and ␣3␤1 in cell-cell and cell-substrate adhesion of human epidermal cells. W G Carter, E A Wayner, T S Bouchard, P Kaur, J. Cell Biol. 110Carter, W.G., E.A. Wayner, T.S. Bouchard, and P. Kaur. 1990a. The role of in- tegrins ␣2␤1 and ␣3␤1 in cell-cell and cell-substrate adhesion of human epi- dermal cells. J. Cell Biol. 110:1387-1404.

Distinct functions for integrins ␣3␤1 in focal adhesions and ␣6␤4/bullous antigen in a new stable anchoring contact (SAC) of keratinocytes: Relation to hemidesmosomes. W G Carter, P Kaur, S G Gil, P J Gahr, E A Wayner, J. Cell Biol. 111Carter, W.G., P. Kaur, S.G. Gil, P.J. Gahr, and E.A. Wayner. 1990b. Distinct functions for integrins ␣3␤1 in focal adhesions and ␣6␤4/bullous antigen in a new stable anchoring contact (SAC) of keratinocytes: Relation to hemides- mosomes. J. Cell Biol. 111:3141-3154.

Distinctive integrin expression in the newly forming epidermis during wound healing in humans. A Cavani, G Zambruno, A Marconi, V Manca, M Marchetti, A Giannetti, J. Invest. Dermatol. 101Cavani, A., G. Zambruno, A. Marconi, V. Manca, M. Marchetti, and A. Gian- netti. 1993. Distinctive integrin expression in the newly forming epidermis during wound healing in humans. J. Invest. Dermatol. 101:600-604.

Integrins and signal transduction pathways: the road taken. E A Clark, J S Brugge, Science. 268Clark, E.A., and J.S. Brugge. 1995. Integrins and signal transduction pathways: the road taken. Science. 268:233-239.

The Molecular and Cellular Biology of Wound Repair. R A F Clark, Plenum PressNew York and London2nd EdClark, R.A.F. 1996. The Molecular and Cellular Biology of Wound Repair. 2nd Ed. Plenum Press, New York and London. 442-447.

Distinct and overlapping ligand specificities of the ␣3A␤1 and ␣6A␤1 integrins: recognition of laminin isoforms. G O Delwel, A A De Melker, F Hogervorst, L H Jaspars, D L A Fles, I Kuikman, A Lindblom, M Paulsson, R Timpl, A Sonnenberg, Mol. Biol. Cell. 5Delwel, G.O., A.A. de Melker, F. Hogervorst, L.H. Jaspars, D.L.A. Fles, I. Kuikman, A. Lindblom, M. Paulsson, R. Timpl, and A. Sonnenberg. 1994. Distinct and overlapping ligand specificities of the ␣3A␤1 and ␣6A␤1 inte- grins: recognition of laminin isoforms. Mol. Biol. Cell. 5:203-215.

Trans-dominant inhibition of integrin function. F Dìaz-Gonzàlez, J Forsyth, B Steiner, M H Ginsberg, Mol. Biol. Cell. 7Dìaz-Gonzàlez, F., J. Forsyth, B. Steiner, and M.H. Ginsberg. 1996. Trans-dom- inant inhibition of integrin function. Mol. Biol. Cell. 7:1939-1951.

␣3␤1 integrin localizes to focal contacts in response to diverse extracellular matrix proteins. C M Dipersio, S Shah, R O Hynes, J. Cell Sci. 108DiPersio, C.M., S. Shah, and R.O. Hynes. 1995. ␣3␤1 integrin localizes to focal contacts in response to diverse extracellular matrix proteins. J. Cell Sci. 108: 2321-2336.

␣3␤1 integrin is required for normal development of the epidermal basement membrane. C M Dipersio, K M Hodivala-Dilke, R Jaenisch, J A Kreidberg, R O Hynes, J. Cell Biol. 137DiPersio, C.M., K.M. Hodivala-Dilke, R. Jaenisch, J.A. Kreidberg, and R.O. Hynes. 1997. ␣3␤1 integrin is required for normal development of the epi- dermal basement membrane. J. Cell Biol. 137:729-742.

␤4 integrin is required for hemidesmosomal formation, cell adhesion and cell survival. J Dowling, Q.-C Yu, E Fuchs, J. Cell Biol. 134Dowling, J., Q.-C. Yu, and E. Fuchs. 1996. ␤4 integrin is required for hemides- mosomal formation, cell adhesion and cell survival. J. Cell Biol. 134:559-572.

Isolation and utilization of epidermal keratinocytes for oncogene research. A A Dlugosz, A B Glick, T Tennenbaum, Methods Enzymol. 254Dlugosz, A.A., A.B. Glick, and T. Tennenbaum. 1995. Isolation and utilization of epidermal keratinocytes for oncogene research. Methods Enzymol. 254:3-20.

Receptor functions for the integrin VLA-3: Fibronectin, collagen, and laminin binding are differentially influenced by ARG-GLY-ASP peptide and by divalent cations. M J Elices, L A Urry, M E Hemler, J. Cell Biol. 112Elices, M.J., L.A. Urry, and M.E. Hemler. 1991. Receptor functions for the in- tegrin VLA-3: Fibronectin, collagen, and laminin binding are differentially influenced by ARG-GLY-ASP peptide and by divalent cations. J. Cell Biol. 112:169-181.

Evaluation of integrin molecules involved in substrate adhesion. M Enomoto-Iwamoto, A S Menko, N Philip, D Boettiger, Cell Adhes. Commun. 1Enomoto-Iwamoto, M., A.S. Menko, N. Philip, and D. Boettiger. 1993. Evalua- tion of integrin molecules involved in substrate adhesion. Cell Adhes. Com- mun. 1:191-202.

Cytoplasmic filaments and gap junctions in epithelial cells and myofibroblasts during wound healing. G Gabbiani, C Chaponnier, I Hüttner, J. Cell Biol. 76Gabbiani, G., C. Chaponnier, and I. Hüttner. 1978. Cytoplasmic filaments and gap junctions in epithelial cells and myofibroblasts during wound healing. J. Cell Biol. 76:561-568.

The human laminin receptor is a member of the integrin family of cell adhesion receptors. K R Gehlsen, L Dillner, E Engvall, E Ruoslahti, Science. 241Gehlsen, K.R., L. Dillner, E. Engvall, and E. Ruoslahti. 1988. The human lami- nin receptor is a member of the integrin family of cell adhesion receptors. Science. 241:1228-1229.

Absence of integrin ␣6 leads to epidermolysis bullosa and neonatal death in mice. E Georges-Labouesse, N Messaddeq, G Yehia, L Cadalbert, A Dierich, M Le Meur, Nat. Genet. 13Georges-Labouesse, E., N. Messaddeq, G. Yehia, L. Cadalbert, A. Dierich, and M. Le Meur. 1996. Absence of integrin ␣6 leads to epidermolysis bullosa and neonatal death in mice. Nat. Genet. 13:370-373.

Inhibition of cytoskeletal reorganisation stimulates actin and tubulin synthesies during injury-indued cell migration in the corneal endothelium. S R Gordon, R M Buxar, J. Cell. Biochem. 67Gordon, S.R., and R.M. Buxar. 1997. Inhibition of cytoskeletal reorganisation stimulates actin and tubulin synthesies during injury-indued cell migration in the corneal endothelium. J. Cell. Biochem. 67:409-421.

␣3␤1 integrin is moved into focal contacts in kidney mesangial cells. H Grenz, S Carbonetto, S L Goodman, J. Cell Sci. 105Grenz, H., S. Carbonetto, and S.L. Goodman. 1993. ␣3␤1 integrin is moved into focal contacts in kidney mesangial cells. J. Cell Sci. 105:739-751.

Aberrrant integrin expression during epidermal wound healing and psoriatic epidermis. M D Hertle, M.-D Kubler, I M Leigh, F M Watt, J. Clin. Invest. 89Hertle, M.D., M.-D. Kubler, I.M. Leigh, and F.M. Watt. 1992. Aberrrant inte- grin expression during epidermal wound healing and psoriatic epidermis. J. Clin. Invest. 89:1892-1901.

Cooperative signalling by ␣5␤1 and ␣4␤1 integrins regulates metalloproteinase gene expression in fibroblasts adhering to fibronectin. P Huhtala, M J Humphries, J B Mccarthy, P Tremble, Z Werb, C H Damsky, J. Cell Biol. 129Huhtala, P., M.J. Humphries, J.B. McCarthy, P. Tremble, Z. Werb, and C.H. Damsky. 1995. Cooperative signalling by ␣5␤1 and ␣4␤1 integrins regulates metalloproteinase gene expression in fibroblasts adhering to fibronectin. J. Cell Biol. 129:867-879.

Alterations of cell surface proteins by viral transformation and by proteolysis. R O Hynes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 70Hynes, R.O. 1973. Alterations of cell surface proteins by viral transformation and by proteolysis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 70:3170-3174.

Integrins: versatility, modulation, and signalling in cell adhesion. R O Hynes, Cell. 69Hynes, R.O. 1992. Integrins: versatility, modulation, and signalling in cell adhe- sion. Cell. 69:11-25.

Integrin heterodimer and receptor complexity in avian and mammalian cells. R O Hynes, E E Marcantonio, M A Stepp, L A Urry, G H Yee, J. Cell Biol. 109Hynes, R.O., E.E. Marcantonio, M.A. Stepp, L.A. Urry, and G.H. Yee. 1989. Integrin heterodimer and receptor complexity in avian and mammalian cells. J. Cell Biol. 109:409-420.

F-actin binding site masked by the intramolecular association of vinculin head and tail domains. R P Johnson, S W Craig, Nature. 373Johnson, R.P., and S.W. Craig. 1995. F-actin binding site masked by the in- tramolecular association of vinculin head and tail domains. Nature. 373:261-264.

Signal transduction from the extracellular matrix. R L Juliano, S Haskill, J. Cell Biol. 120Juliano, R.L., and S. Haskill. 1993. Signal transduction from the extracellular matrix. J. Cell Biol. 120:577-585.

Integrin receptors and RGD sequences in human keratinocyte migration: unique anti-migratory function of ␣3␤1 epiligrin receptor. J P Kim, K Zhang, R H Kramer, T J Schall, D T Woodley, J. Invest. Dermatol. 98Kim, J.P., K. Zhang, R.H. Kramer, T.J. Schall, and D.T. Woodley. 1992. Inte- grin receptors and RGD sequences in human keratinocyte migration: unique anti-migratory function of ␣3␤1 epiligrin receptor. J. Invest. Dermatol. 98: 764-770.

J A Kreidberg, M J Donovan, S L Goldstein, H Rennke, K Shepherd, R C Jones, R Jaenisch, ␣3␤1 integrin has a crucial role in kidney and lung organogenesis. 122Kreidberg, J.A., M.J. Donovan, S.L. Goldstein, H. Rennke, K. Shepherd, R.C. Jones, and R. Jaenisch. 1996. ␣3␤1 integrin has a crucial role in kidney and lung organogenesis. Development (Camb.). 122:3537-3547.

Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of the bacteriophage T4. U K Laemmli, Nature. 227Laemmli, U.K. 1970. Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of the bacteriophage T4. Nature. 227:680-685.

Expression of integrins and basement membrane components by wound keratinocytes. H Larjava, T Salo, K Haapasalmi, R H Kramer, J Heino, J. Clin. Invest. 92Larjava, H., T. Salo, K. Haapasalmi, R.H. Kramer, and J. Heino. 1993. Expres- sion of integrins and basement membrane components by wound kerati- nocytes. J. Clin. Invest. 92:1425-1435.

Involvement of specific laminin isoforms and integrin laminin receptors in wound closure of a transformed model epithelium. M M Lotz, A Nusrat, J L Madara, R Ezell, U M Wewer, A M Mercurio, Am. J. Pathol. 150Lotz, M.M., A. Nusrat, J.L. Madara, R. Ezell, U.M. Wewer, and A.M. Mercu- rio. 1997. Involvement of specific laminin isoforms and integrin laminin re- ceptors in wound closure of a transformed model epithelium. Am. J. Pathol. 150:747-760.

Antibodies to the conserved cytoplasmic domain of the integrin ␤1 cytoplasmic domain by site directed mutagenesis. E E Marcantonio, R O Hynes, J. Cell Biol. 106Marcantonio, E.E., and R.O. Hynes. 1988. Antibodies to the conserved cyto- plasmic domain of the integrin ␤1 cytoplasmic domain by site directed mu- tagenesis. J. Cell Biol. 106:1765-1772.

Evaluation of human skin reconstituted from composite grafts of cultured keratinocytes and human dermis transplanted to athymic mice. D A Medalie, S A Eming, R G Tompkins, M L Yarmush, G G Krueger, J R Morgan, J. Invest. Dermol. 107Medalie, D.A., S.A. Eming, R.G. Tompkins, M.L. Yarmush, G.G. Krueger, and J.R. Morgan. 1996. Evaluation of human skin reconstituted from composite grafts of cultured keratinocytes and human dermis transplanted to athymic mice. J. Invest. Dermol. 107:121-127.

Deficiency of the integrin ␤4 subunit in junctional epidermolysis bullosa with pyloric atresia: consequences for hemidesmosome formation and adhesion properties. C M Niessen, L M H Van Der Raaij-Helmer, E H M Hulsman, R Van Der Neut, M F Jonkman, A Sonnenberg, J. Cell Sci. 109Niessen, C.M., L.M.H. van der Raaij-Helmer, E.H.M. Hulsman, R. van der Neut, M.F. Jonkman, and A. Sonnenberg. 1996. Deficiency of the integrin ␤4 subunit in junctional epidermolysis bullosa with pyloric atresia: conse- quences for hemidesmosome formation and adhesion properties. J. Cell Sci. 109:1695-1706.

Mapping of the ␣-actinin binding site within the ␤1 integrin cytoplasmic domain. C A Otey, G B Vasquez, K Burridge, B W Erickson, J. Biol. Chem. 268Otey, C.A., G.B. Vasquez, K. Burridge, and B.W. Erickson. 1993. Mapping of the ␣-actinin binding site within the ␤1 integrin cytoplasmic domain. J. Biol. Chem. 268:21193-21197.

Sequence and tissue distribution of the integrin ␣9 subunit, a novel partner of ␤1 that is widely distributed in epithelia and muscle. E L Palmer, C Rüegg, R Ferrando, R Pytela, D Sheppard, J. Cell Biol. 123Palmer, E.L., C. Rüegg, R. Ferrando, R. Pytela, and D. Sheppard. 1993. Se- quence and tissue distribution of the integrin ␣9 subunit, a novel partner of ␤1 that is widely distributed in epithelia and muscle. J. Cell Biol. 123:1289- 1297.

Expression, topography, and function of integrin receptors are severely altered in keratinocytes from involved and uninvolved psoriatic skin. G Pellegrini, M Deluca, G Orecchia, F Balzac, O Cremona, P Savoia, R Cancedda, P C Marchisio, J. Clin. Invest. 89Pellegrini, G., M. DeLuca, G. Orecchia, F. Balzac, O. Cremona, P. Savoia, R. Cancedda, and P.C. Marchisio. 1992. Expression, topography, and function of integrin receptors are severely altered in keratinocytes from involved and uninvolved psoriatic skin. J. Clin. Invest. 89:1783-1795.

A homozygous mutation in the integrin ␣6 gene in junctional epidermolysis bullosa with pyloric atresia. L Ruzzi, L Gagnoux-Palacious, M Pinola, S Belli, G Meneguzzi, M D&apos;alessio, G Zambruno, J. Clin. Invest. 99Ruzzi, L., L. Gagnoux-Palacious, M. Pinola, S. Belli, G. Meneguzzi, M. D'Alessio, and G. Zambruno. 1997. A homozygous mutation in the integrin ␣6 gene in junctional epidermolysis bullosa with pyloric atresia. J. Clin. In- vest. 99:2826-2831.

A complex of platelet glycoprotein Ic and Ia identified by a rat monoclonal antibody. A Sonnenberg, H Janssen, F Hogervorst, J Calafat, J Hilgers, J. Biol. Chem. 262Sonnenberg, A., H. Janssen, F. Hogervorst, J. Calafat, and J. Hilgers. 1987. A complex of platelet glycoprotein Ic and Ia identified by a rat monoclonal an- tibody. J. Biol. Chem. 262:10376-10383.

␣6␤4 integrin heterodimer is a component of hemidesmosomes. M A Stepp, S Spurr-Michaud, A Tisdale, J Elwell, I K Gipson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 87Stepp, M.A., S. Spurr-Michaud, A. Tisdale, J. Elwell, and I.K. Gipson. 1990. ␣6␤4 integrin heterodimer is a component of hemidesmosomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 87:8970-8974.

Modulation of epidermal differentiation by epiligrin and integrin ␣3␤1. B E Symington, W E Carter, J. Cell Sci. 108Symington, B.E., and W.E. Carter. 1995. Modulation of epidermal differentia- tion by epiligrin and integrin ␣3␤1. J. Cell Sci. 108:831-838.

Epithelial detachment due to absence of hemidesmosomes in integrin ␤4 null mice. R Van Der Neut, P Krimpenfort, J Calafat, C M Niessen, A Sonnenberg, Nat. Genet. 13van der Neut, R., P. Krimpenfort, J. Calafat, C.M. Niessen, and A. Sonnenberg. 1996. Epithelial detachment due to absence of hemidesmosomes in integrin ␤4 null mice. Nat. Genet. 13:366-369.

Keratinocyte integrins. F M Watt, M D Hertle, The Keratinocyte Handbook. I.M. Leigh, E.B. Lane, and F.M. WattCambridgeCambridge University PressWatt, F.M., and M.D. Hertle. 1994. Keratinocyte integrins. In The Keratinocyte Handbook. I.M. Leigh, E.B. Lane, and F.M. Watt, editors. Cambridge Uni- versity Press, Cambridge. 153-164.

Identification of multiple cell adhesion receptors for collagen and fibronectin in human fibrosarcoma cells possessing unique a and common b subunits. E A Wayner, W G Carter, J. Cell Biol. 105Wayner, E.A., and W.G. Carter. 1987. Identification of multiple cell adhesion receptors for collagen and fibronectin in human fibrosarcoma cells possess- ing unique a and common b subunits. J. Cell Biol. 105:1873-1884.

The function of multiple extracellular matrix receptors in mediating cell adhesion to extracellular matrix: Preparation of monoclonal antibodies to the fibronectin receptor that specifically inhibit cell adhesion to fibronectin and react with platelet glycoproteins IIc-IIa. E A Wayner, W G Carter, R S Piotrowicz, T J Kunicki, J. Cell Biol. 107Wayner, E.A., W.G. Carter, R.S. Piotrowicz, and T.J. Kunicki. 1988. The func- tion of multiple extracellular matrix receptors in mediating cell adhesion to extracellular matrix: Preparation of monoclonal antibodies to the fibronec- tin receptor that specifically inhibit cell adhesion to fibronectin and react with platelet glycoproteins IIc-IIa. J. Cell Biol. 107:1881-1891.

Laminin 5 deposition promotes keratinocyte motility. K Zhang, R H Kramer, Exp. Cell Res. 227Zhang, K., and R.H. Kramer. 1996. Laminin 5 deposition promotes kerati- nocyte motility. Exp. Cell Res. 227:309-322.