Timothy Matthews 
University of California
Los

Jian Li 
University of California
Los
Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre -including this research content -immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active. Key result areas include increased awareness, increased accessi-bility to health and safety services, and decreased incidence. 308 Who is most vulnerable to psychological distress following working from home? A national survey in U.S. employees during the COVID-19 PandemicAngelesEnvironmental Health SciencesLos AngelesUnited States Of America2 University of CaliforniaLos AngelesEnvironmental Health SciencesSchool of NursingLos AngelesUnited States Of America


Introduction: The COVID-19 pandemic has precipitated broad and extensive changes in the way people live and work, especially regarding working from home rather than commuting to a public workplace. While the general subject of working from home has recently drawn increased attention as a research focus, few studies have assessed which demographic subgroups may be more vulnerable to the potential mental health effects of working from home. Material and Methods: Data were from the Health, Ethnicity, and Pandemic Study (HEAP), a national survey conducted in the U.S. during the COVID-19 pandemic in October 2020. The effects of working from home on psychological distress in 1,577 workers were examined via logistic regression, and stratified analyses were conducted to identify vulnerable subgroups. This analytic research project was reviewed and approved for exemption by the University of California, Los Angeles Institutional Review Board. Results: After adjustment for covariates, compared to workers who were not working from home, those who were working from home had higher odds of psychological distress (OR and 95% CI ¼ 2.74 [1.49, 5.04]). Two subgroups, i.e., younger workers (<45 years) and women were identified to be associated with elevated psychological distress (ORs and 95% CIs were 3.23 [1.82, 5.76] and 3.70 [1.64, 8.34], respectively). Conclusions: Working from home is associated with psychological distress, and these associations are stronger in younger workers and in women. These results have implications for workers' mental health in the overall transition towards working from home in the COVID-19 pandemic era.


Business Continuity and Covid 19 Pandemic: A Case Study of resilient framework of multidimensional interventions undertaken at large petrochemical sector in South East Asia Region


Dr Paren Shah

Reliance Industries Limited, HSEF, Bharuch, India Introduction: Covid19 pandemic and related multidimensional novel challenges including lockdowns, local diseases spreads, managing supply chain of medicines, oxygen cylinders, consumables like PPEs as well as managing treatment for affected people in scarce resource settings had compelled the leading organizations to think resiliently and innovatively to take proactive measures to protect their people, plants along with profit in terms of business continuity. The author hereby sharing their people centered business continuity plan and their impact as a case study. Materials and Methodology: A detailed business continuity plan including identifying all the risks proactively, implementing risk mitigating guidelines, defining roles and responsibilities from organizational top leadership to down the line field level executive and their family members, vendors and visitors, surveillance of ongoing interventions, taking decisions in highly ambiguous work scenarios were highlighted. The global, country, state, and district level Covid19 pandemic's disease trend and epidemiological indicators were constantly monitored and compared with organization specific trends and indicators. Results: The epidemiological indicators like total cases per ten thousand population for our site were low that is 45.28 as compared to national (India) level, state level and district level cases per 10k populations were  respectively. Conclusion: The proactive planning and implementation of multidimensional interventions resulted in containing Covid19 disease and kept our business running. Introduction: The pandemic has significantly changed the way people work in all industries. However, the oil and gas employees are uniquely impacted due to their specific nature of work. This study aims to describe the workplace adjustment in the oil and gas companies and how the workers perceived these adjustments. Material and Methods: Cross-sectional data were collected via an online survey from oil and gas employees from November 9th to 23rd 2020. We asked the employees on their knowledge, attitude, practice, risk assessment in the workplace, and their perception on the new protocol. All analysis was conducted using SPSS. Results and Conclusions: A total of 4,895 respondents was participated in the survey with the mean age AE SD was 39.88 AE 8.56 years, and the mean AE SD length of work was 12.37 AE 8.05 years. The majority of respondents were male, permanent workers, and work in the operation division. Respondents had a high level of knowledge and well attitude towards COVID-19, but they had some obstacles in complying to health protocols, such as lack of soap and clean water, unable to avoid contacts with other workers and families. These variables were found to be significant in increasing the risk of COVID-19 as perceived by the workers, i.e., unable to avoid meeting with coworkers, often checking the news related to COVID-19, unable to keep at least 1-metre distance, unable to wash hands regularly, and to wear masks all the time (p < 0,05).


311


COVID-19 as an Occupational Illness: An International Comparison of Recognition Regulation in Selected Countries

Chung-Yen Chen, Ping-Hui Chen Saf Health Work 2022;13:S87eS310 S186