21 -23 September 2007;


XiamenChina
21 -23 September 2007;10.1080/10941660701243430CALL FOR PAPERS Sixth Asia Pacific Forum for Graduate Students Research in Tourism "Shaping Sustainable Tourism in Asia-Pacific: Competition & Cooperation"


The Sixth Asia Pacific Forum for Graduate Research in Tourism will be held in Xiamen, China on 21-23 September 2007. The Forum theme is "Shaping Sustainable Tourism in Asia-Pacific: Competition & Cooperation".

The aim of this Forum is to provide a "research forum" among post-graduate students and faculty members engaged in postgraduate teaching and research in hospitality and tourism programs in the Asia Pacific region. The focus of the Forum facilitates the exchange of information through research and networking amongst Forum participants to foster collaborative research and academic exchanges. The Forum will feature keynote speakers from academic and industry leaders in tourism and hospitality as well as refereed paper and poster presentations from Forum participants.

School of Management of Xiamen University is the host of the Forum, while Jingmin Horizon Destination Management Company serves as the collaborating organization. The Forum is sponsored by Xiamen Tourism Bureau, C&D Travel Agency and C&D Travel Service Co., Ltd. The Forum is also sponsored by The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, the founding institution of the Forum, and The Haworth Hospitality Press (New York).


Who Should Attend

. Post-graduate students in tourism, hospitality, leisure, and related fields . Post-graduate students in "multidiscipline" fields who are active in tourism research . Academics teaching and supervising postgraduate students . Undergraduate students interested in pursuing post-graduate studies . Administrators of academic programs in hospitality, tourism, and transportation . Researchers, academics, and consultants with research interests in tourism . Industry and governmental professionals with an interest in tourism research . Publishers of academic journals and textbooks 


Research Tracks

The Forum will focus on a range of research topics in tourism including those from nontraditional disciplines. The Forum invites papers on the following research tracks:

. Authors (or at least one co-author in the case of co-authored papers) must be a post-graduate student and papers should be based upon a research project undertaken as part of authors' post-graduate research.


Submission Guidelines

Please read the submission guidelines carefully before submitting your abstract(s).

. Two-page abstract(s) (doubled-spaced) of proposed papers or posters should be submitted for the final selection process (maximum of 1,000 words). . Indicate the author's name, affiliation, and contact information (phone number and email address) only on the cover page of the abstract. Only the primary author will be notified regarding the outcome of the paper review process. . All abstracts must be submitted in Microsoft Word format. Please label your submitted file as follows: Your name (last name followed by first initial), research track, and primary submission/theme area. If you have more than one submissions please indicate the submission number 1, 2, etc. after your name. . Please use the Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association (APA), 5th Edition when referencing your abstract and full paper submissions. . Deadline for submitting abstracts is 28 February 2007. The Paper Review Committee will conduct a screening of abstracts. Authors of accepted abstracts will be asked to submit completed papers prior to 1 April 2007. . Only original manuscripts not previously published or presented at another conference/forum should be submitted. . For all accepted paper and poster presentations, at least one (1) of the authors must register for and present the paper or poster at the Forum.


Important Dates

Abstract 


Paper & Poster Awards

Best papers and posters will be competitively selected and authors will be acknowledged with a plaque and certificate during the closing plenary session.


Publication Plan

Final copies of accepted papers will be professionally published in electronic form (CD-ROM) as an edited Forum Proceedings with an ISBN prior to the Forum.


Contact Details

. 


Session Theme 1: Tourism Phenomena . Tourist Consume Behavior (Tourism and Cross-cultural Understanding, Destination Selection Model, Outbound Travel Behavior) . Tourist Experience Session Theme 2: Tourism Education and Discipline Issue . Research Methodology and Practice . Multi-disciplined Issues Related to Tourism . Tourism Education Session Theme 3: Tourism Industry . Tourism Impact Assessment . Rural Tourism and Poverty Alleviation . Policies and Regulations Affecting Tourism . Regional Tourism Cooperation . Destination Marketing . Tourism Planning and Attraction Management . Sustainable Tourism . Contest and Cooperation on Tourism within Asia-Pacific Areas . Role of Local community in Tourism Development . MICE Development and Tourism . Tourist Demand Analysis and Niche Marketing . Future Trends of International tourism . Crisis Management in Tourism industry . Transnational Market Analysis and Forecast Implication of Technology and Media in Tourism . Hospitality Management . Stakeholders' Cooperation in Tourism Business . Services Management and MarketingAsia Pacific Journal of Tourism Research, Vol. 12, No. 2, June 2007 
. Other researchers, academics and students 
interested in post-graduate research and 
scholarship in tourism field 

Research Topic Themes 

This is the initial call for research papers and 
posters. Under the main theme of "Shaping Sus-
tainable Tourism in Asia-Pacific: Competition 
& Cooperation", authors are invited to submit 
papers across a wide spectrum of tourism and 
hospitality related research, including: 

Session Theme 4: Tourism Enterprise 
Management 

. Tourism Human Resource and Training 
. E-commerce and Travel Agency Manage-
ment 
. 


Submission Deadline: 30 June 2007Final Paper Submission Deadline: 31 July 
2007 




To submit papers or for more information, please contact the Coordinator I the school of Management of Xiamen University.. To register for the Forum, please contact the Coordinator II Jingmin Horizon Destination Management Company.Add: 
School of Management, Xiamen University, 
Fujian, PRC, 361005. 
Tel: (0086)592-2185512 
Fax: (0086)592-2187289 
Attn: Dr Lin Derong 
Email: xmu6th@yahoo.com.cn 
deronglin@hotmail.com 

Add: 
5th Floor, Best Western Premier Xiamen 
Central Hotel, North of Changqing Road, 
Xiamen, Fujian, PRC, 361012. 
Tel: (0086) 592-5123333 
Ext: 3322 or (0086)592-5128951 
Fax: (0086) 592-5120481 
Attn: Christine (Chen Hong) 
Email: dmc@bwxm.com