Acute hepatitis as a presenting feature of secondary syphilis
2021

Uttam Biswas 
Department of Internal Medicine
Burdwan Medical College and Hospital
BurdwanIndia

Atanu Chandra chandraatanu123@gmail.com 
Department of Internal Medicine
Kar Medical College and Hospital
KolkataRGIndia

Somak Kumar Das 
Department of Internal Medicine
College of Medicine
JNM Hospital
KalyaniIndia

Uddalak Chakraborty 
Department of Neurology
Bangur Institute of Neurosciences
IPGMER and SSKM Hospital
India

Shrestha Ghosh 
Department of Internal Medicine
Kar Medical College and Hospital
KolkataRGIndia

Acute hepatitis as a presenting feature of secondary syphilis

IMAGE OF THE QUARTER J R Coll Physicians Edinb
512021Clinical Financial and Competing Interests: No confl icts of interest declared Informed Consent: Written informed consent for the paper to be published (including images, case history and data) was obtained from the patient for publication of this paper. Correspondence to: Atanu Chandra Doctor's Quarters (RG Kar Medical College Campus) 1 Khudiram Bose Sarani Kolkata -700004 West Bengal India 382 JOURNAL OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS OF EDINBURGH VOLUME 51 ISSUE 4 DECEMBER 2021 50 TH ANNIVERSARY YEARbenzathine penicillinhepatitissecondary syphilis
A 27-year-old unmarried male, without any comorbidity, presented with high grade fever and generalised skin rash including acral areas for one and a half months, followed by a gradual onset progressive jaundice accompanied by pain in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen and persistent vomiting for about 15 days. He had a history of unprotected anal intercourse with a male sex worker three months ago. No history was obtained regarding injectable drug use, blood transfusion or use of any regular medication. On examination, he was icteric with glossitis. There was generalised papulosquamous eruption resembling pityriasis rosea (Panel A, B) and multiple annular, tender hyperpigmented macules with collarette scaling over palms and soles (Panel C, D); Buschke-Ollendorff sign was elicited on deep dermal pressure, generalised lymphadenopathy and tender hepatomegaly (liver span 16 cm).Liver function test revealed conjugated hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin 103 µmol/L, direct bilirubin 48 µmol/L), raised aspartate transaminase (206 IU/L), alanine aminotransferase (266 IU/L) and alkaline phosphatise (416 IU/L). Serology for Hepatitis A, B, C, E and HIV (I and II) were negative. Other causes of deranged liver function were actively ruled out. However, we were unable to obtain consent for liver biopsy. A venereal disease research laboratory test was positive in 1:64 dilution and a Treponema pallidum hemagglutination test was also positive. The patient was treated conservatively by deep intramuscular injectable benzathine penicillin 2.4 million units which led to a prompt recovery.Syphilis is a venereal disease caused by Treponema pallidum with multi-system affl ictions. It has a global incidence ofFigure 1Generalized papulosquamous eruption over trunk and extremities resembling pityriasis rosea (Panels A, B); multiple annular, tender hyperpigmented macules with collarette scaling over palms and soles (Panels C, D)

Informed Consent: Written informed consent for the paper to be published (including images, case history and data) was obtained from the patient for publication of this paper. A 27-year-old unmarried male, without any comorbidity, presented with high grade fever and generalised skin rash including acral areas for one and a half months, followed by a gradual onset progressive jaundice accompanied by pain in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen and persistent vomiting for about 15 days. He had a history of unprotected anal intercourse with a male sex worker three months ago. No history was obtained regarding injectable drug use, blood transfusion or use of any regular medication. On examination, he was icteric with glossitis. There was generalised papulosquamous eruption resembling pityriasis rosea (Panel A, B) and multiple annular, tender hyperpigmented macules with collarette scaling over palms and soles (Panel C, D); Buschke-Ollendorff sign was elicited on deep dermal pressure, generalised lymphadenopathy and tender hepatomegaly (liver span 16 cm).

Liver function test revealed conjugated hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin 103 µmol/L, direct bilirubin 48 µmol/L), raised aspartate transaminase (206 IU/L), alanine aminotransferase (266 IU/L) and alkaline phosphatise (416 IU/L). Serology for Hepatitis A, B, C, E and HIV (I and II) were negative. Other causes of deranged liver function were actively ruled out. However, we were unable to obtain consent for liver biopsy. A venereal disease research laboratory test was positive in 1:64 dilution and a Treponema pallidum hemagglutination test was also positive. The patient was treated conservatively by deep intramuscular injectable benzathine penicillin 2.4 million units which led to a prompt recovery.

Syphilis is a venereal disease caused by Treponema pallidum with multi-system affl ictions. It has a global incidence of Figure 1 Generalized papulosquamous eruption over trunk and extremities resembling pityriasis rosea (Panels A, B); multiple annular, tender hyperpigmented macules with collarette scaling over palms and soles (Panels C, D) 6 million annually among people of reproductive age group (15-49 years). 1 Syphilitic hepatitis is an uncommon and often overlooked manifestation of secondary syphilis, with 10% of patients developing deranged liver function tests. 2 Clinical hepatitis, though exceedingly rare in existing literature, has been known to occur in all stages of syphilis. However, up to 88.9% cases may present in early syphilis (including primary and secondary syphilis). 3 Rashes over acral or any other body parts are the most frequently documented symptom (78%), followed by fatigue/anorexia, hepatomegaly, jaundice and lymphadenopathy. Buschke-Ollendorff sign refers to the deep dermal tenderness on pressing the papular lesion of syphilis with a pinhead. This sign can be elicited in secondary syphilis and cutaneous vasculitis. 4 Derangement in liver function tests reveals a cholestatic pattern in most patients, with high alkaline phosphatise levels and marginally elevated to normal transaminase levels. However, our case highlights the rare possibility of encountering elevated aspartate transaminase and alanine aminotransferase levels in a case of syphilitic hepatitis. 5 Syphilis, although non-hepatotropic, may lead to unidentifi ed hepatitis, which can be diagnosed on the basis of characteristic liver enzyme patterns in the absence of other causes and seropositivity for syphilis. 6,7 Response to penicillin can also be regarded as a diagnostic criteria for syphilitic hepatitis. 7 We aim to inform clinicians about this uncommon manifestation of syphilis and keep it as an important differential in sexually active patients with abnormal liver function tests, negative serology for common hepatotrophic viruses and suggestive mucocutaneous fi ndings.
 AcknowledgementsWe thank Dr Abheek Sil, Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Leprosy, RG Kar Medical College, Kolkata for helping us with the dermatological perspective of the case and the manuscript.
An update on the global epidemiology of syphilis. N Kojima, J D Klausner, CurrEpidemiol Rep. 5Kojima N, Klausner JD. An update on the global epidemiology of syphilis. CurrEpidemiol Rep 2018; 5: 24-38.

Syphilitic hepatitis: an uncommon manifestation of a common disease. S Baveja, S Garg, A Rajdeo, Indian J Dermatol. 59209Baveja S, Garg S, Rajdeo A. Syphilitic hepatitis: an uncommon manifestation of a common disease. Indian J Dermatol 2014; 59: 209.

A systematic literature review of syphilitic hepatitis in adults. J Huang, S Lin, B Wan, Y Zhu, J Clin Transl Hepatol. 6Huang J, Lin S, Wan B, Zhu Y. A systematic literature review of syphilitic hepatitis in adults. J Clin Transl Hepatol 2018; 6: 306-9.

Secondary syphilis in HIV infection -a diagnostic dilemma. V Panvelker, K Chari, A K Verma, R Batra, Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 63Panvelker V, Chari K, Verma AK, Batra R. Secondary syphilis in HIV infection -a diagnostic dilemma. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol 1997; 63: 181-2.

Syphilitic hepatitis: Case report of an overlooked condition. P Marcos, L Eliseu, M Henrique, H Vasconcelos, Clin Case Rep. 8Marcos P , Eliseu L, Henrique M, Vasconcelos H. Syphilitic hepatitis: Case report of an overlooked condition. Clin Case Rep 2019; 8: 123-6.

Hepatitis in patients with syphilis: an overlooked association. A C Pizzarossa, M Rebella, 10.1136/bcr-2018-226918BMJ Case Rep. 12Pizzarossa AC, Rebella M. Hepatitis in patients with syphilis: an overlooked association. BMJ Case Rep 2019; 12: bcr-2018- 226918. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2018-226918.

Syphilitic hepatitis in HIV-infected patients: a report of 7 cases and review of the literature. C J Mullick, A P Liappis, D A Benator, A D Roberts, D M Parenti, G L Simon, Clin Infect Dis. 39Mullick CJ, Liappis AP , Benator DA, Roberts AD, Parenti DM, Simon GL. Syphilitic hepatitis in HIV-infected patients: a report of 7 cases and review of the literature. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 39: e100-5.