Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre -including this research content -immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.


Research in brief T cells fit to fight omicron

Researchers expect T cells generated by vaccination or COVID-19 infection to be effective against the omicron (B.1.1.529) variant. They analysed more than 1500 epitopes, fragments of SARS-CoV-2's viral proteins, that were recognised by T cells in COVID-19 patients or after vaccination and found that omicron was unlikely to evade such T cells. The study reported that only 20% of virus epitopes showed mutations associated with omicron.

When the researchers broadened their analysis to other virus proteins, they found that more than 97% of non-spike T-cell epitopes did not have mutations associated with omicron. These findings suggest that any broad escape from T cells is very unlikely, the researchers said.


SARS-CoV-2 evades antibodies

Cell-culture experiments have shown that SARS-CoV-2 can hide from the immune system and spread through cell-to-cell transmission by limiting the release of viral particles that can be inactivated by antibodies. The study found that the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein enables cell-to-cell transmission, but the ACE2 receptorthe primary receptor on target cells to which the spike binds, enabling entry of the virus-is not a necessary part of such transmission. Unexpectedly, the study found that cells with no or low levels of ACE2 on their surfaces can be penetrated by the virus. Neutralising antibodies are less effective against the virus when it spreads through cells, and the exact mechanism the virus uses to spread from cell to cell is unknown.


Understanding mRNA vaccines

The Pfizer-BioNTech BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine is very effective at activating T-follicular immune cells that assist antibody-producing cells. Researchers found that these T-follicular cells last for up to 6 months after vaccination, and after they decline long-lived antibody-producing cells and memory B cells help to provide protection against severe disease and death. The researchers recruited 15 volunteers who each received two doses of BNT162b2 3 weeks apart and obtained T-follicular helper cells from their lymph nodes.

The T-follicular cells responded to one part of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein that has little variation, and this helps to explain the vaccine's protection against the delta (B.1.617.2) and omicron variants.


Dolutegravir for children

Dolutegravir-based regimens, a low-cost, daily antiretroviral that is widely used to suppress HIV in adults, reduced the chances of treatment failure among young people aged 3-18 years by around 40% compared with standard treatments. The findings were based on a randomised controlled trial called ODYSSEY involving more than 700 children from 29 clinical centres in Africa, Europe, and Asia. Researchers found that 14% of children receiving dolutegravir experienced treatment failure over 2 years compared with 22% of children receiving standard treatment. The trial's findings informed new guidance by WHO recommending the use of dolutegravir-based treatment for children.


Target for universal flu vaccine

Scientists have found a site at the base of the influenza virus haemagglutinin (HA) protein that might be a suitable target for a future universal influenza vaccine and antibody therapies. Cell-culture and mice experiments suggested that antibodies can neutralise this "anchor epitope" found in a broad set of influenza strains. The scientists analysed antibodies elicited by an experimental universal influenza vaccine, as well as by seasonal influenza vaccines and natural influenza infections. They found that many of the antibodies were attached to the lower, stalk portion of HA that is less variable than the upper portion. They also showed that human antibody-making cells can produce anchor epitope antibodies; the challenge will be to make a vaccine that also generates them.  Trichophyton erinacei, a fungus carried on the skin of hedgehogs, secretes compounds to kill bacteria, and in response the bacteria evolved antibiotic resistance. The researchers traced the genes giving mecC-MRSA its antibiotic resistance to the 19th century. The lead researcher first identified mecC-MRSA in human and dairy cow populations in 2011, and it was assumed it had arisen in cows because of the antibiotics they were fed.


Zika pathogenesis


Hedgehogs source of MRSA


Sharmila Devi


For more on Zika pathogenesis see Cell Rep 2021; 37: 110118 For more on MRSA and hedgehogs see Nature 2022; published online Jan 5. https:// doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04265-wNewsdesk 

176 
www.thelancet.com/infection Vol 22 February 2022 

For more on T cells and omicron 
see Viruses 2022; 14: 79 

For more on cell-to-cell 
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 
see Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2022; 
published online Jan 4. https:// 
doi.org/10.1073/ 
pnas.2111400119 

For more on T-follicular helper 
cells see Cell 2021; published 
online Dec 23. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.12.026 

For more on dolutegravir for 
children see N Engl J Med 2021; 
385: 2531-43 

For more on a flu vaccine target 
see Nature 2021; published 
online Dec 23. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s41586-021-
04356-8 




Further study is needed to ascertain what dose of pyruvic acid is needed.Pyruvic acid, a compound in the 
glucose metabolism pathway and a 
readily available supplement, may 
protect babies from neurological 
disorders and other birth defects 
caused by the Zika virus if taken by 
pregnant women. Scientists have 
discovered a critical gene change that 
turns the Zika virus from its weakened 
form into a mildly pathologenic 
form called M-F37L. Infection of 
pregnant mice with M-F37L disrupted 
the glucose metabolism pathway 
in foetuses, affecting their nerve 
development. But supplementing cells 
and pregnant mice with pyruvic acid 
could restore mitochondrial function. 



The emergence of meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) in hedgehogs came from a biological process, not the use of antibiotics, according to a study. Up to 60% of hedgehogs carried a type of MRSA called mecC-MRSA that causes one in 200 of all MRSA infections in humans.