Research letter Adherence to Personal Protective Equipment Guidelines During the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Worldwide Survey Study



Division of Plastic Surgery
Department of Surgery
Brigham and Women's Hospital
Harvard Medical School
02115BostonMAUSA


School of Medicine
ALPHA Health Sciences Leadership Program
Anahuac University
52786Mexico


Department of Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery
Nanfang Hospital
Southern Medical University
510515GuangzhouGuangdongP. R. China


Department of Hand, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
Burn Center, BG Trauma Center Ludwigshafen
University of Heidelberg
67071Microsurgery, LudwigshafenGermany

Research letter Adherence to Personal Protective Equipment Guidelines During the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Worldwide Survey Study
10.1002/bjs.12001www.bjs.co.uk BJS 2020; 107: e526-e528 Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd


Editor

While a multitude of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) guidelines have been published since the start of the COVID-19 crisis, adherence has remained variable. We fielded an international survey-based study to rapidly collect data on PPE usage by healthcare professionals (HCP) with the aim of comparing adherence to published guidelines across regions and countries.

This study was approved by the review board at Brigham and Women's Hospital. An online survey was designed using REDCap (Vanderbilt University, Tennessee, US) and made available in seven languages: English, Chinese, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, and Spanish and distributed to HCPs.

Based on official guidelines an optimum PPE combination was determined for six settings: Communal hospital space -facemask/respirator 1 ; Patient contact when COVID-19 not suspected -facemask/respirator, gloves, apron/isolation gown 2 ; Patient contact when COVID-19 suspected or confirmed -respirator, gloves, eye protection, apron/isolation gown 3,4 ; Carrying out AGPs and high risk areas -respirator, gloves, eye protection, and isolation gown/apron, booties, and hairnet 2 .

Proportions were calculated per region and country using Prism (GraphPad, California, US). Adherence was determined by comparing the proportion of respondents who selected the proper PPE to our optimum standard.

From April 17 to June 17, 2020, 1255 surveys were completed.

Responses came from nine geographic regions (Fig. 1a). 13 of 80 countries had enough responses (>20) to be included in the country-specific analysis (Fig. 1b). Respondents included physicians (43⋅8%), nurses (29⋅6%), midwives (19⋅8%), paramedics (3⋅8%) and technicians (3⋅1%).

Of all regions, East Asia showed the highest adherence in communal hospital spaces (96⋅1%), patient contact when COVID-19 suspected (69⋅5%) or confirmed (72⋅3%), carrying out AGPs (76⋅6%) and high-risk areas (67⋅5%). Lowest adherence was shown by Australasia in communal hospital spaces (21⋅7%), patient contact when COVID-19 suspected (21⋅7%), and high risk areas (26⋅1%), and the Indian Subcontinent in patient contact with confirmed cases (30⋅8%) and carrying out AGPs (26⋅9%). North America (16⋅1%) showed the lowest adherence in patient contact when COVID-19 not suspected.

At the country level, Japan (100%) showed the highest adherence in communal hospital spaces. Highest adherence was mostly noted in European countries (UK, 85%, patient contact when COVID-19 not suspected; Spain, 81⋅3%, patient contact when COVID-19 suspected; Portugal, 81⋅5%, patient contact with confirmed cases). Exceptions, were Argentina (83⋅3%) when carrying out AGPs and China (71⋅5%) in high-risk areas. Lowest adherence was noted in Norway in communal hospital spaces (6⋅9%) and patient contact when COVID-19 not suspected (10⋅3%), and Germany when carrying out AGPs (13⋅6%) and in high risk areas (18⋅2%). Finally, Canada showed the lowest adherence during patient contact when COVID-19 is suspected (15⋅2%) or confirmed (26⋅6%).

Protection of frontline HCPs through adequate PPE has remained a key concern throughout the crisis. Although the selected guidelines were based on the best evidence available, adherence varied greatly. East Asia consistently showed high adherence in all scenarios, while among the countries represented, the US showed low adherence when treating patients not suspected to have COVID-19. With a high proportion of asymptomatic carriers such non-adherence must be mitigated.

The reasons for this variability are multifactorial, including PPE shortages disproportionately affecting countries, forcing healthcare institutions to resort to alternative approaches, such as decontamination and re-use. Frequent guideline modifications by public health organizations, such as the WHO, 5 as well as individual hospital administrations, make it difficult for HCPs to remain up-to-date with rapidly evolving recommendations.

Use of PPE aims to prevent viral transmission from patients to HCPs 

Fig. 1
1Adherence to optimum PPE guidelines by region (a) and by country (b) a b


and vice versa. Further research into the reasons underlying adherence variability is urgently needed to pinpoint strategies for maximizing adherence and improving the safety of HCPs. Roig M.D., Zé Menezes M.D.; World Medical Association, International Confederation of Midwives, American College of Nurse Midwives, European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Guidance for wearing and removing personal protective equipment in healthcare settings for the care of patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19. https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/ publications-data/guidance-wearingand-removing-personal-protectiveequipment-healthcare-settings. 4 Centre for Disease Control and Prevention. Use Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) When Caring for Patients with Confirmed or Suspected COVID-19. https://www.cdc.gov/ coronavirus/2019-ncov/downloads/A_ FS_HCP_COVID19_PPE_11x17.pdf. 5 Jessop ZM, Dobbs TD, Ali SR, Combellack E, Clancy R, Ibrahim N et al. Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) for Surgeons during COVID-19 Pandemic: A Systematic Review of Availability, Usage, and Rationing. Br J Surg 2020; https://doi.org/10.1002/ bjs.11750 [Epub ahead of print].Commonwealth Nurses and Mid-
wives Federation, Women Doctors 
Association, Rural Doctors Associa-
tion Australia, Independent Doctors 
Foundation, Norwegian Medical 
Association, German Society of Oto-
Rhino-Laryngology, Head and Neck 
Surgery, Schweizer Berufsverband 
der Pflegefachfrauen und Pflege-
fachmänner, Plastic Surgery Trainees 
Association, Asociación Española de 
Cirujanos, Canadian Nurses Asso-
ciation, The Gillian Reny Stepping 
Strong Center for Trauma Innova-
tion, ARNPs United of Washington 
State, Associação dos Enfermeiros 
de Sala de Operações Portugueses, 
NPAssociation Canada, Eesti Odede 
Liitm, and Ikatan Bidan Indonesia. 

Financial Disclosure 
Statement 
1 European Centre for Disease 
Prevention and Control. Infection 
prevention and control for COVID-19 
in healthcare settings. https://www 
.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/ 
infection-prevention-and-control-and-
preparedness-covid-19-healthcare-
settings. 
2 World Health Organization (WHO). 
Rational use of personal protective 
equipment for coronavirus disease 2019 
(COVID-19) and considerations during 
severe shortages. https://www.who.int/ 
publications/i/item/rational-use-of-
personal-protective-equipment-for-
coronavirus-disease-(covid-19)-and-
considerations-during-severe-
shortages. 
3 
© 2020 BJS Society Ltd
© 2020 BJS Society Ltd www.bjs.co.uk BJS 2020; 107: e526-e528 Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
AcknowledgementsWe thank those who helped disseminate the survey on various platforms: The authors have nothing to disclose. No funding was received for this article.Adriana C. Panayi 1 , Angel Flores-Huidobro 2 , Mengfan Wu 1,3 , Yori Endo 1 , Ryoko Hamaguchi 1 , Valentin Haug 1,4 , Chenhao Ma 1 and Dennis P. Orgill 1