"The Necessary Result of Piety": Slavery and Religious Establishments in South Carolina Presbyterianism, 1800-1840


Miles Smith mjsmith@regent.edu 
Department of Government, History, and Criminal Justice
Regent University
23464Virginia BeachVAUSA

"The Necessary Result of Piety": Slavery and Religious Establishments in South Carolina Presbyterianism, 1800-1840
10.3390/rel8090180Received: 19 August 2017; Accepted: 1 September 2017; Published: 4 September 2017religions ArticleslaveryPresbyterianSouth Carolinaestablishmentchurchauthority
Historians have argued that disestablishment liberated American religion and allowed for the proliferation of religious practice and religious freedom, especially individualistic Evangelicalism in the South. This proposition reduced nearly all of southern Protestantism to Revivalist Evangelicalism, and failed to account for the powerful presence of coercive Protestant religiosity in older southern states such as South Carolina. While they shared certain Evangelical particulars with frontier populations, Protestants in South Carolina, especially Presbyterians, rejected individualized religion in favor of religiosity that favored and nurtured activist state protection of both antidemocratic political norms and chattel slavery. This essay argues that ostensibly disestablished Presbyterianism in South Carolina helped intellectually erect and socially perpetuate coercive religious and state power.

In 1777, William Henry Drayton, respected scion of a wealthy planter from the coastal slaveholding Lowcountry of South Carolina, publicly confronted one of the pillars of South Carolina society: the Anglican church, generally known in North America as the Episcopal Church. Hordes of dissenting churches, Baptists, Methodists, and reluctantly disestablished Presbyterians, flooded into South Carolina's Backcountry. Their churches, freed from the officialdom of the Anglican establishment and (in the case of the Baptists and Methodists) not requiring credentials, education or licensure, dissenting churches grew rapidly in number and in congregants. They complained that they paid taxes for the upkeep of other churches and that they outnumbered the Anglicans. The Episcopalian numerical minority, however, payed a majority of the state's taxes however, and contributed exponentially more to the newly independent state's economy. Drayton, assisted by Presbyterian cleric William Tennent, eventually succeeded in removing state institutional protection of Anglicanism in 1778. The state stopped institutionally protecting Protestantism in 1790. Historians have argued that disestablishment liberated American religion and allowed for the proliferation of religious practice and religious freedom, especially individualistic Evangelicalism in the South. This proposition reduced nearly all of southern Protestantism to Revivalist Evangelicalism, and failed to account for the powerful presence of coercive Protestant religiosity in older southern states such as South Carolina. While they shared certain Evangelical particulars with frontier populations, Protestants in South Carolina, especially Presbyterians, rejected individualized religion in favor of religiosity that favored and nurtured activist state protection of both antidemocratic political norms and chattel slavery. Historians often assume that Presbyterianism in South Carolina supported preexisting civil and political protections of slavery. This stemmed from the Spirituality of the Church doctrine, most famously articulated by mid-century divines such as James Henley Thornwell. The doctrine argued that because of the church's inherently spiritual nature, ministers and the church in a religious capacity could not make binding declarations concerning the civil and political order outside the provisions given to Believers in the Decalogue.

of an authoritative and aristocratic Protestant order, largley intolerant of non-Christian religions and to a lesser degree of Roman Catholicism. The Revolutionary War certainly bred emancipationists and even abolition sentiment in some quarters of the Presbyterian Church, even in the South, but it did not necessarily breed a commitment to religious diversity. Belief in a societal commitment to a Protestant establishment never entirely waned even while some South Carolinians flirted with emancipation. During the American Revolution the pastor of Charleston's Scots Presbyterian Church preached that all humans enjoyed equality in the sight of God. Planter Ralph Izard, wrote from Switzerland the year before the promulgation of American independence and bemoaned the presence of Roman Catholics in the Swiss republic. "It would be fortunate," Izard wrote, "for them if another Luther and Calvin could make them all protestants." Overwhelmingly Protestant British North America, Izard explained, had "no such cause for jealousy and disunion, and, therefore, I hope in God, she may guard against the fatal effects of them." Simultaneously, Reverend W.C. Davis warned against Christian slaveholding at the 1794 meeting of the South Carolina Synod. Synodical directives recommended ministers to prepare slaveholders and enslaved people under their care to prepare for eventual emancipation. Unitary religious culture did not preclude discussions on the innate contradiction of human bondage. In fact, Evangelical growth and the broad disestablishment of religion under the constitutional order enabled more voices to argue against emancipation (Izard 1844;Genovese and Fox-Genovese 2007;Farmer 1986;Heyrman 1988).

The still relatively new U.S. Constitution also presented an obstacle to the emancipationist sentiments of the Revolutionary Era. The document codified slavery and racial caste into law, and Presidency of Thomas Jefferson provided the expansionism to propel the pro-slavery U.S. constitutional order across the continent. The slavery-affirming constitutional milieu never enjoyed universal support. Even in the South, slavery seemed at best a necessary evil to some prominent planters. But as historian David Walstreicher noted, "antislavery would lose repeatedly in mainstream politics for the next several generations thanks in part to the Constitution's rules." That South Carolina's commitment to the Constitution necessitated the document's commitment to slavery remained obvious to all. South Carolinians, with the assistance of Georgia planters, made slavery the price of union. Any move against slavery, warned Thomas Lynch, precipitated an "end to the confederation." The constitutional convention put South Carolinian's worries to rest. Slavery enjoyed robust federal protection. Even northern divines who disliked the institution saw no reason to destroy the American union (Walstreicher 2009;Rael 2015).

Southern Presbyterians at the beginning of the nineteenth century in many ways mirrored magisterial New England Federalists more that the class of religious southern slaveholders that succeeded them. They praised activist religion and never embraced the moral disinterest in pressing social problems that typified later southern Presbyterian divines wedded to the spirituality of the church doctrine. South Carolina Presbyterians understood an explicit connection between the state and the affirmation and even regulation of state religiosity. Episcopalians and Presbyterians argued that ministers licensed in South Carolina should be obliged "to take an oath of allegiance fidelity to the same." The explosive numerical growth of Baptists in South Carolina and other southern states worried South Carolina's Establishmentarians. By the end of the Eighteenth century Presbyterians joined with Episcopalians to argue that Baptists' libertarian conceptions of churchmanship and civil society especially might represent a nefarious influence on state state's moral and political order. Establishmentarians, including Presbyterians, marked Baptists as "unfriendly to the government." As early as 1786, South Carolinians complained that the new United States constitution failed to fully propagate and protect a national moral and religious order. Patrick Calhoun, Presbyterian ruling elder and father of future Vice President John C. Calhoun, complained to the South Carolina General Assembly that the new constitution "allowed too great latitude in matters of religion." Establishmentarians felt strongly that a religious establishment remained a necessity for ensuring a polity's moral and social order. Some Baptists even attempted to rhetorically coopt themselves into the Establishment. They warned their less magisterial brethren that "the laws of our country are the barrier by which our persons, reputations and property are secured from the cruel depredations of the robber, the slanderer and the assassin." Establishmentarians regarded "these laws as sacred," and they would "mark those who do not." Some South Carolina establishmentarians even balked at the Bill of Rights' First Amendment guarantee of freedom of religion, viewing it as a potential attack on the state's religious establishment. Representative Thomas Tucker preferred that the federal constitution "leave the state governments to themselves" and not guarantee religious liberty across the federal union (Thompson and Michael 1977;Elliot 1830;Klein 1990;Sehat 2011). South Carolina made the state's authority over religious organization, if not practice, explicit during the Federalist Era. Although the state guaranteed Protestant religiosity, it nevertheless retained the authority to regulate the conscience of its citizens. "The liberty of conscience thereby ordained," the South Carolina General Assembly declared in 1791, "shall not be so construed as to excuse acts of licentiousness, or justify practices inconsistent with the peace or safety of the state." The enduring establishment showed itself explicitly when the "Jewish congregation at Charleston, called Beth Eloihim, or House of God," petitioned the legislature for legal incorporation, "with privileges and powers similar to those heretofore granted to religious societies of other sects and denominations." The same principle applied to Presbyterian and Baptist congregations. Far from separating church and state, South Carolina continued to join and even subordinate church to state officialdom in a way inconceivable to later nineteenth and twentieth century American Christians. The state, not the church, created the congregation's place in the civil sphere. South Carolina, not the synod or local presbytery "declared" Presbyterians in Hopewell "to be one established body corporate and politic, in deed and in name, by the name and style of the Presbyterian Church of Hopewell on Jeffries creek." That the state might incorporate the church seemed unremarkable. That the state established the church "in politic" indicated far more vigorous state control of religion than assumed by succeeding generations of Evangelical Christians, especially in the twentieth century (Carolina 1808). South Carolina's enduring commitment to forms of religious establishments fit neatly in with the state's growing Presbyterian religious influences and the growing slave economy. Presbyterians influential in the formation of the United States government-Elias Boudinot, Roger Sherman, and John Witherspoon-all remained committed to religious establishments in the states. Witherspoon, Princeton's president and perhaps the best known Presbyterian to sign both the Declaration of independence and the United States Constitution, also represented the surprisingly national acceptance of slavery in the late eighteenth century. Witherspoon argued that slavery might prove to be an unlawful violation of certain rights, but he never called it sinful. More importantly, Witherspoon actively recruited students from slaveholding families, especially from South Carolina. The number of Princeton students from slaveholding states doubled during Witherspoon's tenure as the College's president. The politically powerful trustees of the College of New Jersey included nine Congressmen and four U.S. Senators and various state legislators from throughout the new republic. And most closely identified with the dispositions and politics of the Federalists (Noll 2002(Noll , 2007Wilder 2013).

Witherspoon's acceptance of slavery fit neatly with Princeton's conservative conception of an ordered Protestant polity governed by an anti-democratic political and religious establishment. He repudiated the notion that citizens might make religious decisions for themselves. The very "depravity of our nature" meant that democratic agency relying on humanity's innate goodness inevitably led to "wars and fighting's" because humans remained governed by their individual lusts and passions. A human realm that relied on humanity's goodness in decision-making inevitably led to the "ravages of lawless power." Witherspoon argued for and hoped for instead for human humility ruled by 'the dominion of righteousness and peace." Witherspoon conceived this dominion as a temporal possibility brought about by a robust and explicit entangling of civil and religious authority. He hoped that in the new United States "true religion and civil liberty may be inseparable and that unjust attempts to destroy the one may in the issue tend to the support and establishment of both." Witherspoon's conception of the civil realm pushed against the emancipationist sentiments of even some South Carolinians. Witherspoon's son-in-law David Ramsay, a Pennsylvania-born Presbyterian layman, physician, and writer from Charleston slowly moved away from his anti-slavery dispositions through his relationship with Witherspoon (Witherspoon 1776;Taylor and Messer 2016).

Slaveholding families found Princeton a welcoming educational home for their young men while Witherspoon administered the College of New Jersey. He gave southern planters every reason to believe he remained solid on the slavery issue. In 1790 Witherspoon voted against a plan for gradual emancipation in New Jersey. When he died in 1794, he owned two slaves. Witherspoon's second cousin, Gavin Witherspoon, helped join Princeton Presbyterianism's national intellectual realm with South Carolina's enthusiasm for slavery. Gavin's son became a legislator and his grandsons attended South Carolina College. Another Witherspoon cousin, John Witherspoon, served a pastor of the Presbyterian church in the town of Camden while another, Colonel James H. Witherspoon, became a prosperous planter. Devout and Presbyterian, James' daughter Nancy eventually wed James Henley Thornwell. In the Witherspoons and others South Carolina wed establishmentarianism nationalism with southern slaveholding (Wilder 2013; Palmer 1875).

Nationalism proved to be an enduring goal although not ultimate goal for the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church. Historian William Harrison Taylor noted that "Presbyterians, like many others in the new nation, strove to further Christ's Kingdom. National unity was in the best interest of the United States, and so nationalism . . . was in the best interest of the body of Christ." While Presbyterian nationalism experienced certain numerical limitations in the South, the prevalence of elite slaveholders and Federalists in South Carolina's Presbyterian Church meant that nationalism found a relatively welcome reception and "for the most part the southern Presbyteries and Synods reflected the desires of the General Assembly." George Buist, pastor of a large Presbyterian church in Charleston and future President of the College of Charleston, worked vigorously to actuate the General Assembly's vision of a multi-denominational Protestant nationalism in South Carolina. "The royal law of love," Buist argued in 1793, formed the basis "of the Christian character." The Christian law of love transcended the individual and worked itself out is ecclesiastic bodies as well as through political bodies. "The love of our neighbor" shone forth "with resplendent lustre in the gospel" but also made itself manifest in every "part of the system of nature." Like the historic Reformers Buist conjoined moral law and natural law more readily than succeeding generations of Americans religious intellectuals. Moral law and natural law, therefore, "entered into every code of laws which has been published to the world." The state upheld the moral law and a largely inseparable natural law. The moral law of love was "not, however, an useless and inactive principle; on the contrary, it is the foundation of a virtuous character, and is, in truth, the fulfilling of the law. For where it exists in full force, it secures a complete discharge of all the social duties" (Taylor 2010;Buist 1794).

Buist and Witherspoon's echoed the Reformer Francis Turretin's argument that the interests of the national moral order and the natural order necessitated the social regulation of religion. Witherspoon argued that duty to God "should never be erased" in the moral law, and as such "loosening the obligation of religion" in society inevitably led to "justifying the indulgence of every natural desire." The state also held the duty of regulating and if need be suppressing "false religion." "Every doctrinal opinion, every form of government," Witherspoon declared, would be "brought to the test, and tried by its fruits" for its conduct upholding the law of God. Turretin became increasingly popular with South Carolina's Presbyterians as the Nineteenth Century progressed. The Southern Presbyterian Review published a gushing review of a new Latin edition of the Reformer's theology in 1848, declaring the work a "happy omen for theology of our times." Although Robert Lewis Dabney dissented occasionally from Turretin, the South Carolinian admired the Swiss thinker and approved of his reentrance in theological studies of the era. His influence at southern seminaries and colleges grew as well. Every major southern seminary included his works as textbooks, as did Columbia Presbyterian Seminary, South Carolina College, and the College of Charleston (Witherspoon 1759; An Association of Ministers 1848; Holifield 1978).

The nationalist establishmentarian principles espoused by Buist and Witherspoon remained powerful in South Carolina well into the Nineteenth Century. Witherspoon's Princeton exercised the decisive influence on southern Presbyterianism and southern collegiate culture in the first half of the nineteenth century. By the 1820s most college and professors and teachers claimed Princeton as their alma mater, and through John Witherspoon's years teaching pastors destined for ministry in the South the institution exercised the decisive influence on the creation of southern intellectualism. Historian Charles Sydnor noted that if there was "such a thing as a Presbyterian type of mind, southern college boys were brought into close contact with it in the early nineteenth century." These young southern men, educated by Presbyterians affected the course of American intellectual development in decisive ways. Because of its preeminent place at the nexus of educating southern slaveholders at an institution of national influence, Presbyterianism "bound the nation's intellectual culture to the future of American slavery and the slave trade." The transformation of northern Presbyterian ministers to well-regarded denizens of an explicitly slave society proved remarkably easy. So long as they affirmed the acceptability of slavery, northern-born and often Princeton educated pastors enjoyed near-universal acclaim from laymen. When the northern-born Rev. Robert Smith died in 1803, his congregants from Savannah's Presbyterian Church-which served populations in South Carolina as well-attended his funeral en masse, along with other prominent citizens of the city and surrounding environs. A Vermont-born Presbyterian minister happily spent his final days in the comfort of a plantation on South Carolina's Edisto Island (Sydnor 1948;Wilder 2013; Gazette of the United States 1803; Vermont Chronicle 1826).

South Carolinians solicited northern as well as British clerics for their pulpits in the Early Republic. Scots seemed especially attractive to elite congregations. In 1793 the First (Scots) Presbyterian Church of Charleston sought not a revolutionary American but a "gentleman bred in the communion and principles of the Established Church of Scotland" to serve as the church's pastor. They might have easily found an educated Princetonian, but instead they looked for a minister from the established Church of Scotland. Charleston's Presbyterian reaffirmed their establishmentarian and magisterial commitment and hoped their new minister would "preach to a polite, well informed congregation, and that he will appear at the head of the Presbyterian interest in this State." Presbyterian interest in the state included the civil and social realm, a relationship later South Carolina Presbyterians denounced. When George Buist arrived in Charleston in 1793 he actively ingratiated himself into the city's cultural, social, and religious life and became "an acceptable minister to the Congregation, as well as an agreeable member of society." Buist held other offices while he served as a minister. He headed the College of Charleston and committed himself to education whole-heartedly before his early death in 1808. Presbyterians comfortably ingratiated themselves into state apparatuses in the Early Republic, and saw no issue with joining the church and state educational institutions officially in the person of their ministers (Sprague 1859).

The Presbyterian commitment to education, however, allowed slave-affirming conceptualizations of the American order to spread into the Old Southwest and into the political mainstream. Plantation profits faded almost as swiftly as religious revival. Upstate South Carolinians pushed farther afield to acquire lands for cotton, and they took Presbyterianism with them. Half of white South Carolinians born after 1800 immigrated. By the middle of the nineteenth century Georgia's population included 50,000 South Carolinians. 45,000 resided in Alabama and roughly 26,000 resided in Mississippi. Fully thirty percent of the immigrants to those three Deep South states hailed from South Carolina. As early as 1821 South Carolina's diaspora helped people the Deep South in noticeable ways. A newspaper in Huntsville noted that Carolinians and Georgians poured into the community looking for still-available cotton land. A generation of Presbyterian trained planters began to take their education into the rest of the Deep South, with far-reaching consequences (Ford 1988; Alabama Republican 1821).

Schooling, especially at the primary and secondary levels, served as the essential social southern and cultural catechesis available to elite children as well as a few students from yeomen backgrounds among southern Presbyterians. The best tutors tended to be religious ministers, and in the South Carolina backcountry Presbyterians came to be seen as best-suited to teach the budding backcountry master class. The importance of Presbyterian churches and schools cannot be overstated. In many cases, they were the twin pillars of burgeoning civilization, and the masthead of material and social progress associated with the nascent American nation. Robert Mills, best known for pioneering American architecture, concluded in his 1826 travelogue of South Carolina that Presbyterian churches and schools generally served as the hallmark of civilization in a locale. The Abbeville District along the Savannah River particularly impressed Mills. "Abbeville may be regarded as the original seat of learning in the upper country, and from it has emanated that light and intelligence which manifested themselves there previous to, and during the Revolutionary War." Attention to education, he noted, was vital. He praised the Presbyterians for their "remarkable" care regarding the education of the community's youth. In Williamsburg County, the Session House of the Presbyterian Church doubled as the community's school room (Mills 1826).

Moses Waddel, perhaps South Carolina's best known secondary educator in the nineteenth century, moved to the Abbeville District from North Carolina and began an academy near the hamlet of Willington. He also married Patrick Calhoun's daughter, joining the planter class. Waddel ran the best-known academy in the South Carolina back-country, and other Presbyterian ministers educated and created a generation of southern leaders committed to wedding Jeffersonian nationalism with the continuation of slavery. Waddel's academy building also served as a church, codifying the religious component slaveholders' education. Waddel's institution trained such prominent southerners as William Crawford, Howell Cobb, Augustus Longstreet, Calhoun, Hugh S. Legare, James L. Petigru, and George McDuffie. Waddel preached on Sundays, and the building became a regular congregation. Waddel's most famous charge, his young brother-in-law John Calhoun, illustrated the cultural, religious, and social dispositions of Waddel's students. Far from being a raging democrat, Calhoun and the scions of Upstate Presbyterians held fast to the "conservatism of their class" and in many ways proved "more conservative in thought than the most aristocratic Europeans." Historians might mythologize Upstate Presbyterians' commitment to Jefferson, but as observers as early as Henry Adams noted, Calhoun's "modes of thought were those of a Connecticut Calvinist" (Waddel 1891;White 1911;Adams 1903).

Yankee Calvinists-comfortable with activist state religion-and their politics regularly influenced South Carolinians in the Early Republic. James Henley Thornwell's emphasis on an apolitical spirituality of the church lay several decades in the future when northern educators ministers first arrived among South Carolina's growing Presbyterian population. Nathan S. Beman, a transplanted New Englander and stepfather of future Fire-eater William Lowndes Yancey, preached political sermons in the South just as he had in northern states. His politics remained that of a convinced Federalist, complete with a powerful sense of American nationalism. He preached against the Embargo setup by Jefferson to punish British impressment of American sailors. He also railed against American involvement in the War of 1812. When he moved south in for his health, he kept his politics. But he refrained from importing northern intransigence on slavery. He hoped, in fact, that religion might make slavery more palatable to religious slaveholders by making it a mark of divine favor. He gained enough goodwill amongst slaveholding Presbyterians to serve as temporary clerk of the Presbyterian Synod of South Carolina and Georgia, and his views long with others ushered in a new era of Presbyterian affirmation of chattel slavery. Beman informed slaveholders that if they proselytized their slaves, God would reward them with more compliant human chattel. "Let the servant," he instructed, "feel that he enjoys the distinction of the Son of God." If slaveholders encouraged in their slaves the belief that they were the heirs "of the same glory to which the patriarchs and apostles aspired," slaves would "cheerfully submit to the lot, though a humble and painful one which has been appointed him here below." Beman owned slaves himself, and tortuously tried to reconcile his Federalist New England sensibilities with his closeted questions over slaveholding's morality. Beman's stepson hated him, but even Yancey's biographer admitted the young man received an excellent education from the minister. More than that, he received a vision of the United States that affirmed both a powerful national identity and slaveholding (Walther 2006;Draughon 1966).

Chronology helped ease the wedding of slavery and nationalized Presbyterianism. At the beginning of the nineteenth century revivals swept the western states and then moved east across the Appalachian Mountains. Carolinians understood the revival to be truly national. Although the western states seemed most affected, South Carolina experienced a visible increase in public piety. Religiosity spread across denominational boundaries as well. Presbyterian churches, enjoying a substantive increase in attendance from the revival, understood that their church now represented the intellectual vanguard of a truly national religiosity and morality. The preceding two decades saw Deism and heterodox Christianity sweep the United States and the especially the South. Ebenezer Cummins, a minister in South Carolina's Abbeville District, worried that "Satan and all his power" had been "let loose" by Deism and unorthodoxy. He went, Reverend Cummins warned, about the South "like a roaring lion seeking whom he might devour." Evangelical revivals, however, gave new energy to older more traditional religiosity in the South. One Presbyterian cleric in South Carolina's Waxhaw district thrilled with the knowledge that "languishing, dying religion is beginning to revive in an astonishing manner." Another South Carolinian opined that there was "not a Presbyterian in the southern states, which is not in a state of revival" (Foote 1846;Woodward 1802;DesChamps 1952).

Presbyterian revivalism combined with increasingly lucrative agricultural pursuits, gave South Carolina Presbyterians a preeminent place in shaping a pro-slavery intellectual milieu. Much of the initial impulse stemmed from northern Presbyterians. In 1815 Eliphalet Pearson, a Boston Presbyterian, publicly called for religious education in the South. There were, he complained "in Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina and Virginia, which contain a population of 2,197,670 . . . not 126 ministers of competent education. This left leaving "2,071,670 souls without a regular stated ministry," a situation Pearson believed Presbyterians might remedy. An immediate and universal effort must be made," he argued "to provide religious instruction' for the destitute in our own land, by engaging all the pious and well disposed of our nation, to unite and act systematically in this work of self-preservation." By casting Presbyterian education in national terms, Pearson exposed the seriousness of Presbyterian prioritization of educating a united moral nation. Not every southerner seemed thrilled by northern Presbyterian's decision to educate southerners. Thomas Jefferson especially feared their influence, and warned his neighbors that Presbyterian educators would flood the South and poison the minds of young southern men and women (Pearson 1815;Richmond Enquirer 1816).

Presbyterians in South Carolina joined their northern brethren in affirming a moral national order that understandably concerned the increasingly democratic (and sectionalist) third President. Jefferson earned the scorn of Federalists throughout the Union for his perceived deism, and South Carolina Presbyterians joined the chorus lambasting the Virginian for his religious heterodoxies and penchant for democratization. Historian Jonathan Den Hartog noted that "in 1800, Federalists North and South shared many opinions, as well as fears, about the possible direction of the nation." Constitutional, political, and religious concerns" potentially made South Carolina's Presbyterians-men like Henry William De Saussure, "open to the type of evangelical and Combative Federalism Jedidiah Morse, Timothy Dwight, and other Northerners were developing." De Saussure's "strong" attachment "to order and good government" affirmed his belief that both brought about "the happy results of union and social order" and stemmed the infinite evils of civil dissentions." Like his northern Federalist brethren, De Saussure conceived of the United States and its people as a nationalized moral, social, and religious order under providential protection. After Jefferson won a second term De Saussure warned that "times are becoming very Critical, and I am fearful we shall have trouble in this land, so long favored with peace & prosperity. God in his providence may avert the Evil; & I pray that he may." Den Hartog noted that "De Saussure's use of providence went beyond merely the national providentialism so common in the new nation, rising instead to . . . belief in God's active involvement in the affairs of both nations and individuals." While De Saussure warned against a de-facto establishment of one particular denomination, he nonetheless affirmed the principle of church and state buttressing each other to support the national moral order and that of South Carolina (Den Hartog 2015).

De Saussure actively worked to perpetuate both Presbyterian religion and magisterial Federalist-style politics among South Carolina's planters and also among their children. During his time as Intendant (mayor) of Charleston he took an active interest in education. De Saussure's decision to lead the charge for the creation of South Carolina College proved to be an even more enduring legacy for the inculcation future generations of South Carolinians. In 1808 he moved to Columbia and regarded himself as a leading patron of the college. "The college of the State, which he had contributed so much to found, was an object of his unceasing care and interest." De Saussure served as a trustee and watched over the school's "affairs with an unceasing, industrious vigilance, as if its superintendence, and the advancement of its prosperity, were his own peculiar and exclusive duty." De Saussure cared deeply for South Carolina's youth, and "he delighted to watch for any indication of merit, and to develop whatever appeared promising in talent or character." De Saussure and others undoubtedly ensured that college prioritized the hiring of Presbyterians, beginning with R.B. Montgomery in 1806. Professorships at the college became Presbyterian sinecures (Harper 1841).

Educating youth with Federalist conceptions of a political and religious order transcended region in the Early Republic. South Carolina educated a larger percentage of its white youth than every slave state except Maryland and Virginia. Through Presbyterian dominated South Carolina College and the Federalists-dominated College of Charleston-led by a general establishmentarian Anglican and former Presbyterian New Englander, Jasper Adams-South Carolinians learned a Federalist-style view of the American nation that affirmed a powerful vision of state and religious activity, and a vigorous conservatism that affirmed slavery. Adams, a distant relation of the second President of the United States, argued in an emphatic sermon and series of letters to ex-President James Madison that Christianity "is the established religion of the nation, its institutions and usages are sustained by legal actions, and many of them are incorporated with the fundamental law of the country." He denounced divines and politicians who believed that "Christianity has no connection with our civil constitutions of government. True disestablishment, Adams warned, brought "absurd and dangerous consequences" (Niles 1829;Dreisbach 1996;Adams 1833).

By wedding religion and the state, Adams inferred an coercive political structure reminiscent of the civil polity laid out by John Calvin's Institutes on the Christian Religion. Submission to state authority characterized Adams' conception of a Christian citizenry's duties. "That the New Testament ranks this among the most important of Christian duties, may be fairly inferred from the strong language which it is accustomed to employ. We are not only 'to fear God, but to honor the king'" which Adams argued represented "civil government and magistracy of every kind." Christians must submit "to every person whom men have invested with any degree of lawful authority over you, 'whether it be to the king, as supreme, or unto governors,' that is, all subordinate magistrates." Adams denied the selective obedience that characterized Evangelicals, typically Baptists and Methodists but also some anti-slavery northern Presbyterians. Evangelicals rejected any coercion the state might levy on matters of religion but they still argued for the maintenance of a democratic and voluntarily upheld Christian moral order (Sehat 2011;Adams 1837).

While Evangelicals tended to appeal to Christians' religious liberty, Adams cast Christian citizenry as a more total submission to a state that legislated on all manners of social and civil life, including religion. Those "ordained by men to perform the functions of governors, are to be obeyed for conscience' sake; and are, therefore, said by St. Paul 'to be ordained of God.'" Adams echoed St. Paul by concluding that there was no power but God, and "every form of lawful government and magistracy is sanctioned by the Almighty . . . even the idolatrous and persecuting Roman government had authority from God to exact obedience from those to whom St. Paul wrote." Whence he infers, that whoever resisted the power of the state "refuses just obedience to his lawful rulers" and resisted "the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves condemnation." Adams urged South Carolinians to "render to all," not entirely different than the more selective rhetorical affirmation of federal authority that characterized succeeding generation of South Carolinians, including Presbyterians like James Henley Thornwell, Benjamin Palmer, and others. Succeeding generations nonetheless echoed Adams, especially regarding chattel slavery. The established religious order, Adams argued, also established chattel slavery. "It is well for masters constantly to keep in mind, how responsible their situation is, in respect to their servants, how much they are entrusted to their judgment, discretion, and good feeling." Strong "temptations of passion, prejudice, and mistaken interest" might lead them "to neglect or abuse the extensive discretionary power with which the laws of their country and the providence of God have invested them." But their place as slaveholders' came from God. The state and religious establishment protected that right, and religious masters upheld their duties to God and slave (Sehat 2011;Adams 1837).

Adams' College of Charleston leaned towards a vocal affirmation of general establishmentarianism principles and perpetuated that vision amongst the College's students. George Buist saw Christianity as the educational and political vehicle actualizing youth's fullest potential understanding of moral and natural law. "In nothing is the humane spirit of Christianity more conspicuous than in improving the state of children. In the most polished nations of antiquity we observe on this subject laws the most ridiculous, and customs the most shocking to humanity." But even Classical pagans, Buist argued, understood the importance of education to the creation and perpetuation of a national moral order.

Greek and Roman "legislators had too much wisdom not to perceive that the youth were an important part of the community; and that, if they did not sow in spring, they could not reap in harvest." Christian influence and control of state morality, Buist argued, tempered the brutal excesses of Spartan militaristic infanticide, Athenian dissipation, and the autocratic power of the Roman paterfamilias. "Christianity," Buist claimed, "restored to nature its rights, and to virtue its reign. With the severe legislators of antiquity compare the mild and merciful Lawgiver of the universe." Buist appealed to an innately political conception of justice and mercy to affirm a national moral order. This appeal to a particularly Christian politic, for example, allowed his listeners to affirm both Christian morality in the moral order and the continued affirmation of human bondage. Buist touched on the possibility of unjust authority, and heavily alluded to slavery. "There may not be one reason" why an unjust master's "punishment should be delayed for a single moment. But would you throw a hundred industrious people out of employment, and leave them as a burden on the publick?" Justice, instead of mercy, might "cut off the hopes of many diligent and well-educated young men, who expected, by his means, to have been brought forward into notice, and to have served their country in an useful station." Would those who wanted slavery destroyed "reduce a family of innocent and helpless children to beggary, and turn them into the street without a friend or a protector?" Supposed justice of overthrowing slavery, Buist argued, was "more difficult to reconcile with the mercy of God, than to account for the present impunity of vice in perfect consistency with justice" (Buist 1809).

South Carolinians coopted these anti-emancipationist historic conceptions of church, morality and state authority to support their society's innate inequalities. Inequality in South Carolina, typically associated with an economy dominated by planters, insinuated itself into a burgeoning capitalist economy as well. Affirmation of societal inequality allowed a robust interstate slavery trade to develop, increasing South Carolinian's capital even as the plantation economy faltered after 1820. South Carolina religion thus actively upheld inequality, bit it agrarian or capitalist. No Presbyterian in South Carolina believed that Christianity should be removed from its preeminent place in the moral order, and only the assumed preexistence of a Christian moral order precipitated the American conception of church and state. More telling was the fact that South Carolina Presbyterians remained fiercely committed to state regulation of slavery. A slaveholding Christian moral order upheld state prerogatives, and state power upheld the Christian slaveholding moral order. Slavery gave lie to the pleas of separation of church and state. Far from being divorced from politics, Slaveholding Presbyterians saw their world through this lens. Far from breeding an ethic of Christian liberalism and democratic freedoms, the Christian moral order often squelched the aspirations of poor whites and especially enslaved African Americans. Enslaved peoples, like their masters, remained under the force of moral law. David Ramsay, born in Pennsylvania and vocally anti-slavery, until he moved to South Carolina during the last decade of the Eighteenth Century, that African Americans needed moral improvement before they might enjoy moral, cultural, social, and even religious parity. Ramsay initially believed that white that "pride and avarice are great obstacles in the way of black liberty." But exposure to South Carolina conservatism convinced him that attempts to introduce freedom to enslaved people would disorder morality and society. By the 1790s, Ramsey no longer believed in the moral or social possibility of freedom for South Carolina's enslave peoples. Ramsey might protest that establishment made the church "a worldly sanctuary" that succumbed to "ambition, pride, and avarice," but he never granted the church's ability argue for emancipation nor did he believe the state had the right to coerce the church towards emancipation. Slaveholding joined church and state because any disruption of that relationship in the South ultimately challenged slavery, who must remain subordinate in the social and moral. "They who have been born and grow up in slavery" Ramsey argued, "are incapable of the blessings of liberty" (Baptist 2013;Longfield 2013;Ramsey 1819).

South Carolinians understood that far from being merely a civil institution, the relationship between master and slave stemmed from the Christian understanding of moral and natural law. William Riley told a gathering largely comprised of young Presbyterian slaveholding communicants that Christian moral and philanthropic minds were "too expansive to be confined to the narrow bounds of self and home." The moral regeneration of the continent remained their ostensible goal. Although Christians might work for Christ kingdom in their "domestic circle," when they surveyed "the widely extended hemisphere, he must be anxious for the period when the nations of the world shall be influenced by one common sentiment, and when it may be proclaimed that Christ is King on earth, as he is now King of saints" Young Presbyterian layman eventually, Riley averred, bring the "sunbeams of grace to "Asia, Africa, Europe and America." Thus, Riley argued, "may the grace of God, through our instrumentality, take deep root, and run from heart to heart, and house to house, till the whole country is blessed with the gracious fruits of the Gospel." The Christianization of enslaved peoples remained an important facet of redeeming the moral nation. Riley understood that some in South Carolina remained averse to their "servants" joining their churches, but he argued that slavery's Christianization, not emancipation, brought about the divine moral order. Slaves receiving communion and partaking in other religious observances inevitably became more pacific. More importantly, churched slaves meant better policing of slaves. Slave catechesis "brought the whole internal concerns of the plantations before the minister; who, every Sabbath, after Service, carefully examined the heads of the different classes." Often, Riley noted, "the first intimation a master had of his being plundered, was the restoration of his property, through the vigilance of the pastor, his leaders and their classes." Most importantly, Riley confined slavery to "the non-essential differences, which exist among us," which would never "prevent unity of action." Slavery and what Riley offered as small socio-cultural differences "may divide us in some of the minor walks of Christian life, but in the great concerns of 'doing good and loving mercy', we can cordially unite" (Riley 1821).

State Religion played a vital role in preserving and regulating the relationship between master and slave. While the existence of slavery need not divide Christians, the maintenance and ordering of the slave order remained a sphere for both church and state in the Early Republic. The First Presbyterian Church of Columbia tried Richard Sandley, a slaveholder and communing member, for the murder of one of his slaves. The charged Sandley officially with "the death of a negro man." Sandley "fully acknowledged the charge," and chose instead to argue that the enslaved person's life stemmed from inadvertently harsh punishment. The elders eventually determined that the death to be an accident and fully acquitted the Mr. Sandley of all design to take the life of said negro." They chose only to "admonish Mr. Sandley in relation to this unhappy affair & caution him against giving way to passion when the life of a fellow creature is concerned." In cases like Sandley's and others churches tended to discipline white violence more for disordering the social realm than for assault on the humanity of enslaved people. In the case of an overseer hitting his employer's slave, Robert Elder argues, that "in such cases, it would seem the offense was more against" property owners than enslaved persons. The maintenance of the slaveholding order remained the primary concern of both church and state. Churches, Elder rightly notes, "mirrored" southern courts and "viewed violence against blacks as primarily a transgression against an owner's property rights, and only secondarily, if at all, an assault on a slave's person." Far from being separate, church and state worked closely together to maintain the slaveholding order (Elder 2016).

The union of church and state on slavery helped perpetuate slaveholding amongst congregations with generally anti-slavery sentiments. The Palmer family, members of the Congregationalist Circular Church in Charleston, upheld the slaveholding order even as they pursued an activist religious ethic inherited from New England. In 1820 Edward Palmer, a cousin of future Presbyterian luminary Benjamin Morgan Palmer, held membership in "several societies-one, a Musical Association; another a Young Men's Missionary Society-at which I had been called to deliver public addresses. On one of these occasions, Mr. Jonas King, afterwards a distinguished missionary to Greece, was present." King, a New Englander, maid a powerful impression on Palmer. After a religious meeting King and Palmer walked home "and in the course of conversation," King asked Palmer if he "had ever thought of the ministry myself. I promptly replied: 'Look, my dear sir, at a fond wife and four lovely children, whom I am bound by every tender and holy tie to support, and then say whether that question can be asked.'" King's encouragement accompanied that of Rev. Dr. Porter Andover Seminary. Porter also met with Palmer "and, after a long and interesting interview, not only encouraged the step, but imposed upon me the prayerful consideration of the matter; all of which culminated in my departure to the North in 1820." In the Early Republic the influence of New England Federalists-Andover especially spawned establishmentarian Calvinists-remained perfectly respectable among planter families committed to slaveholding, largely because Federalist Congregationalist conceptions of church and state could be easily coopted to defend the slaveholding order (Johnson 1906).

Ecclesiological ties between South Carolina's Federalists-influenced magisterial-minded Presbyterians, and New Englanders, remained firm even during the Nullification Crisis. Unionism remained common amongst Presbyterians more than other confessional groups. Charleston Presbyterian merchantmen feared the loss of their commercial relationships with New England. In the Pee Dee Region Presbyterians publicly embarrassed a member of the church in Indiantown for publicly espousing Nullification. The Nullifier wore a cockaded hat to church, signifying his allegiance to the Nullifiers. Boys in the congregation put a cockade necklace on a dog and allowed the animal to jaunt through the sanctuary. The incident prompted laughter from the congregation and humiliated the errant Nullifier. Other Presbyterians viewed South Carolina's actions with less humor. John Witherspoon of Camden saw Nullification and the political discord that stemmed from it as an ominous "dark cloud" "gathering over our country." The Presbyterian church, he feared, might also be "overshadowed" by the events shaking the political landscape. William MacDowall remonstrated against the "reckless spirit of opposition to the general government." Columbia's Presbyterians, drawn from elite planters but also from the state's small but powerful elite merchant class, remained heavily devoted to the cause of the Union. The sanctuary of the First Presbyterian Church in Columbia served as the meeting place for Unionists throughout the crisis (McGill 1897;Snay 1997;DesChamps 1954).

Despite political rumblings over Nullification Boston Presbyterians-generally National Republicans and soon to be Whigs-held a charity meeting "for the benefit" of the theological seminary "at Columbia." The Synod of South Carolina and Georgia chartered the seminary a few years earlier, but the institution relied heavily on support from outside South Carolina. Even South Carolina's Nullifiers found the largess of Massachusetts Presbyterians praiseworthy. A newspaper in Columbia told its readers: "We have a certain regard for Boston, her spirit, her intelligence, her liberality; and (though loving little else in Massachusetts) we love, at least, the ancient sturdiness of that state." South Carolinians admitted that even in political scuffles that divided them from Massachusetts that the Bay State fought "bold and fair . . . strongly and well; and we verily believe that she alone, if the late contest had come to arms, would have joined battle with all the ancient spirit." South Carolina scorned "windy New York, or leaden Pennsylvania," and never made much account of them. "But Massachusetts is a true foe, and we like her" (Niles 1833).


South Carolina Presbyterians espoused Unionist nationalism and engaged in friendly banter

with New Englanders in the press during the Nullification Crisis because the conflict never directly impugned the institution of slavery. For the same reason South Carolinians did not question the conflation of church and state during the Early National period to the degree described by later historians. Only as American religiosity increasingly divided over the place of slavery did southern divines separate slavery from the conjoined moral and natural law regulated by the historical partnership of church and state. Led by a younger generation of clerics like James Henley Thornwell, South Carolina Presbyterians hoped to protect slavery by divorcing its preservation and regulation from a religion and a religiously influenced state. Thornwell's Spirituality of the Church doctrine declared church and state strictly separate and veritably untouchable. South Carolinians began to deny the immorality of slavery at precisely the same time they denied that the church could speak about human bondage. It should not be considered a coincidence that the congressional agitation over abolitionist pamphlets in 1836 so immediately preceded actions by the Presbyterian Synod of South Carolina and Georgia removing emancipationists provisions from the Synod's official positions. The same year John Calhoun declared slavery a positive good the South Carolina's Synod unanimously declared that they considered "Slavery as a civil institution, with which the General Assembly has nothing to do, and over which it has no right to legislate." The same year a South Carolina Presbyterian applauded his fellow co-religionists in Virginia for declaring that "slavery is not sin" but admitted that such a declaration was a departure from historic Presbyterian moral orthopraxy in both the North and South. "Which one of all the weekly religious periodicals has assumed this ground?" (Southern Christian Herald 1838).

Thornwell's separation of state and religion certainly created a religious reality wherein individualized religiosity flourished, but religious individualism remained an anomaly. Subsequent association of conservative Protestant Christianity with capitalism and so called small government economic policies relied on religious practice being divorced from state and social considerations. South Carolina's Presbyterians before the Civil War associated religious authority with moral, social, and state authority. South Carolina Presbyterians in the Early Republic understood that the church and state in conjunction could, within certain limits, tell them what to do with their slaves, how to live their lives, and even how to spend their money.
 © 2017 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Conflicts of Interest:The author declares no conflict of interest.
The Relation of Christianity to the Civil Government of the United States. Jasper Adams, A.E. MillerCharlestonAdams, Jasper. 1833. The Relation of Christianity to the Civil Government of the United States. Charleston: A.E. Miller.

Elements of Moral Philosophy. Jasper Adams, Philadelphia: E.L. Carey and A. HartAdams, Jasper. 1837. Elements of Moral Philosophy. Philadelphia: E.L. Carey and A. Hart, pp. 110-13.

History of the United States during the First Administration of Thomas Jefferson. Henry Adams, Charles Scribner's SonsINew YorkAdams, Henry. 1903. History of the United States during the First Administration of Thomas Jefferson. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, vol. I, pp. 153-54.

Alabama Republican. 1821. Alabama Republican. 1821. September 28.

The Half Has Never Been Told: Slavery and the Making of American Capitalism. An Association of Ministers. 1848. Southern Presbyterian Review. Columbia: A.S. JohnstonBasic Books2181New York; New YorkBaird, Robert. 1844. Religion in AmericaAn Association of Ministers. 1848. Southern Presbyterian Review. Columbia: A.S. Johnston, vol. 2, p. 136. Baird, Robert. 1844. Religion in America. New York: Harper Brothers, p. 99. Baptist, Edward E. 2013. The Half Has Never Been Told: Slavery and the Making of American Capitalism. New York: Basic Books, p. 181.

Masters and Slaves in the House of the Lord: Race and Religion in the American South. John Boles, 103LexingtonUniversity Press of KentuckyBoles, John, ed. 1988. Masters and Slaves in the House of the Lord: Race and Religion in the American South, 1740-1870. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, p. 103.

The Great Revival: Beginnings of the Bible Belt. John Boles, University of Kentucky Press139LexingtonBoles, John. 1996. The Great Revival: Beginnings of the Bible Belt. Lexington: University of Kentucky Press, p. 139.

A Sermon, Preached in the Presbyterian Church, of Charleston; before the Incorporated Grand Lodge of South-Carolina, Ancient York Masons. And the Brethren of that Fraternity Assembled in General Communication, on the Festival of Saint John the Evangelist. George Buist, Harrison and BowenCharlestonBuist, George. 1794. A Sermon, Preached in the Presbyterian Church, of Charleston; before the Incorporated Grand Lodge of South-Carolina, Ancient York Masons. And the Brethren of that Fraternity Assembled in General Communication, on the Festival of Saint John the Evangelist, 27 December 1793. Charleston: Harrison and Bowen.

Sermons by the Revered George. George Buist, Buist, D.D. New York: D. & G BruceIBuist, George. 1809. Sermons by the Revered George Buist, D.D. New York: D. & G Bruce, vol. I, pp. 183-84.

Acts of the General Assembly of the State of South-Carolina, from February 1791 to December 1794 Both Inclusive. Columbia. South Carolina, J.J. Faust. I136Carolina, South. 1808. Acts of the General Assembly of the State of South-Carolina, from February 1791 to December 1794 Both Inclusive. Columbia: J.J. Faust, vol. I, p. 136.

Religion and the Continental Congress, 1774-1789: Contributions to Original Intent. Derek H Davis, Oxford University Press34New York and OxfordDavis, Derek H. 2000. Religion and the Continental Congress, 1774-1789: Contributions to Original Intent. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 34.

Jonathan Den Hartog, Patriotism and Piety: Federalist Politics and Religious Struggle in the New American Nation. CharlottesvilleUniversity of Virginia Press145Den Hartog, Jonathan. 2015. Patriotism and Piety: Federalist Politics and Religious Struggle in the New American Nation. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, p. 145.

The Presbyterian Church in the South Atlantic States. Margaret Deschamps, Burr, Atlanta, GA, USAEmory UniversityPh.D. dissertationDesChamps, Margaret Burr. 1952. The Presbyterian Church in the South Atlantic States, 1801-1861. Ph.D. dissertation, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Union or Division? South Atlantic Presbyterians and Southern Nationalism. Margaret Deschamps, Burr, 10.2307/2954736The Journal of Southern History. 20DesChamps, Margaret Burr. 1954. Union or Division? South Atlantic Presbyterians and Southern Nationalism, 1820-1861. The Journal of Southern History 20: 484-98. [CrossRef]

Draughon, Ralph B. 1966. The Young Manhood of William Lowndes Yancey. William E Dodd, Alabama Review. 19Yale University PressThe Cotton Kingdom: A Chronicle of the Old SouthDodd, William E. 1919. The Cotton Kingdom: A Chronicle of the Old South. New Haven: Yale University Press, p. 103. Draughon, Ralph B. 1966. The Young Manhood of William Lowndes Yancey. Alabama Review 19: 28-37.

Daniel L Dreisbach, Religion and Politics in the Early Republic: Jasper Adams and the Church. Lexington163University Press of KentuckyDreisbach, Daniel L., ed. 1996. Religion and Politics in the Early Republic: Jasper Adams and the Church. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, p. 163.

The Sacred Mirror: Evangelicalism, Honor, and Identity in the Deep South. Robert Elder, University of North Carolina PressElder, Robert. 2016. The Sacred Mirror: Evangelicalism, Honor, and Identity in the Deep South, 1790-1860. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, pp. 130-31.

Jonathan Elliot, The Debates, Resolutions, and Other Proceedings, in Convention, on the Adoption of the Federal Constitution. 4 vols. WashingtonJonathan Elliot312Elliot, Jonathan, ed. 1830. The Debates, Resolutions, and Other Proceedings, in Convention, on the Adoption of the Federal Constitution. 4 vols, Washington: Jonathan Elliot, p. 312.

The Metaphysical Confederacy: James Henley Thornwell and the Synthesis of Southern Values. James O Farmer, Mercer University Press203MaconFarmer, James O. 1986. The Metaphysical Confederacy: James Henley Thornwell and the Synthesis of Southern Values. Macon: Mercer University Press, p. 203.

Sketches of North Carolina. William H Foote, 1846, Robert CarterNew YorkFoote, William H. 1846. Sketches of North Carolina. New York: Robert Carter, pp. 407-8.

Origins of Southern Radicalism: The South Carolina Upcountry. Lacy K Ford, Oxford University PressNew York and OxfordGazette of the United States. 1803Ford, Lacy K. 1988. Origins of Southern Radicalism: The South Carolina Upcountry, 1800-1860. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press. Gazette of the United States. 1803. December 13.

The Fatal Self-Deception: Slaveholding Paternalism in the Old South. Eugene D Genovese, Elizabeth Fox-Genovese, Cambridge University Press4CambridgeGenovese, Eugene D., and Elizabeth Fox-Genovese. 2007. The Fatal Self-Deception: Slaveholding Paternalism in the Old South. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 4.

Memoir of the Life and Public Character of the Late Hon. William Harper, Henry Wm De Saussure. Charleston: W. RileyHarper, William. 1841. Memoir of the Life and Public Character of the Late Hon. Henry Wm De Saussure. Charleston: W. Riley, pp. 24-25.

Southern Cross: The Beginnings of the Bible Belt. Christine Heyrman, Leigh, Alfred A. KnopfNew YorkHeyrman, Christine Leigh. 1988. Southern Cross: The Beginnings of the Bible Belt. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

The Gentlemen Theologians: American Theology in Southern Culture. Brooks Holifield, Duke University Press75DurhamHolifield, Brooks. 1978. The Gentlemen Theologians: American Theology in Southern Culture, 1795-1860. Durham: Duke University Press, p. 75.

Correspondence of Ralph Izard of South Carolina, from the year 1774 to 1804, with a Short Memoir. Ralph Izard, Charles S. Francis & Company114New YorkIzard, Ralph. 1844. Correspondence of Ralph Izard of South Carolina, from the year 1774 to 1804, with a Short Memoir. New York: Charles S. Francis & Company, vol. 1, p. 14.

The Life and Letters of. Thomas Johnson, Cary, Benjamin Morgan Palmer. RichmondPresbyterian Committee on Publications14Johnson, Thomas Cary. 1906. The Life and Letters of Benjamin Morgan Palmer. Richmond: Presbyterian Committee on Publications, p. 14.

Unification of a Slave State. Rachel S Klein, University of North Carolina Press79Klein, Rachel S. 1990. Unification of a Slave State. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, p. 79.

Presbyterians and American Culture: A History. Bradley J Longfield, Westminster John Knox Press87LouisvilleLongfield, Bradley J. 2013. Presbyterians and American Culture: A History. Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, p. 87.

Narrative of Reminiscences of Williamsburg County. Columbia: Bryan Printing Company. Samuel D Mcgill, 1897, McGill, Samuel D. 1897. Narrative of Reminiscences of Williamsburg County. Columbia: Bryan Printing Company, pp. 70-71.

Statistics of South Carolina, Including a View of its Natural, Civil, and Military History, General and Particular. Robert Mills, Hulrbut and Lloyd357CharlestonMills, Robert. 1826. Statistics of South Carolina, Including a View of its Natural, Civil, and Military History, General and Particular. Charleston: Hulrbut and Lloyd, p. 357.

South Carolina Opinion of Boston. Hezekiah Niles, 1833Niles' Register. Baltimore: Hezekiah Niles. Niles' Register. Baltimore: Hezekiah Niles376Liberal EducationNiles, Hezekiah, ed. 1829. Liberal Education. In Niles' Register. Baltimore: Hezekiah Niles, vol. 37. Niles, Hezekiah, ed. 1833. South Carolina Opinion of Boston. In Niles' Register. Baltimore: Hezekiah Niles, vol. 45, p. 6.

America's God: From Jonathan Edwards to Abraham Lincoln. Mark Noll, Oxford University Press164Oxford and New YorkNoll, Mark. 2002. America's God: From Jonathan Edwards to Abraham Lincoln. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, p. 164.

Princeton in the Revolutionary Era, 1757-1815. Mark Noll, The Journal of Presbyterian History. 85Noll, Mark. 2007. Princeton in the Revolutionary Era, 1757-1815. The Journal of Presbyterian History 85: 89-101.

Benjamin M Palmer, The Life and Letters of James Henley Thornwell. Richmond: Whittet & Shepperson. 137Palmer, Benjamin M. 1875. The Life and Letters of James Henley Thornwell. Richmond: Whittet & Shepperson, p. 137.

A Sermon Delivered in Boston before the American Society for Educating Pious Youth for the Gospel Ministry. Eliphalet Pearson, Flagg and Gould13AndoverPearson, Eliphalet. 1815. A Sermon Delivered in Boston before the American Society for Educating Pious Youth for the Gospel Ministry, 26 October 1815. Andover: Flagg and Gould, p. 13.

Eighty-Eight Years: The Long Death of Slavery in the United States. Patrick Rael, University of Georgia Press75Rael, Patrick. 2015. Eighty-Eight Years: The Long Death of Slavery in the United States, 1777-1865. Athens and London: University of Georgia Press, p. 75.

David Ramsey, Universal History Americanized. Philadelphia: M. Carey and Son. 5488Ramsey, David. 1819. Universal History Americanized. Philadelphia: M. Carey and Son, vol. 5, p. 488.

An Essay on the Influence of Religion in Civil Society. Thomas Reese, Markland & McIver1873Richmond Enquirer. 1816Reese, Thomas. 1788. An Essay on the Influence of Religion in Civil Society. Charleston: Markland & McIver, pp. 5, 18, 73. Richmond Enquirer. 1816. February 13.

An Address Delivered before the Young Men's Missionary Society. William Riley, Gould Riley14CharlestonRiley, William. 1821. An Address Delivered before the Young Men's Missionary Society. Charleston: Gould Riley, p. 14.

The Myth of American Religious Freedom. David Sehat, Oxford University Press47New York and OxfordSehat, David. 2011. The Myth of American Religious Freedom. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 47.

Gospel of Disunion: Religion and Separatism in the Antebellum South. Mitchell Snay, University of North Carolina Press101Snay, Mitchell. 1997. Gospel of Disunion: Religion and Separatism in the Antebellum South. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, pp. 44, 101.

The History of South Carolina. Yates Snowden, Lewis Publishing Company1353Southern Christian Herald 5. 1838Snowden, Yates, ed. 1920. The History of South Carolina. Chicago and New York: Lewis Publishing Company, vol. 1, p. 353. Southern Christian Herald 5. 1838. June 22.

Annals of the American Pulpit. William B Sprague, 1859, IV72New York: Robert Carter & BrothersSprague, William B. 1859. Annals of the American Pulpit. New York: Robert Carter & Brothers, vol. IV, p. 72.

The Development of Southern Sectionalism. Charles S Sydnor, 69Baton RougeLouisiana State UniversitySydnor, Charles S. 1948. The Development of Southern Sectionalism, 1819-1848. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University, p. 69.

Unintended Consequences: Southern Presbyterians and Interdenominationalism in the Late Eighteenth Century. William Taylor, Harrion, Journal of Southern Religion. Taylor, William Harrion. 2010. Unintended Consequences: Southern Presbyterians and Interdenominationalism in the Late Eighteenth Century. Journal of Southern Religion. Available online: http://jsreligion.org/Volume12/ Taylor%20article.html (accessed on 1 September 2017).

Faith and Slavery in the Presbyterian Diaspora. Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield. William Taylor, Peter C Harrison, Messer, 108Taylor, William Harrison, and Peter C. Messer. 2016. Faith and Slavery in the Presbyterian Diaspora. Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield, p. 108.

Journals of the House of Representatives, the State Records of South Carolina. Columbia: State Printers. Thompson, Theodora J., and Stevens Michael1826Thompson, Theodora J., and Stevens Michael, eds. 1977. Journals of the House of Representatives, the State Records of South Carolina. Columbia: State Printers, p. 394. Vermont Chronicle. 1826. June 30.

Memorials of Academic Life: Being an Historical Sketch of the Waddel Family. John N Waddel, 1891, Presbyterian Committee of PublicationRichmondWaddel, John N. 1891. Memorials of Academic Life: Being an Historical Sketch of the Waddel Family. Richmond: Presbyterian Committee of Publication, pp. 44-60.

Slavery's Constitution: From Revolution to Ratification. David Walstreicher, Hill and Wang108New YorkWalstreicher, David. 2009. Slavery's Constitution: From Revolution to Ratification. New York: Hill and Wang, p. 108.

William Lowndes Yancey and the Coming of the Civil War. Eric H Walther, University of North Carolina Press10Walther, Eric H. 2006. William Lowndes Yancey and the Coming of the Civil War. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, p. 10.

Ebony and Ivy: Race, Slavery, and the Troubled History of America's Universities. Henry White, ; Alexander, Craig Wilder, Steven, The Neale Publishing Company111New York; New York; BloomsburySouthern Presbyterian LeadersWhite, Henry Alexander. 1911. Southern Presbyterian Leaders. New York: The Neale Publishing Company, p. 201. Wilder, Craig Steven. 2013. Ebony and Ivy: Race, Slavery, and the Troubled History of America's Universities. New York: Bloomsbury, pp. 103, 111.

The Trial of Religious Truth by its Moral Influence. John Witherspoon, The Works of the Review John Witherspoon. Philadelphia: William W. Woodward. 1Witherspoon, John. 1759. The Trial of Religious Truth by its Moral Influence, 9 October 1759. In The Works of the Review John Witherspoon. Philadelphia: William W. Woodward, vol. 1, pp. 289-92.

Sermon on the Dominion of Providence over the Passions of Men. John Witherspoon, Princeton UniversityPrincetonWitherspoon, John. 1776. Sermon on the Dominion of Providence over the Passions of Men. Princeton: Princeton University.

Increase of Piety, or the Revival of Religion in the United States. William Woodward, Philadelphia: W.W. WoodwardWoodward, William. 1802. Increase of Piety, or the Revival of Religion in the United States. Philadelphia: W.W. Woodward, pp. 98-100.