PULMONIC ENDOCARDITIS: A CLINICAL AND PATH- OLOGIC REPORT OF THREE CASES*


David M Grayzel 
Department of Pathology
Yale University School of Medicine


PULMONIC ENDOCARDITIS: A CLINICAL AND PATH- OLOGIC REPORT OF THREE CASES*



The pulmonic valve is relatively infrequently involved in endocarditis and generally only after the other three valves have been affected. It is a well-known fact, however, that the pneumococcus, and more particularly the gonococcus, may affect the right side of the heart only. Ziegler5 reported one case of pulmonic valvulitis and cited 11 more from the literature in which the gonococcus was definitely proved to have been the causative agent. More often the cases of isolated pulmonic valvulitis are found in association with congenital cardiac malformations. Hamilton and Abbott3 reported a case of patent ductus arteriosus with acute infective pulmonary endocarditis in a 19-year-old girl, and cited I 0 similar instances from the literature. More recently, cases have been reported by Har-rison4, Bishop, Bishop, and Wallace', and Eakins and Abbott2, in which there were cardiac anomalies associated with involvement of the puJmonic valve, either alone or with the tricuspid valve. The infrequent occurrence of pulmonic endocarditis is a sufficient reason for this brief report. Report of Cases CASE No. 1 Clinical History: F. P., a white female, aged 22 years, was admitted to the New Haven Hospital on August 16, 1934, complaining of fever and weakness. For the past year she had noticed increasing weakness, dyspnea on exertion, and palpitation. Six weeks before her admission she awoke with a chill and high fever, and since then had been confined to bed with persistent fever and occasional chills. She remained at home for three weeks and then entered St. Raphael's Hospital in New Haven, where a diagnosis of "bilateral pyonephritis" was made. Her blood urea nitrogen at the time ranged around 200 mg.%. Repeated blood cultures taken during the course of her stay in the hospital were negative. She was transferred to the New Haven Hospital three weeks later where the essential findings on physical examination were confined chiefly to the heart. This was slightly enlarged, the rate was rapid, and the rhythm was regular. There was a soft systolic murmur at the apex and a loud systolic and diastolic murmur over the pulmonic area. The spleen was palpable and firm, and the liver was palpable below the costal margin. There was striking pitting edema of the lower extremities. The * From the Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine. clinical impression was "subacute bacterial endocarditis." Repeated blood cultures here also were consistently negative. Her course in the hospital was rapidly down-hill. The N. P. N. remained elevated, she gradually developed uremia, and died on September 2, 1934.

The laboratory findings showed a marked anemia with R. B. C. around 1,800,000 and Hgb. 45%o. W. B. C. ranged around 20,000, with polymorphonuclears 94%. The urine examination showed 3+ to 4+ albumin and there were many R. B. C., W. B. C., and all kinds of casts in the sediment.


Autopsy:

The necropsy was performed 2 hours post mortem. Only the findings relating to the subject of this paper are reported. The body was well developed and well nourished. There was striking pallor of the skin and mucous membranes as well as of all the viscera. There was marked pitting edema of the lower extremities extending to the sacrum. When the abdomen was examined, there were 1250 cc. of cloudy brown fluid in the peritoneal cavity. The peritoneum, however, was everywhere smooth and glistening. The liver was large and weighed 2430 gms. The spleen was soft and markedly increased in size; it weighed 1170 gms. The tubes, ovaries, and uterus presented nothing of note. The lungs were firm and gray on section. There were both old and recent infarcts in each lung. The urinary bladder was the seat of a hemorrhagic cystitis. The kidneys were large, boggy, and edematous. The cortex in each was widened and measured 18 mm. in depth. The right kidney weighed 230 gms., the left 215 gms.

Heart: The heart weighed 360 gms. Over both auricles the epicardium was covered by a thin fibrinous exudate. The endocardium was everywhere smooth and glistening. The mitral and tricuspid valves had thin and velamentous leaflets, and their chords tendinea were thin and delicate, inserting a short distance beyond the free edges of the valve cusps. The pulmonic valve had the usual three leaflets. They were thickened and their edges were rolled. Attached to them were several large, irregular, nodular, friable, yellow-brown vegetations. The aortic valve had the usual three thin cusps. The pulmonic, tricuspid, mitral, and aortic orifices measured 7.5, 12.5, 10.5, and 7 cm. in circumference respectively. The musculi pectinati and the trabeculae carnee were well rounded and the interstices between them were of the usual depth. The wall of the right ventricle measured 3 mm. and that of the left ventricle 13 mm. in thickness. The myocardium was everywhere a homogeneous red-brown. The coronary arteries were patent throughout and their walls were not thickened.


Microscopic:

Heart: The epicardium was infiltrated by small numbers of polymorphonuclear leukocytes and small and large mononuclear cells. The myocardial fibers were well preserved with distinct striations and blue-staining nuclei. There was no increase in fibrous connective tissue. A section of the vege- tation from the pulmonic valve showed it to be composed of fibrin and bluestaining masses composed of cell debris and clumps of organisms.

Lungs: Preparations from various portions of both lungs showed fresh and organizing infarcts which were heavily infiltrated with polymorphonuclear leukocytes and with numerous clumps of bacteria. Other zones showed organization of the pneumonic exudate.

Kidneys: Sections from both kidneys showed little involvement of the glomeruli, but there was a heavy infiltration of the interstitial tissue with polymorphonuclear cells and lymphocytes. There was marked edema of the whole tissue. In many zones the tubules were dilated and contained inspissated urine or red blood cells and lymphocytes. The epithelium of the convoluted tubules was swollen and in some areas necrotic.

Other viscera: Preparations from the other organs showed infiltration of the interstitial tissue with lymphocytes and polymorphonuclear leukocytes. The parenchymatous tissues, however, were not involved and showed nothing unusual. CASE No. 2 Clinical History:

F. S., a white male child, aged 9 years, had been followed in the Cardiac Clinic of the New Haven Hospital since 1926. At that time his heart was slightly enlarged, particularly to the right, and over the pulmonic area there was a soft systolic murmur which could be heard faintly over the entire. precordial region. There was also marked clubbing of his fingers. His condition was diagnosed as congenital heart disease with interventricular septal defect. His activities were greatly restricted because of dyspnea on the slightest exertion. On June 7, 1933, he was suddenly seized with a severe attack of cyanosis and shortness of breath and died on the way to the hospital. lutopsy:

Only the findings pertaining to the present subject are reported. The body was that of a well-developed and fairly well-nourished boy, weighing 25 kilos and measuring 129 cm. in length. The skin over the entire body was dusky blue but the color was more marked over the head and neck. The thorax was somewhat asymmetrical with a distinct bulge over the precordium. There was striking clubbing of the distal phalanges of both lower and upper extremities. The usual Y-shaped incision was made. The peritoneal cavity contained 100 cc. of clear yellow fluid. There was a blue tint to the organs in situ. There were 100 cc. of clear fluid in the right pleural cavity, 75 cc. of a similar fluid in the left pleural cavity, and 100 cc. in the pericardial sac. The heart was increased in size in situ; its transverse diameter measured 12.5 cm. and that of the chest 19.5 cm. The pulmonary artery was definitely decreased in caliber and measured 1 cm. in diameter as compared to the aorta which measured 2 cm. in diameter.

Heart: The heart and lungs together weighed 575 gm. The right auricle was not increased in size; the right ventricle, on the other hand, was greatly enlarged and its wall equalled in thickness that of the left ventricle. They each measured 7 mm. in thickness. The apex of the heart was made up more of the right ventricle than of the left. The endocardium throughout was smooth and shining. The leaflets of the tricuspid and mitral valves were thin and delicate, and their chordxe tendineae inserted beyond the free edges. The papillary muscles and the trabecule carneve on the right were increased in size but they appeared flattened and the interstices between them were exceedingly shallow. The foramen ovale was closed. The pulmonic cusps were thickened and fused together, leaving an orifice that measured only 2 mm. in diameter. On the edges of the thickened leaflets there were small, milky white, translucent nodules, each 1 mm. in greatest diameter, which were firmly attached to the leaflets. The separate cusps could be identified only by small ridges which marked the sites of their fusion. The pulmonary artery throughout its extent appeared to be hypoplastic and measured not more than 0.8 to 1 cm. in diameter. The aorta arose in the usual manner, as did also the coronary arteries. Immediately below the origin of the aorta the interventricular septum had a circular defect 1.5 cm. in diameter which offered direct communication between the right and left ventricles. The aorta measured 5 cm. in circumference. The aortic valve measured 7.5 cm. in circumference and consisted of the usual three thin and delicate cusps. The ductus arteriosus was not patent.


Microscopic:

Sections from both the right and the left ventricles showed small foci of cellular infiltration around blood vessels and in the interstitial tissue between muscle bundles. These consisted chiefly of small mononuclear cells. The myocardial fibers were compactly arranged; their striations were distinct and their nuclei stained dark blue. In the right ventricle the myocardial fibers appeared to be increased in size and many of their nuclei were bizarre-shaped.

Section of the pulmonary valve showed its base to be composed of loose connective tissue. Toward the free edge it became thickened by numerous nodules of dense, acellular, pink-staining connective tissue. In several places blue-staining deposits of calcium were seen. Small numbers of small and large mononuclear cells infiltrated the tissues adjacent to these nodular thickenings. Here, too, several thin-walled blood vessels were present. A portion of the pulmonary artery adjacent to the valve showed a well-formed vessel whose three coats were sharply delineated.


CASE No. 3 Clinical History:

F. D., a white male aged 17 years, was admitted to the New Haven Hospital on July 28, 1924, because of pain in the chest and in the epigastrium. He had always had "heart trouble" and as a child had attacks of shortness of breath with swelling of the feet. These attacks recurred about once a month during the past four years. Two years prior to admission to the hospital, he was seen in the New Haven Dispensary following a similar attack. At that time there was moderate enlargement of his heart with visible precordial pulsations and systolic and diastolic murmurs and systolic thrills. A diagnosis of rheumatic heart disease was made at that time.

Five weeks prior to the last admission the patient had another attack of precordial pain with marked dyspnea and orthopnea: He was seen two weeks later in the dispensary and found to have signs of cardiac decompensation. Four days later he was admitted to the hospital. The essential findings on physical examination were confined chiefly to the heart. He was cyanotic, dyspneic, and orthopneic. There was pitting edema of his feet and clubbing of his fingers. There were numerous moist rales at the right base. The heart was enlarged to the left and there was a continuous roaring in the second left interspace with a systolic thrill and murmur and a soft diastolic murmur over the pulmonic area. The following day the roaring had disappeared but there was present a diastolic thrill near the sternum and a systolic and diastolic thrill at the apex. The heart sounds were almost completely replaced by murmurs. The heart action was regular. The temperature hovered around 1010 F. and the pulse rate ranged around 100 to 1 10 per minute. Repeated blood cultures were negative. His course in the hospital was rapidly down-hill and he died a few days later.


Autopsy:

The necropsy was performed 6 hours post mortem. Only the findings pertaining to the question under discussion are reported. -The body was well developed and fairly well nourished. There was marked cyanosis of the face and mucous membranes and there was a group of petechial hemorrhages in the right anterior axillary portion of the chest. The heart was greatly enlarged in situ; its transverse diameter measured 18 cm. It reached from the left mid-axillary region to about 5 cm. to the right of the midsternal line. The pericardium was firmly adherent to the heart but only slightly adherent to the anterior chest wall. There was extreme distention of both superior and inferior venx cavx and of the pulmonary arteries. The right pleural cavity contained 400 cc. of cloudy fluid; the left contained only a few cc. of fluid. The left lung was compressed against the posterior thoracic wall.

Heart: The heart with the attached pericardium weighed 650 gm., the preponderance of weight being on the right side. The right auricle was very much distended and it almost obliterated the appendage. The foramen ovale was closed. The tricuspid orifice measured 13 cm. in circumference. Here and there thickening of the free edges of the valve cusps, and a slight increase in the size of the chords tendineae denoted the presence of an old inflammatory process in this valve. Three to four groups of fresh warty vegetations were present along the line of closure, each measured 5 to 8 mm. in length and 1 to 2 mm. in each of the other dimensions. Their surfaces were roughened and gray in some places but red in others. The right ventricle was greatly hypertrophied and dilated; its thickness measured 8 mm. The myocardium was everywhere a homogeneous red-brown. The pulmonic orifice measured 8 cm. in circumference. The leaflets showed no thickening of the edges, but on two of the cusps at the nodules of Arantius small, warty, pinkish-gray vegetations were found. The pulmonary artery was quite large and just before its division into the right and left branches a patent ductus arteriosus was found leading into the aorta. The ductus was so shortened that it appeared to be really a direct opening between the two large vessels. It measured about 1 cm. in diameter. The left side of the heart appeared relatively small. There was no dilatation of either auricle or ventricle. The valves here were thin and delicate. The mitral orifice measured 8.5 cm. and the aortic 6.5 cm. in circumference. Firmly adherent to the wall at the apex was a small red and gray thrombus which projected for about 1 cm. into the cavity. The opening of the patent ductus could be seen just below the arch of the aorta.


Discussion

The outstanding feature of the three cases reported in this paper is the pulmonic lesion without any involvement of the left side of the heart. In two of them the valvulitis was associated with congenital cardiac malformations and in one there was also a chronic and acute tricuspid valvulitis. That congenital anomalies of the heart may predispose to right-sided valvular lesions is frequently recognized. The first case, however, presented many more difficulties and, indeed, it was not possible to determine the exact sequence of events. The lesion was confined to the pulmonary valve only in a 22-year-old woman with no history of previous cardiac disease and with no history of venereal disease. The kidneys showed a chronic diffuse interstitial nephritis with tubular epithelial necrosis and marked infiltration of the interstitial tissue by lymphocytes and plasma cells. A similar cellular infiltration was present in the interstitial tissues of other viscera. No portal of entry for the infection could be demonstrated. Moreover, all ante-mortem cultures were sterile and, unfortunately, no post-mortem cultures were taken.

FIG. 3 (
3Case 3). Patent ductus arteriosus; fibrous pericardial adhesions; cardiac mural thrombus (left).

. L F Bishop, L F BishopJr, S C Wallace, Am. Heart J. 5I Bishop, L. F., Bishop, L. F. Jr., and Wallace, S. C.: Am. Heart J., 1929, 5, 23 3-42.

. W W Eakins, Abbott , M E , Am. J. Med. Sci. 186Eakins, W. W., and Abbott, M. E.: Am. J. Med. Sci., 1933, 186, 860-70.

. W F Hamilton, Abbott , M E , Tr. A. Am. Physicians. 29Hamilton, W. F., and Abbott, M. E.: Tr. A. Am. Physicians, 1914, 29, 294- 308.

. W F Harrison, Am. Heart J. 5Harrison, W. F.: Am. Heart J., 1929, 5, 213-3 1.

. K Ziegler, Miunchen. med. Wchnschr. 80Ziegler, K.: Miunchen. med. Wchnschr., 1933, 80, 2001.