Virtual reality headset versus traditional training in orthopedic surgery A comparative study on real surgical performance in total knee arthroplasty


Yunus Can Unal dryunuscanunal@gmail.com 0009-0001-6733-4211
MDCihan Adanas 0000-0002-3652-6077
MDSehmuz Kaya 0000-0002-9636-5260
MDSezai Ozkan 0000-0003-4444-6939
MDUlan Ismailov 0000-0003-4759-3969

a Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, University of Health Sciences Van Training and Research Hospital,
Van, Turkey, Van, Turkey, Sanliurfa, Turkey. Van, Turkey


b Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Faculty of Medicine Van Yuzuncu Yil University,



c Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Sanliurfa Training and Research Hospital,



Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Van Education and Research Hospital,


Virtual reality headset versus traditional training in orthopedic surgery A comparative study on real surgical performance in total knee arthroplasty
960713BFE1E8A2552290F93E448F466210.1097/MD.0000000000040615Received: 24 September 2024 / Received in final form: 30 October 2024 / Accepted: 1 November 2024OSATS = Objective Structured Scale of Technical SkillsVR = immerse virtual reality open surgery performanceorthopedic trainingsimulation-based learningsurgical educationtotal knee arthroplastyvirtual reality surgery simulation
Is it possible for a low-volume surgeon to enhance their surgical skills without performing actual surgeries by utilizing virtual reality headsets and emerging technologies?It has been observed that the time spent by surgical assistants in the operating room decreased after the post-shift leave regulation.In the literature, the use of virtual reality simulations as a support tool in surgical training is recommended.Although the efficacy of virtual reality surgical simulations in surgeries such as arthroscopy and laparoscopy has been proven, there are limited studies on their effect in open surgeries.In this study, 20 orthopedic and traumatology residents with no experience in primary total knee arthroplasty were divided into 2 groups.One group was prepared for surgery using surgical simulation with virtual reality headsets, while the other group was prepared for surgery with traditional methods.The actual surgical performance of the participants was evaluated with the Objective Structured Scale of Technical Skills (OSATS) surgical skills scale.It was observed that the virtual reality group was more successful in the "Time and Motion" and "Surgical Functioning and Fluency" criteria.Virtual reality surgical simulations are useful tool in surgical training and can contribute to the development of surgeons' skills.However, more research is needed on how to integrate these simulations into training programs and in which areas they are most effective.

Introduction

The origin of the word surgery comes from the Ancient Greek word "kheirourgía," which means "manual work."For this reason, surgeon candidates have tried different techniques for centuries to gain hand practice.The first recorded example of this is estimated to be the use of leaf and clay models to practice nasal reconstruction with a forehead flap in India in 600 BC. [1] Today, orthopedic surgical simulation options include cadavers, animal models, 3-dimensional models, arthroscopic box simulations and the latest technology, immerse virtual reality (VR) surgical simulations. [2]Due to this rapid development, there is a growing need for new studies to assess the effectiveness of these technologies in surgical training.Simulation-Based Training enhances healthcare professionals' skills and patient safety through technology, though challenges like high costs and realism limitations require strategic management for its future success. [3]In the last 20 years, a limited number of studies have been conducted on the subject.Most of these studies used models or cadavers to determine the contribution of VR to surgical performance. [4]There is no other study in the literature that investigated the effectiveness of VR by evaluating the performance of participants in a real knee arthroplasty operation.

The decreasing number of surgeries in the pandemic and the limited working hours of residents have again demonstrated the importance of simulation in the acquisition of surgical technical skills.There are suggestions that more studies should be conducted on the subject of VR studies related to Orthopedics and Traumatology. [4,5]The performances of the group practicing with VR simulation and the group preparing for surgery with conventional methods had compared in a real knee arthroplasty surgery.


Material and method

Our study was initiated in May 2023 after approval from the ethics committee of Van Yuzuncu Yil University.Informed consent for publication of surgical images was obtained from the patient.In our study, 20 orthopedic and traumatology residents who had not previously perform total knee arthroplasty surgery and had no experience with VR were divided into 2 groups; 10 orthopedic and traumatology residents with VR training (Group 1) and 10 residents with traditional surgical training (Group 2), all with similar seniority and arthroplasty experience, were selected using a stratified random sample.All participants has given a test consisting of evaluation questions about the basic steps in total knee arthroplasty surgery.These questions were accompanied by a demographic questionnaire (arthroplasty experience, VR experience, years of seniority; Fig. 1).

A study sheet was prepared, including information on the knee arthroplasty surgery simulation called "Prosthetic Worlds." [6]The VR content and the study sheet were created as similar as possible to avoid inequality between the groups.After these examinations and surveys, 20 participants were divided into 2 groups as stratified random samples according to their seniority and exam scores (surgical observation experience and surgical technical knowledge level, to obtain 2 balanced groups).The relevant participant was called for VR training 2 hours before the planned surgery.During this period, simulation training was performed with virtual reality google, and then real surgery was performed.In Picture 1, you see the surgeon candidate preparing for the real surgery with the primary knee arthroplasty with Oculus Quest 2 VR headset.Surgery was performed by our participant under the supervision of a surgeon.The participants in Group 2 read the prepared total knee arthroplasty technique sheet.Before the actual surgery, studied for 2 hours, and then performed the surgery under the supervision of the surgeon in charge.In this study, we used the Objective Structured Scale of Technical Skills (OSATS) to determine participants' surgical performance.All surgeries were monitored by 3 independent observers and evaluated using OSATS.The surgical performance of the VR and traditional groups was compared.According to this scale, participants were evaluated by independent observers according to 4 different parameters in terms of respect for tissue, time and motion, instrument handling, flow of operation. [7]Blind evaluators were asked to assign points from 1 to 5 to the criteria.Independent sample t test was applied to the statistical analysis made in terms of the OSATS (Figs. 2  and 3).


Results

In this study, the actual surgical performances of the Virtual Reality Group and the Traditional Group were compared according to the OSATS.

In terms of the Respect for Tissue criterion, the difference between the traditional and virtual reality groups was found to be statistically insignificant.The mean values of the 2 groups were (3.41 and 3.50).

In terms of the Time and Motion criterion, the difference between the traditional and virtual reality groups was statistically significant (P < .01).The mean of the Virtual Reality group was higher.

In terms of the criterion of instrument handling, the difference between the Traditional and Virtual Reality Groups was found to be statistically insignificant.The average values of the 2 groups were similar (2.71 and 2.80).

In terms of the Surgical Procedure and Fluency criterion, the difference between the traditional and virtual reality groups was found to be statistically significant (P < .01).The mean of the Virtual Reality Group was higher (Fig. 4).


Discussion

In our study, no significant difference was observed in terms of "Respect for Tissue" between the virtual reality group and traditional groups according to the OSATS.In the literature, because the parameter of Respect for Tissue has not been evaluated in 2 virtual reality surgical simulation studies conducted on real surgeries, comparison is not feasible.However, findings from studies conducted on cadavers or in minimally invasive surgeries indicate that the group using virtual reality surgical simulations has demonstrated superiority over the control group in terms of the "Tissue Respect" criterion. [4]n particular, the limited space in minimally invasive surgeries and reduced surgical stress in cadaver studies differentiate these results from those of our study.Nevertheless, in open surgeries such as total knee arthroplasty, no significant difference was found in the "Tissue Respect" criterion between groups, likely due to the complexity of the steps involved and the impact of surgical stress.These outcomes will gain further significance with an increase in the number of studies testing virtual reality simulations in open surgeries.Looking at the issue from another perspective, the visual quality, anatomical details, and tactile sensation of surgical simulation may play a significant role in enhancing the surgical skill with respect to tissue.Studies conducted with surgically simulated models proven to have high visual fidelity will shed light on this issue.In our study, the visual fidelity of the software was determined through participant surveys, revealing a moderate level of anatomical realism.However, the limited vibrational feedback provided through virtual reality during simulation raises questions about their superiority in imparting tissue manipulation practice.Consequently, we concluded that open surgical simulation studies employing realistic anatomical details, technically graded scenarios, and high tactile feedback, utilize precise haptic hardware.

In a systematic review examining studies on virtual reality surgical simulations between 2000 and 2020, 8 randomized controlled studies were included.In 6 of the 8 studies analyzed, it was shown that surgical simulation with immersive VR is a superior training method compared to traditional training modules.However, in the remaining 2 articles, although the authors could not find a significant difference between the VR and control groups, they showed at least equivalent success in the training of novice surgeons.The results show promising evidence that randomized controlled trials of surgical simulations using immersive VR are an effective tool in orthopedic surgical education. [3]Owing to technological advancements, these simulations can now provide detailed anatomical details, a real sense of tissue, and tactile feedback; therefore, the number of simulation studies for open surgeries is increasing.This study contributes to the literature by investigating the effects of simulations on surgical performance in a real knee arthroplasty operation.

Long-term studies of the effectiveness of virtual reality surgical simulations have generally focused on arthroscopy and laparoscopy.However, owing to technological advancements, opportunities have been provided for open surgical simulations, and knowledge accumulation in this area is just beginning to form.Our study evaluated surgical performance after an open surgical simulation, such as total knee arthroplasty.We must accept that there are more factors during open surgery than arthroscopic surgery.In our study, we attempted to balance group levels with stratified randomization and to fill the OSATS objectively with independent observers.However, there may be situations that may affect the surgical performance of the participants (missing tourniquet, tight patella, osteoporotic or obese patient etc).We used the primary total knee arthroplasty criterion.We did not use any other criteria related to patients.This may have caused inequality between the groups.

In our study, while some of the virtual reality surgical simulation software can measure the performance during the simulation with metric values, the software we used does not have this feature.Therefore, we did not have the opportunity to measure the participants' virtual performance during the simulation.We recommend that researchers conduct similar studies in the future to use simulation software with metric measurement features and to evaluate the appearance, content, and construct validity of the simulation by obtaining the opinions of experienced surgeons.The duration of practice to determine the contribution of surgical simulation to real surgery is also an important factor.In our study, we performed 2 hours of simulation practice before real surgery; however, there are also publications made with wider ranges of practice time.More work on this issue will help standardize practice times.


Conclusion

Our study and current literature suggest that virtual reality surgical simulation can play a significant role in surgical education and help surgeons improve their skills.More research is needed to determine how to use virtual reality simulations effectively and how to integrate them into surgical education programs within a comprehensive curriculum.In our study, we concluded that virtual reality surgical simulations, which offer the opportunity to repeat a surgical procedure indefinitely without compromising patient safety, can be used as an auxiliary method to provide an inexperienced surgeon with practical experience.

Figure 1 .
1
Figure 1.STROBE flow-chart of participants.OSATS = Objective Structured Scale of Technical Skills, STROBE = strengthening the reporting of observational studies in epidemiology, VR = immerse virtual reality.


Figure 2 .
2
Figure 2. Primary total knee arthroplasty virtual reality surgical simulation and participants performing the actual surgery.


Figure 3 .
3
Figure 3. İmages from virtual reality surgery simulation software.


Figure 4 .
4
Figure 4. Statistics on the surgical performances of the groups evaluated according to OSATS.OSATS = Objective Structured Scale of Technical Skills, VR = immerse virtual reality.

The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Early use of simulation in medical education. H Owen, Simul Healthc. 72012

Simulation and its role in training. H Samia, S Khan, J Lawrence, C P Delaney, Clin Colon Rectal Surg. 262013

The impact of simulation-based training in medical education: a review. C Elendu, D C Amaechi, A U Okatta, Medicine (Baltim). 103e388132024

Head-mounted display virtual reality is effective in orthopedic training: a systematic review. D P Berthold, L N Muench, M C Rupp, Arthrosc Sports Med Rehabil. 42022

Effectiveness of immersive virtual reality on orthopedic surgical skills and knowledge acquisition among senior surgical residents: a randomized clinical trial. R Lohre, A J Bois, J W Pollock, JAMA Netw Open. 3e20312172020

Virtual reality surgical simulations. Prosthetic Worlds, 2023

. Accessed, October 2024

Using the Objective Structured Assessment of Technical Skills (OSATS) global rating scale to evaluate the skills of surgical trainees in the operating room. H Niitsu, N Hirabayashi, M Yoshimitsu, Surg Today. 432013