2019


Department of Respiratory Medicine
UMC
University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, AmsterdamThe Netherlands


Department of Clinical Pharmacy
Faculty of Pharmacy
Assiut University
AssiutEgypt


Division of Pharmacology
Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences
Utrecht University
UtrechtThe Netherlands


Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences
Utrecht University
UtrechtThe Netherlands


Department of Pediatric Respiratory Medicine
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Amsterdam UMC
UMC
Emma Children's Hospital
Amsterdam, AmsterdamThe Netherlands


University of Amsterdam
Meibergdreef 9AmsterdamThe Netherlands

Clin Exp Allergy
49201910.1111/cea.13444| 1067 wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/cea


allergic disorders. Studying the role of the microbiome and how it interacts with the host will provide opportunities to better understand the complex disease process of asthma.

The development of micro-organism identification technologies from culture-dependent to DNA/RNA sequencing technologies has made more in-depth microbiome research possible. The focus shifted to a wider prospective, including both commensal and pathogenic micro-organisms and their interaction with the human body and their role in asthma. To date, several cross-sectional and longitudinal microbiome studies have been conducted in asthmatics with different phenotypes, which have revealed many associations between bacterial composition and asthma. However, further research is still needed to reach definitive conclusions.

In this review, we aim to provide an overview of methodological aspects of conducting asthma microbiome studies. In addition, we will explore the associations and role of bacterial microbiota in asthma and discuss the challenges that hinder appropriate interpretation of the results and transfer of knowledge into clinical practice.


| ME THODOLOG I C AL A S PEC TS OF A S THMA MI CROB I OME S TUD IE S


| Sampling of the microbiome

The first step in the analysis of the microbiome is to obtain samples.

Samples for analysis of the microbiome in relation to asthma either originate from the naso-/oropharyngeal route (such as nose, throat), airways or from the large intestinal tract (gut). Table 1 represents commonly used sampling compartments, and their main advantages and disadvantages.

Since many different sampling compartments and methods are currently used, [14][15][16][17][18] obtained results are difficult to compare. For example, a study conducted in 39 asthmatics and 19 healthy controls revealed that statistically significant differences in bacterial α-diversity (diversity in individual site or sample) and β-diversity (intervariability, between sites or samples) were found between bronchial brushings and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid within individuals for both asthmatics and control groups. 14 In a study of 30 asthmatic children, significant differences in bacterial α-and β-diversity were found between nasal brushes and nasal washes within individuals. 15 In another study comparing bacterial composition in bronchial aspirates and bronchial brushings in 13 adults with severe asthma, the composition of the microbiota in the bronchial brushings showed a specific pattern that was not represented in bronchial aspirates. 16 Induced sputum was found to be more compositionally similar to bronchial brushings than oral washes or nasal brushings in adult atopic asthmatics (n = 22). 17 A study conducted in 60 individuals comparing stool samples with rectal swabs found that certain bacterial taxa are highly specific to the sample site, while other taxa can be found in both sample types and are specific for the individual. 18 Although the choice of the sampling compartments in studies depends on several factors such as patients' age, disease state and available facilities, it is of importance to note that microbial communities can change between sampling compartments within the same individual, for example mucosa-associated or luminal bacteria. In


TA B L E 1 Microbiome sampling compartments, advantages and disadvantages


Route


Sampling compartment

Advantages Disadvantages


Naso-/oropharyngeal route and airways

Nasal swab or wash Non-invasive, high patient acceptability, easy to sample frequently Patients may feel slightly uncomfortable As it only represents the upper respiratory tract, it may not be suitable if the study aim was to characterize the lower respiratory microbiome Saliva, buccal swab or wash Non-invasive, high patient acceptability, easy to sample frequently Differences related to gender, pH and diet intake should be accounted for Sputum (spontaneous or induced)

Relatively non-invasive, can represent microbiota from the lower respiratory tract

May be cross-contaminated from bacteria from the saliva or oral cavity, patient's cooperation is required to assure the quality of sample Bronchoalveolar lavage and bronchial aspirates Good representation of the microbiota from the lower respiratory tract Invasive, less patient acceptability, risk of cross-contamination during aspiration


Bronchial brushings and biopsies

Good representation of the microbiota from the lower respiratory tract, including mucosa-associated microbiota Invasive, less patient acceptability


Gut

Stool Non-invasive Patient might feel uncomfortable collecting stool samples

Rectal swab Non-invasive, easy to sample frequently Patients may feel more discomfort than stool samples, patient acceptability may be low, may be cross-contaminated by bacteria from the skin addition, it is very important to consider the effect introduced by treatment with drugs on the microbiome present in different sampling compartments. For instance, studies have shown that medications such as proton pump inhibitors, antibiotics, antidepressants, statins, antidiabetics and probably others can influence gut microbiota. 19,20


| Available microbiome analysis techniques

Various techniques are available to analyse the microbiome (Table   S1). In the past, microbial studies in asthma were dependent on the growth of the micro-organisms on laboratory culture media, which was limited to certain pathogenic micro-organisms.

More recent studies have shown that culture-based methods are relatively insensitive to detect certain micro-organisms, such as atypical bacteria. 21 In addition to the methodological aspects we discussed, we recommend reading a recently published article that highlights the best methodological practices that should be taken into account in the microbiome respiratory research such as quality control, data handling, microbial contamination, low biomass samples and standardized protocols. 36 


| L ATE S T IN S I G HTS INTO MI CROB IAL DYS B I OS IS AND A S THMA PHENOT YPE S (S EQUEN CING S TUDIE S)

Samples for high-throughput microbiome sequencing studies in asthma patients are either taken at a certain time-point of patients' life (cross-sectional studies) or at two or more time-points (longitudinal studies).


| Cross-sectional studies

Various cross-sectional studies have studied associations between airway or gut bacterial dysbiosis at single time-points in relation to asthma phenotypes, for example mild-moderate, severe, and uncontrolled asthma or inflammatory phenotypes, such as eosinophilic and neutrophilic asthma. Most of the studies compared the microbial compositions between asthmatics with different severity levels and healthy controls, and sometimes with other airway disorders, such as cystic fibrosis (CF) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). other groups. 47 In the same study, atopic asthmatic patients were further randomized into fluticasone arm versus placebo which later revealed that corticosteroids may cause changes in certain bacteria. 47 In another study of 23 corticosteroid-free asthma patients and 10 healthy controls, bacterial dysbiosis was found between asthma patients with a low level of eosinophils when compared with asthma patients with high levels of eosinophils and healthy controls. 48 This suggests that asthma disease by itself, different phenotypes, and medications used (including corticosteroids) play a significant role in shaping the microbiome profiles.

Regarding bacterial diversity, some studies have shown that asthma patients had higher bacterial diversity in the airways when compared to healthy controls. 38,39 Again, this might be related to the effect of corticosteroids, which by suppressing immunity would enhance the growth of diverse microbiota. However, in other studies, no significant differences in bacterial diversity were found between asthma patients and healthy controls. 43,44,50 Other studies showed that asthmatic patients had lower airway and gut microbiome diversity when compared to healthy controls. 51 


| Longitudinal studies

In longitudinal microbiome studies, patients have been followed prospectively to study associations between early life microbial dysbiosis and asthma development later in life or changes in the microbiome composition between two time-points (Table 3). Often the gut microbiome in children has been investigated in this type of studies. A recent study showed that an immature gut microbiome profile at 1 year of age in children born to asthmatic mothers was associated with asthma development at 5 years of age. 63 However, another study showed that children who developed asthma at 7 years of age (n = 8) had distinct gut bacterial profiles at one week and one month, but not at one year of age. 64 Similarly, it was shown that during the first three months of life, children with high risk of asthma had lower abundances of certain bacteria genera in their stool compared to others. 65 with already established asthma disease to uncover the dynamic relation between the microbiome and the asthma disease process.


| HOW C AN THE MI CROB I OME INFLUEN CE A S THMA DE VELOPMENT ?

Various studies have found associations between microbial dysbiosis in the airways and/or intestinal tract and the risk of asthma development;

however, the causal relationship remains unclear. In this section, we discuss two different processes, which may explain how the microbiome might influence asthma risk and the evidence supporting them.


| From hygiene hypothesis to old friends theory

The "hygiene hypothesis" that was first developed by Strachan et al assumes that excessive cleanliness, vaccination and antibiotic use can lead to an over-reactive immune system. 73,74 It was suggested that too much hygiene lowers the threshold of immune adaptation, it becomes sensitive and it over-reacts to substances that are normally not recognized by the immune system, like pollen and other allergens. In contrast, more exposure to micro-organisms may lead to immune tolerance and hence less recognition to allergens. Various studies have shown that more exposure to micro-organisms during childhood has protective effects against asthma development, for example; growing up in a farm environment, exposure to livestock animals and dogs, drinking unpasteurized milk and breastfeeding all have protective effects on asthma development. [75][76][77][78][79] However, the limitation to this hypothesis is that it cannot be generalized to all populations. For instance, Japanese individuals are less prone to develop asthma than individuals living in the United States and Australia, 80 despite that they are exposed to a more hygienic environment. 81 The Japanese people have different dietary habits, eat more fermented products and possibly have a microbiome profile that protects them from allergy. Due to the inconsistencies to the hygiene hypothesis found in various studies, a revision has been suggested by the introduction of the "old friend" theory by Rook et al. 82 This theory proposed that micro-organisms co-evolved with humans (old friends) which have been essential for the development of the immune system. 82 Exposure to industrialized environments diminishes these micro-organisms with subsequent defective immune regulation which results in predisposition of the human to chronic inflammatory diseases, such as asthma. Therefore, exposure to natural environments, such as breastfeeding, natural delivery, outdoor activities, healthy-balanced diets and suitable use of antibiotics can re-establish the healthy microbiome environment and consequently reduces risk of allergic disorders. 83


| The gut-lung axis and effects on immunity

Gut microbiota produce different types and amounts of short- Short-chain fatty acids have affinity for G-protein-coupled receptors such as GPR41, GPR43 and GPR109a, which are known to regulate mucosal immunity. [89][90][91][92] In preclinical and clinical studies, high-fibre diet and SCFAs were found to reduce inflammatory biomarkers and improve lung function through an action mediated through these receptors. 89,93 In addition to the effects of SCFAs on receptors, butyrate has been shown to act as histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi). 94 HDACis have been shown to inhibit airway hyperresponsiveness and have anti-inflammatory effect with therapeutic potential in patients with asthma. 95 [97][98][99][100][101][102][103][104] Bifidobacterium longum was found in higher prevalence in the gut of healthy children (n = 102) compared to those with high risk of allergic asthma and atopic dermatitis (n = 99). 105 Increased abundance of nasopharyngeal lactobacillus was associated with reduced risk of wheezing at two years of age in 118 infants. 106 In the respiratory tract, nasopharyngeal colonization with S pneumoniae and H influenzae leads to increased production of CXCL8 and CXCL2 in nasal lavage fluid of mice, and amplification of asthma-like pro-inflammatory responses. 107 A study conducted on the bronchial epithelial brushings of severe asthmatics (n = 40), mild-moderate asthmatics (n = 41) and healthy controls (n = 7) showed that Actinobacteria was correlated with gene expression of FK506 binding protein (FKBP5), which is a marker of corticosteroid responsiveness, while Proteobacteria was correlated with Th17 gene expression. 41 In a study conducted in 8 asthmatics and 6 healthy controls, asthma patients had higher abundance of Proteobacteria, and particularly M catarrhalis was associated with increased expression of inflammatory mediators (eg CCL20, IL1A and IRAK2) and apoptosis (eg TNF and C8orf4). 108,109 A mice study confirmed the pathogenic role of Proteobacteria inhaled through the nostrils, which induced severe lung inflammation and immunopathology characterized by prevalent airway neutrophilia, and expression of cytokine/chemokine profile. 110 These results are in line with the cross-sectional asthma studies which were discussed previously and imply that increased abundances of certain bacterial taxa, for example Proteobacteria and Firmicutes, and decreased abundances of others, for example Bacteroidetes and Actinobacteria, in asthmatics are probably influencers of asthma disease development, risk and severity.


| THER APEUTI C VALUE OF THE MI CROB I OME IN S I G HTS FOR A S THMA : PRO -B I OTI C , PREB I OTI C AND SYNB I OTI C INTERVENTI ON S

The importance of the microbiota in the asthma disease process has raised interest in the possibility of using dietary supplements influencing the intestinal bacteria, such as pro-biotics 111 and prebiotics 112 and their combinations synbiotics to treat or control asthma. Pro-biotics are "live micro-organisms that, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit to the host", 111 while prebiotics are "substrates that are selectively utilized by host micro-organisms conferring a health benefit". 112 Synbiotics are combinations of both pro-and prebiotics.

Most evidence of beneficial effects of pro-, pre-and synbiotics comes from animal studies. Mice studies showed that administration of Bifidobacterium breve or adolescentis strains and Lactobacillus plantarum or rhamnosus strains significantly decreased allergic airway inflammation in OVA-or birch pollen-induced asthma mice models. [113][114][115][116] It is worthy to note that the effect of pro-biotics in mice asthma models is more prominent in neonates than adults. 117 One of the available therapeutic options is CpG oligodeoxynucleotides (CpG-ODN) which are synthetic single-stranded DNA that have affinity for TLR9. Mice and other animal (eg cats and rhesus monkeys) studies have shown that CpG-ODN can significantly reduce airway inflammation, hyperreactivity and remodelling [118][119][120][121][122][123][124] and the effect was more pronounced when it was combined with the antigen or used as nanoparticle formulations. 119,121,122,125,126 In a house dust mite (HDM)-induced asthma mice model, dietary galacto-oligosaccharides were found to prevent airway hyperresponsiveness, airway eosinophilia and T H 2 response, in a comparable way to budesonide 127 and the effect was eliminated in a Treg depleted model which might suggest that it is a Treg cell-mediated response. 128 Synbiotic combination of B breve and non-digestible oligosaccharides was found to have a strong airway anti-inflammatory properties in mice asthma models, 129,130 and the anti-allergic effect was greater than their individual effects. 131 In contrast to mice studies, little evidence has been found for the beneficial effect of pro-biotics in human asthma. A meta-analysis conducted on 3257 infants from nine randomized clinical trials found that the risk ratio (RR) of asthma in infants received pro-biotics was 0 In an open-label trial of 20 adult human asthmatics allergic to HDM, A-type CpG-ODN given as adjuvant to subcutaneous immunotherapy with HMD allergen extract was found to be safe and produce nearly complete alleviation of allergic symptoms after 10 weeks of immunotherapy. 136 In a double-blind trial, where 63 asthmatic patients were treated with 7 injections of either QbG10

(bacteriophage with CpG-motif G10 inside) or placebo, it was found that two-thirds of the intervention group had their asthma well controlled after 12 weeks of treatment compared to one-third of the placebo group. 137 For the effect of prebiotics on humans, a metaanalysis conducted on 249 infants from 2 trials showed that prebiotics reduce the risk of asthma/wheezing compared to the control TA B L E 4 Challenges that interfere for optimum delivery of gained knowledge and therapeutic potential of microbiome and "-biotics" products from bench to bedside


From bench to bedside Challenges Recommendations

Different sampling compartments and whether they are mucosal or luminal should be considered while studying microbiome in asthma

It is important to investigate the microbiome from various sampling compartments in the same studied population and whether drugs (both asthma and non-asthma medications) are associated with microbial changes in certain compartments. Therefore, it might be wise to collect samples from multiple compartments while conducting microbiome asthma studies and adjust for effects introduced by certain medications Different sequencing approaches and platforms might produce variability in reported results

The choice of desired method depends on various factors, such as costs, quality and error rates of the produced sequencing reads. However, investigators should take into account that some of the variability can be introduced by the choice of the sequencing platforms and techniques. Therefore, this is important to consider when comparing results from different studies Some inconsistencies in the reported results have been found in microbiome asthma studies, which might influence clinical applicability and relevance

Large multi-centre international microbiome studies, accounting for the effect of multiple possible confounders, should be conducted to reach more definitive conclusions Different ways of reporting studies results, in terms of bacterial taxa, whether at phylum, genus or species level and using specialized microbiological terms can make hindrance for non-expert healthcare professional to see clinical relevance and can produce difficulty to directly compare results between studies An agreement of clinical experts, stakeholders and healthcare organizations on standardized structure or pattern (as possible) for reporting results of microbiome studies will help to facilitate comparison, interpretation and systematic analysis of the combined work of world-wide research groups Some of the published microbiome asthma studies have investigated the gut microbiome profile without reference to the diet composition or the type of meal the patients usually consume which is an important determinant for the production of SCFAs

Accounting for diet while investigating the microbiome should be undertaken in the asthma studies

There is hindrance in the optimum transfer of the therapeutic potential of products targeting microbiota(-biotics) from animal studies to humans A thorough investigation is required to adequately enclose barriers of transmission, and whether personalizing or tailoring "-biotics" to certain patient/groups of patients will show more beneficial effect group (RR = 0.37, 95% CI: 0.17-0.8); however, low number of events made the precision questionable. 138 In summary, mice studies show promising results of using pro-, pre-and synbiotics in asthma models, while evidence in humans is scarce, especially for pro-biotics. One possibility for decreased therapeutic outcomes in infants is that the intended therapeutic outcomes are long term (for years) which can be influenced by different factors, such as environmental exposure, different dietary habits and dynamicity of microbiome over time. Whether the individual should receive high-fibre diet or making certain diet restrictions should be also considered in clinical trials of pro-biotics. New strategies for using products targeting the microbiota to prevent or treat asthma should be further investigated. Moreover, the role of precision medicine is very important to define certain individuals or patients' groups who can benefit most from the potential therapeutic "-biotics" options.


| THE A S THMA MI CROB I OME FROM B EN CH TO B EDS IDE: CHALLENG E S

Results of microbiome studies in patients with asthma convey the importance of the role of microbiome either in the intestinal tract or in the airways in shaping asthma. However, using combined information from different studies to elaborate the asthma-microbiome interaction in humans is hindered by methodological, design and interpretations issues/challenges in microbiome studies (Table 4). We suggest some recommendations to overcome them.

More efforts are required from healthcare professionals and researchers to conduct large-scale microbiome asthma studies, if possible, accounting for and/or minimizing sources of variability, to obtain a clearer overview of the microbiome role in asthma. We still do not clearly know the type of link between reported microbial dysbiosis and different asthma characteristics; whether is it an association or causation? And what is the direction in case of the latter? The finding that early life microbial dysbiosis was associated with increased risk of asthma later in life might suggest that the microbiome is responsible to some extent to asthma disease development. However, this does not negate that the link might be bidirectional. More research is needed to investigate the relationship behind just "associations."

Translating the results of microbiome asthma studies from sequencing reads into applicable clinical guidelines requires a systematic approach and cooperation of multi-disciplinary research groups.

One strategy is to use the microbiome to better refine asthma phenotypes (eg neutrophilic asthma) diagnosis, for which certain therapeutics targets might be directed. Another strategy is to detect groups of asthma patients with clear microbial dysbiosis for whom interventions (eg pre-, pro-and synbiotics) to reshape the gut and/or airway microbiome might be more beneficial.

The microbiome is thought to have host genetic background, 139 cause epigenetic modulations, 140 affect host metabolism 141 and be influenced by environmental exposures. 142 This necessitates integrating the microbiome with other omics layers, such as metabolomics, proteomics, transcriptomics, genomics, epigenomics and exposomics (environmental factors), which will help to provide more insight into the mechanisms of complex disease processes such as asthma. Hopefully, this will aid to discover new biomarkers for better diagnosis and/or new therapeutic targets in asthmatic patients. 


CO N FLI C T O F I NTE R E S T


With the emergence of novel nucleotide sequencing technologies, microbiome research shifted from a single pathogenic microorganism to a microbial community-oriented approach, studying commensal and pathogenic bacteria and their interactions. Cultureindependent or sequencing techniques start with the extraction of the nucleic acid (DNA and/or RNA) of the collected samples and can Amplicon sequencing of the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) of the microbiome is one of the most common techniques used recently in microbiome asthma studies. 16S rRNA is found in all bacteria and archaea, and is ideal for classifying micro-organisms. There are nine separate hypervariable regions (V1-V9) within the 16S rRNA gene 30 that are targeted by the sequencing platforms. On the other hand, WGS sequencing depends on fragmentation and random sequencing of the totally extracted microbiome DNA. It has been reportedthat WGS sequencing has improved accuracy and provides better detection of microbial species when compared to 16S amplicon sequencing.31 Moreover, WGS sequencing provides the opportunity to assess the functional characteristics of the microbiome because it targets the whole genome instead of particular regions. However, it is more expensive and requires higher computational power than amplicon sequencing, and is therefore less used.,22 Therefore, other techniques have been used 

such as serologic testing, which depends on identifying antibod-

ies against a pathogen, for example microimmunofluorescence or 

ELISA. 23,24 Newer methods, which target DNA of a pathogen, such 

as PCR and reverse transcriptase PCR, have been used in microbi-

ome asthma studies, 25-27 with some commercially available PCR kits 

for detecting certain pathogens. 28,29 

be subdivided into amplicon sequencing or whole-genome shotgun 

(WGS) sequencing. 

Various sequencing platforms are available which differ based 

on the read length, sequencing depth and error rates. 32 The most 

frequently used platforms in the literature are Illumina platforms 

(eg, MiSeq and HiSeq) and 454 pyrosequencing. Other platforms are 

also available such as Ion Torrent, PacBio and SOLiD. It is important 

to note that different sequencing platforms may produce variable 

results for the same samples. 32,33 For a clear comparison between 

sequencing approaches and platforms, see recent articles written by 

Liu et al 34 and Tessler et al 35 



Table 2
2summarizes the main findings of airway microbiome cross-sectional studies conducted in asthmatic patients. Regarding airway bacterial composition, various studies have shown that Proteobacteria, particularly Haemophilus species, are more common in asthmatic patients, while Bacteroidetes andActinobacteria are more common in healthy controls.[37][38][39][40][41][42][43] However, it is not clear whether this difference in bacterial composition is a feature of asthma itself, related to corticosteroid use, or both.For example, there was an increase in the relative abundance of Proteobacteria and decrease in the abundance of Bacteroidetes and changes in skin and nasal cavity Allergic disorders, such as asthma, atopic eczema, hay fever, rhinitis and atopic sensitization, were three-to ten-fold more common in the Finland when compared to Russian Karelia Microbiota from skin and nasal cavity showed that overall microbial diversity and abundance of Acinetobacter genus were higher in Russian Karelia Firmicutes, Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria were the most abundant phyla in both BB and BA samples, while prevotella and streptococcus are the most predominant genera Fusobacteria showed significantly higher relative abundances in BA contrast to Proteobacteria was significantly lower in BA when compared with BB Asthmatic patients with low levels of eosinophils had different microbial profiles compared with asthmatic patients with high levels of eosinophils and healthy controls; they had more abundance of Neisseria, Bacteroides and Rothia species and less abundance of Sphingomonas, Halomonas and Aeribacillus species and healthy controls Patients with severe and non-severe asthma had a reduced prevalence of Bacteriodetes and Fusobacteria when compared to healthy controls There was a high increase in the prevalence of Firmicutes and a minor increase in Proteobacteria in severe asthmatics when compared to healthy controls Also, Firmicutes was increased in severe asthmatics when compared to non-severe asthmatics Non-severe asthmatics showed an increase in Proteobacteria compared to healthy controls and severe asthmatics Patients with neutrophilic asthma had lower bacterial diversity and high prevalence of Haemophilus influenza compared with non-neutrophilic (eosinophilic) asthma, while patients with eosinophilic asthma had high prevalence of Tropheryma whipplei Neutrophilic asthma patients had lower abundance of Actinobacteria and Firmicutes, and higher abundance of Proteobacteria compared with patient with non-neutro-PBs, protected bronchial epithelial brushes; T-RFLP, terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism.Fusobacteria in endobronchial brushings samples with increasing 

corticosteroid use. 14 Furthermore, it was reported that there were 

no differences in microbial compositions at phyla level between 

healthy controls and corticosteroid-free asthma patients. 44 A possi-

ble explanation for the effect of corticosteroids on microbiota is that 

they suppress or disturb mucosal immune system and therefore lead 

to overgrowth of bacteria. This overgrowth probably leads to harm-

ful health effects if opportunistic or pathogenic micro-organisms be-

came abundant such as fungal candidiasis associated with the use of 

inhaled corticosteroids. 45 However, it may still lead to beneficial ef-

fects by increasing abundances of beneficial commensal bacteria. 46 

The results of other studies may reflect that corticosteroids are not 

the only influencers of the bacterial compositions. 47-49 For instance, 

in a study of 42 atopic corticosteroid-naïve asthmatics, 21 atopic 

non-asthmatics and 21 healthy controls, corticosteroid-naïve asth-

matics had a distinct airway bacterial profile when compared to the 



Inflammatory phenotypes of asthma have been shown to be associated with airway bacterial dysbiosis. Three studies have reported that neutrophilic asthma patients had lower sputum bacterial richness and diversity and showed higher abundances of Proteobacteria phylum especially Moraxella and Haemophilus compared with non-neutrophilic, eosinophilic or paucigranulocytic asthma phenotypes.[54][55][56] In contrast, eosinophilic asthma patients had higher sputum abundances of Actinobacteria phylum especially-53 

Actinomycetaceae family compared with non-eosinophilic or neu-

trophilic asthma patients. 50,56 The microbial dysbiosis observed 

between different asthma phenotypes has driven some research 

groups to phenotype cluster their patients based on asthma clinical 

and biochemical characteristics before exploring microbial dysbiosis 

between these phenotypes. Two studies have shown that microbial 

composition can differ between the identified phenotypic clus-

ters. 57,58 Observed microbial differences between different asthma 

phenotypes may help later to better diagnose them and provide an 

opportunity to use the microbiome as a biomarker in precision med-

icine approaches of asthma. 

However, it is important to note that the above-mentioned stud-

ies measured microbiota in different sampling compartments which 

might induce variability of the obtained results and limit the abil-

ity to directly apply microbiome results in clinical care. In addition, 

some variations in results are still observed when comparing stud-

ies originating from the same sampling compartment. It should be 

noted that other factors can play a role in results dissimilarities. For 

instance, individuals originating from different populations might 

contribute to this variability because of the exposure to different 

environments and risk factors. A study shown that children from 

Russian Karelia had higher overall bacterial diversity and abundance 

of genus Acinetobacter and were less likely to have allergic disorders 

including asthma, compared to children from Finland Karelia. 59 In 

addition to different populations and environments, other factors 

related to multiple asthma phenotypes studied, 50,53,55,60 asthma 

and non-asthma medications used besides corticosteroids, 61 dietary 

habits 62 and age groups. 43 Moreover, it should be noted that sam-

ple size is a huge determining factors for inconsistencies found in 

reported microbiome statistical differences which should be consid-

ered while designing the microbiome asthma studies. 

In conclusion, there is no distinct microbiome profile that can 

be said to be responsible for or associated with the asthma disease 

process. Under the umbrella of inconsistencies in reported results, 

several factors might hold responsible such as different populations, 

environments, age groups, drugs, diet and study design. 




,66 A different study showed that there was an as-sociation between gut bacterial diversity at 1 month and 1 year of 

age and allergic sensitization, but not with asthma development until 

6 years of age. 67 

Only limited studies are available studying early life airway bac-

terial composition and the risk of developing asthma. One study 

showed that chronic wheeze at 5 years of age was associated with 

early airway colonization with Streptococcus during the first year 

of life. 68 In another study, cultures from the hypopharyngeal re-

gion aspirates of 321 infants at 1 month showed that colonization 

with Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae or Moraxella 

catarrhalis increased the risk for recurrent wheeze and asthma at 

5 years of age. 69 

Despite that there was inconsistency about the most important 

time period (whether the first 3 months or the first year of life) to 

shape asthma risk later in life, it is apparent that gut or airway micro-

biota disturbances at an early age, especially the first year of life, are 

risk factors for asthma development. This bacterial dysbiosis may 

explain why early life antibiotic exposure may increase risk of later 

asthma development. 70-72 

In conclusion, longitudinal microbiome studies may help to un-

cover the shifts that occur in microbiome profiles over time. Studying 

the time-associated changes in the microbiome is essential because 

the microbiome is dynamic by nature and is influenced by several en-

vironmental and biological conditions. In addition to the studies that 

investigate early life microbial dysbiosis and its relation to asthma risk, 

more longitudinal investigation should be also conducted in patients 
TA B L E 3 Longitudinal microbiome asthma studies 

Authors 
Number and type of 
participants 

Samples 

Time of 
collection 
Technique used to as-

sign bacterial taxa 

Outcomes 

Key finding 

Dzidic et al 150 

, 

2018 
80 children (47 aller-
gic and 33 healthy) 

Saliva 

3, 6, 12, 24 mo 
and 7 y of age 
16S ribosomal RNA-
based method (target-
ing V1-V5 region) 
Allergic symptoms and sensiti-
zation at 7 y of age 
Allergic children, particularly asthmatics, had lower bacte-
rial diversity compared to healthy children at 7 y of age 
During early infancy, there was an increase in relative 
abundances of Gemella haemolysans in allergic children, 

while healthy children showed increased abundances 
of Lactobacillus gasseri and Lactobacillus crispatus 

Stokholm et 

al 63 
, 2018 

690 children 

Stool 

1 wk, 1 mo and 
1 y of age 

16S ribosomal RNA-
based method (target-
ing V4 region) 

Asthma at 5 y of age 
Children at 1 y of age who have an immature gut micro-
biome profile have increased risk of asthma at 5 y of 
age, but this effect is only evident in children who are 
born to asthmatic mothers 

Pérez-Losada et 

al 151 
, 2017 
40 asthmatic chil-
dren (6-18 y) 

Nasopharyngeal 

washes 

2 samples 
collected 
5.5-6.5 mo 
apart 
16S ribosomal RNA-
based method (target-
ing V4 region) 

Temporal dynamics of airway 
microbiome in asthmatic 

children and their stability 

over time 

No significant differences in 

α-and 
β-diversity were 

found between seasons 
There were significant differences in relative abun-
dances of Haemophilus, Staphylococcus, Moraxella and 
Corynebacterium between summer and fall season and 

between age groups 

Fujimura et 

al 152 
, 2016 

298 children 

Stool 

1 and 6 mo 

16S ribosomal RNA-
based method (target-
ing V4 region) 
Atopy diagnosis at 2 y of age 
and asthma diagnosis at 4 y 
of age 
Neonates with highest risk of atopy and asthma 
diagnosis showed reduced relative abundances of 
Bifidobacterium, Akkermansia and Faecalibacterium 

bacterial taxa and high relative abundances of Candida 

and Rhodotorula fungi 
They also showed enriched fecal pro-inflammatory 
metabolites 

Stiemsma et 

al 66 
, 2016 
76 children (39 pre-
school asthmatic 
children and 37 
matched healthy 
control) 

Stool 

3 mo and 1 y 
of age 
16S ribosomal RNA-
based method (target-
ing V3 region) 
Asthma diagnosis by 4 y of age 
Asthma patients at 3 mo of age showed decreased 
abundance of the genus Lachnospira and a trend for in-
creased abundance of the species Clostridium neonatale 

The ratio of these two bacteria (L/C) was negatively 
associated with asthma risk by 4 y of age 

Arrieta et al 65 

, 

2015 
319 children (136 
with wheezing, 
87 with atopy, 
22 both, and 74 
controls) 

Stool 

3 mo and 1 y 
of age 
16S ribosomal RNA-
based method (target-
ing V3 region) 
High risk of asthma develop-
ment (asthma diagnosis at 3 y 
of age) 
No significant difference was found in microbiome 
diversity among the four groups 
During the first 100 d of life, children with high risk of 
asthma had lower abundance of the bacteria genera; 
Lachnospira, Veillonella, Faecalibacterium and Rothia 

Teo et al 68 

, 

2015 

234 children 

Nasopharyngeal 

aspirates 
2, 6 and 12 mo 
of age during 
two states; 
healthy 
condition and 
episodes of 
acute respira-
tory illness 
16S ribosomal RNA-
based method 
Impact of dynamics of naso-
pharyngeal microbiome, dur-

ing the first year of life during 
both healthy condition and 
episodes of acute respiratory 
infections, on allergic sen-
sitization at 2 y and chronic 
wheeze at 5 and 10 y of age 
Children who had atopy by age of 2 y and developed 
chronic wheeze at 5 y of age were twice likely to 
have early colonization with Streptococcus, and lower 
respiratory tract infection during the first year of life 
compared to those who did not develop wheezing 

(Continues) 



randomized clinical trials showed that pro-biotics significantly reduced total IgE levels (−7.59 U/mL mean reduction, 95% CI: −14.96 to −0.22); however, they did not significantly reduce risk of asthma or wheeze (relative risk = 0.96, 95% CI: 0.85-1.07).133 A randomized controlled trial was conducted on 1,302 asthmatic subjects older than 5 years of age to assess whether pro-biotic intake can reduce antibiotic prescribing for winter respiratory tract infections.134 In this trial, no significant difference between the intervention group (n = 652) and control group (n = 650) was seen regarding the proportion of participants who were prescribed new courses of antibiotics (odds ratio = 1.04; 95% CI, 0.82-1.34).134 Despite the diminished effects of pro-biotics shown in human controlled clinical trials, a recent study showed that the delayed gut microbial development in infants with high risk of asthma can be altered with daily oral supplementation of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG compared with placebo, and this effect was lost 6 months after stopping the supplementation.135 By changing gut microbial maturation early in infancy, there is a possibility to modify asthma risk later in life. This study provides a new potential strategy for using pro-biotics as an early preventive measure in high-risk infants..99 (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.81-1.21) and RR of wheeze was 

0.97 (95% CI 0.87-1.09). 132 Another meta-analysis conducted on 25 




AHM has been reimbursed for visiting the ATS by Chiesi, AHM received a fee for participating in advisory boards for Boehringer lngel-heim and Astra Zeneca, and AHM received an unrestricted research grant from GSK. ADK received grants/research support from several companies ao Janssen, GSK, Nutricia Research, Friesland Campina and NTRC. Mahmoud I. Abdel-Aziz https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9263-7137 Susanne J. H. Vijverberg https://orcid. Anne H. Neerincx https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4533-486X Aletta D. Kraneveld https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9819-383X Anke H. Maitland-van der Zee https://orcid. org/0000-0002-0414-3442 R E FE R E N C E SO RCI D 

org/0000-0002-4579-4081 



Global, regional, and national deaths, prevalence, disability-adjusted life years, and years lived with disability for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma, 1990-2015: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study. J B Soriano, A A Abajobir, K H Abate, Lancet Respir Med. 59Soriano JB, Abajobir AA, Abate KH, et al. Global, regional, and national deaths, prevalence, disability-adjusted life years, and years lived with disability for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma, 1990-2015: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet Respir Med. 2017;5(9):691-706.

Epidemiology of asthma. P A Loftus, S K Wise, Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 243Loftus PA, Wise SK. Epidemiology of asthma. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2016;24(3):245-249.

Asthma: a syndrome composed of heterogeneous diseases. L Borish, J A Culp, Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 1011quiz 8-11, 50Borish L, Culp JA. Asthma: a syndrome composed of heteroge- neous diseases. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2008;101(1):1-8; quiz 8-11, 50.

Revised estimates for the number of human and bacteria cells in the body. R Sender, S Fuchs, R Milo, PLoS Biol. 1481002533Sender R, Fuchs S, Milo R. Revised estimates for the num- ber of human and bacteria cells in the body. PLoS Biol. 2016;14(8):e1002533.

The human microbiome project: exploring the microbial part of ourselves in a changing world. P J Turnbaugh, R E Ley, M Hamady, C Fraser-Liggett, R Knight, J I Gordon, Nature. 4497164Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Hamady M, Fraser-Liggett C, Knight R, Gordon JI. The human microbiome project: exploring the microbial part of ourselves in a changing world. Nature. 2007;449(7164):804-810.

Defining the human microbiome. L K Ursell, J L Metcalf, L W Parfrey, R Knight, Nutr Rev. 701SupplUrsell LK, Metcalf JL, Parfrey LW, Knight R. Defining the human microbiome. Nutr Rev. 2012;70(Suppl 1):S38-S44.

The NIH human microbiome project. J Peterson, S Garges, M Giovanni, Genome Res. 1912Peterson J, Garges S, Giovanni M, et al. The NIH human microbi- ome project. Genome Res. 2009;19(12):2317-2323.

A human gut microbial gene catalogue established by metagenomic sequencing. J Qin, R Li, J Raes, Nature. 4647285Qin J, Li R, Raes J, et al. A human gut microbial gene cat- alogue established by metagenomic sequencing. Nature. 2010;464(7285):59-65.

The role of viral respiratory infections in asthma and asthma exacerbations. W W Busse, R F Lemanske, J E Gern, Lancet. 3769743Busse WW, Lemanske RF, Gern JE. The role of viral respira- tory infections in asthma and asthma exacerbations. Lancet. 2010;376(9743):826-834.

Chlamydophila pneumoniae and Mycoplasma pneumoniae: a role in asthma pathogenesis?. S L Johnston, R J Martin, Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1729Johnston SL, Martin RJ. Chlamydophila pneumoniae and Mycoplasma pneumoniae: a role in asthma pathogenesis? Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2005;172(9):1078-1089.

The role of bacterial infections in asthma. M Kraft, Clin Chest Med. 212Kraft M. The role of bacterial infections in asthma. Clin Chest Med. 2000;21(2):301-313.

The link between fungi and severe asthma: a summary of the evidence. D W Denning, B R O&apos;driscoll, C M Hogaboam, P Bowyer, R M Niven, Eur Respir J. 273Denning DW, O'Driscoll BR, Hogaboam CM, Bowyer P, Niven RM. The link between fungi and severe asthma: a summary of the evi- dence. Eur Respir J. 2006;27(3):615-626.

Hay fever, hygiene, and household size. D P Strachan, BMJ. 2996710Strachan DP. Hay fever, hygiene, and household size. BMJ. 1989;299(6710):1259-1260.

Corticosteroid therapy and airflow obstruction influence the bronchial microbiome, which is distinct from that of bronchoalveolar lavage in asthmatic airways. D R Denner, N Sangwan, J B Becker, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1375Denner DR, Sangwan N, Becker JB, et al. Corticosteroid therapy and airflow obstruction influence the bronchial microbiome, which is distinct from that of bronchoalveolar lavage in asthmatic airways. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016;137(5):1398-1405.e1393.

Two sampling methods yield distinct microbial signatures in the nasopharynges of asthmatic children. M Perez-Losada, K A Crandall, R J Freishtat, Microbiome. 4125Perez-Losada M, Crandall KA, Freishtat RJ. Two sampling methods yield distinct microbial signatures in the nasopharynges of asth- matic children. Microbiome. 2016;4(1):25.

The respiratory microbiome in bronchial mucosa and secretions from severe IgE-mediated asthma patients. L Millares, G Bermudo, V Pérez-Brocal, BMC Microbiol. 1720Millares L, Bermudo G, Pérez-Brocal V, et al. The respiratory mi- crobiome in bronchial mucosa and secretions from severe IgE-me- diated asthma patients. BMC Microbiol. 2017;17:20.

Bacterial biogeography of adult airways in atopic asthma. Microbiome. J Durack, Y J Huang, S Nariya, 6104Durack J, Huang YJ, Nariya S, et al. Bacterial biogeography of adult airways in atopic asthma. Microbiome. 2018;6(1):104.

Inter-niche and inter-individual variation in gut microbial community assessment using stool, rectal swab, and mucosal samples. R B Jones, X Zhu, E Moan, Sci Rep. 814139Jones RB, Zhu X, Moan E, et al. Inter-niche and inter-individual variation in gut microbial community assessment using stool, rec- tal swab, and mucosal samples. Sci Rep. 2018;8(1):4139.

The influence of proton pump inhibitors and other commonly used medication on the gut microbiota. F Imhann, Vich Vila, A Bonder, M J , Gut Microbes. 84Imhann F, Vich Vila A, Bonder MJ, et al. The influence of proton pump inhibitors and other commonly used medication on the gut microbiota. Gut Microbes. 2017;8(4):351-358.

Proton pump inhibitors alter the composition of the gut microbiota. M A Jackson, J K Goodrich, M-E Maxan, Gut. 655Jackson MA, Goodrich JK, Maxan M-E, et al. Proton pump inhibitors alter the composition of the gut microbiota. Gut. 2016;65(5):749-756.

Limited utility of culture for Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Chlamydophila pneumoniae for diagnosis of respiratory tract infections. R C She, A Thurber, W C Hymas, J Clin Microbiol. 489She RC, Thurber A, Hymas WC, et al. Limited utility of cul- ture for Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Chlamydophila pneumo- niae for diagnosis of respiratory tract infections. J Clin Microbiol. 2010;48(9):3380-3382.

Laboratory diagnosis of Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection. F Daxboeck, R Krause, C Wenisch, Clin Microbiol Infect. 94Daxboeck F, Krause R, Wenisch C. Laboratory diagnosis of Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2003;9(4):263-273.

Standardizing Chlamydia pneumoniae assays: recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (USA) and the Laboratory Centre for Disease Control (Canada). S F Dowell, R W Peeling, J Boman, Clin Infect Dis. 334Dowell SF, Peeling RW, Boman J, et al. Standardizing Chlamydia pneumoniae assays: recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (USA) and the Laboratory Centre for Disease Control (Canada). Clin Infect Dis. 2001;33(4):492-503.

Evaluation of ELISA kits for detection of Mycoplasma pneumoniae-specific IgG, IgA, IgM antibodies on the diagnosis of Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection in children. M Narita, Kansenshogaku Zasshi. 797Narita M. Evaluation of ELISA kits for detection of Mycoplasma pneumoniae-specific IgG, IgA, IgM antibodies on the diagnosis of Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection in children. Kansenshogaku Zasshi. 2005;79(7):457-463.

Increased frequency of detection of Chlamydophila pneumoniae in asthma. G L Biscione, J Corne, A J Chauhan, S L Johnston, Eur Respir J. 245Biscione GL, Corne J, Chauhan AJ, Johnston SL. Increased fre- quency of detection of Chlamydophila pneumoniae in asthma. Eur Respir J. 2004;24(5):745-749.

Detection of Mycoplasma pneumoniae in the airways of adults with chronic asthma. M Kraft, G H Cassell, J E Henson, Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1583Kraft M, Cassell GH, Henson JE, et al. Detection of Mycoplasma pneumoniae in the airways of adults with chronic asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1998;158(3):998-1001.

A link between chronic asthma and chronic infection. R J Martin, M Kraft, H W Chu, E A Berns, G H Cassell, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1074Martin RJ, Kraft M, Chu HW, Berns EA, Cassell GH. A link be- tween chronic asthma and chronic infection. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2001;107(4):595-601.

Evaluation of five real-time PCR assays for detection of Mycoplasma pneumoniae. R Dumke, E Jacobs, J Clin Microbiol. 5211Dumke R, Jacobs E. Evaluation of five real-time PCR assays for detection of Mycoplasma pneumoniae. J Clin Microbiol. 2014;52(11):4078-4081.

Simultaneous detection of Chlamydophila pneumoniae and Mycoplasma pneumoniae by use of molecular beacons in a duplex real-time PCR. K Gullsby, M Storm, K Bondeson, J Clin Microbiol. 462Gullsby K, Storm M, Bondeson K. Simultaneous detection of Chlamydophila pneumoniae and Mycoplasma pneumoniae by use of molecular beacons in a duplex real-time PCR. J Clin Microbiol. 2008;46(2):727-731.

A quantitative map of nucleotide substitution rates in bacterial rRNA. Y Van De Peer, S Chapelle, De Wachter, R , Nucleic Acids Res. 2417Van de Peer Y, Chapelle S, De Wachter R. A quantitative map of nucleotide substitution rates in bacterial rRNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996;24(17):3381-3391.

Analysis of the microbiome: advantages of whole genome shotgun versus 16S amplicon sequencing. R Ranjan, A Rani, A Metwally, H S Mcgee, D L Perkins, Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 4694Ranjan R, Rani A, Metwally A, McGee HS, Perkins DL. Analysis of the microbiome: advantages of whole genome shotgun ver- sus 16S amplicon sequencing. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016;469(4):967-977.

An introduction to microbiome analysis for human biology applications. K R Amato, Am J Hum Biol. 29122931Amato KR. An introduction to microbiome analysis for human biol- ogy applications. Am J Hum Biol. 2017;29(1):e22931.

Performance comparison of Illumina and ion torrent next-generation sequencing platforms for 16S rRNA-based bacterial community profiling. S J Salipante, T Kawashima, C Rosenthal, Appl Environ Microbiol. 8024Salipante SJ, Kawashima T, Rosenthal C, et al. Performance com- parison of Illumina and ion torrent next-generation sequencing platforms for 16S rRNA-based bacterial community profiling. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014;80(24):7583-7591.

Comparison of next-generation sequencing systems. L Liu, Y Li, S Li, J Biomed Biotechnol. 251364Liu L, Li Y, Li S, et al. Comparison of next-generation sequencing systems. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2012;2012:251364.

Large-scale differences in microbial biodiversity discovery between 16S amplicon and shotgun sequencing. M Tessler, J S Neumann, E Afshinnekoo, Sci Rep. 716589Tessler M, Neumann JS, Afshinnekoo E, et al. Large-scale differ- ences in microbial biodiversity discovery between 16S amplicon and shotgun sequencing. Sci Rep. 2017;7(1):6589.

Characterising the respiratory microbiome. R L Watson, E M De Koff, D Bogaert, Eur Respir J. 5321801711Watson RL, de Koff EM, Bogaert D. Characterising the respiratory microbiome. Eur Respir J. 2019;53(2):1801711.

Disordered microbial communities in asthmatic airways. M Hilty, C Burke, H Pedro, PLoS ONE. 518578Hilty M, Burke C, Pedro H, et al. Disordered microbial communities in asthmatic airways. PLoS ONE. 2010;5(1):e8578.

Airway microbiota and bronchial hyperresponsiveness in patients with suboptimally controlled asthma. Y J Huang, C E Nelson, E L Brodie, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1272Huang YJ, Nelson CE, Brodie EL, et al. Airway microbiota and bronchial hyperresponsiveness in patients with suboptimally con- trolled asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011;127(2):372-381.e1-3.

Asthmaassociated differences in microbial composition of induced sputum. P R Marri, D A Stern, A L Wright, D Billheimer, F D Martinez, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1312Marri PR, Stern DA, Wright AL, Billheimer D, Martinez FD. Asthma- associated differences in microbial composition of induced spu- tum. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013;131(2):346-352.e1-3.

Microbial communities in the upper respiratory tract of patients with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. H Park, J W Shin, S G Park, W Kim, PLoS ONE. 910109710Park H, Shin JW, Park SG, Kim W. Microbial communities in the upper respiratory tract of patients with asthma and chronic ob- structive pulmonary disease. PLoS ONE. 2014;9(10):e109710.

The airway microbiome in patients with severe asthma: associations with disease features and severity. Y J Huang, S Nariya, J M Harris, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1364Huang YJ, Nariya S, Harris JM, et al. The airway microbiome in pa- tients with severe asthma: associations with disease features and severity. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015;136(4):874-884.

Airway microbiota in severe asthma and relationship to asthma severity and phenotypes. Q Zhang, M Cox, Z Liang, PLoS ONE. 114152724Zhang Q, Cox M, Liang Z, et al. Airway microbiota in severe asthma and relationship to asthma severity and phenotypes. PLoS ONE. 2016;11(4):e0152724.

Different upper airway microbiome and their functional genes associated with asthma in young adults and elderly individuals. J-J Lee, S-H Kim, M-J Lee, Allergy. 744Lee J-J, Kim S-H, Lee M-J, et al. Different upper airway microbiome and their functional genes associated with asthma in young adults and elderly individuals. Allergy. 2019;74(4):709-719.

Lung microbiome analysis in steroid-naїve asthma patients by using whole sputum. J-W Jung, J-C Choi, J-W Shin, Tuberc Respir Dis (Seoul). 793Jung J-W, Choi J-C, Shin J-W, et al. Lung microbiome analysis in steroid-naїve asthma patients by using whole sputum. Tuberc Respir Dis (Seoul). 2016;79(3):165-178.

Oral candidiasis associated with inhaled corticosteroid use: comparison of fluticasone and beclomethasone. C Fukushima, H Matsuse, S Tomari, Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 906Fukushima C, Matsuse H, Tomari S, et al. Oral candidiasis associated with inhaled corticosteroid use: comparison of fluticasone and be- clomethasone. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2003;90(6):646-651.

Using corticosteroids to reshape the gut microbiome: implications for inflammatory bowel diseases. E Y Huang, T Inoue, V A Leone, Inflamm Bowel Dis. 215Huang EY, Inoue T, Leone VA, et al. Using corticosteroids to re- shape the gut microbiome: implications for inflammatory bowel diseases. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2015;21(5):963-972.

Features of the bronchial bacterial microbiome associated with atopy, asthma, and responsiveness to inhaled corticosteroid treatment. J Durack, S V Lynch, S Nariya, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1401Durack J, Lynch SV, Nariya S, et al. Features of the bronchial bac- terial microbiome associated with atopy, asthma, and responsive- ness to inhaled corticosteroid treatment. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017;140(1):63-75.

Eosinophilic airway inflammation in asthmatic patients is associated with an altered airway microbiome. A Sverrild, P Kiilerich, A Brejnrod, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1402e411Sverrild A, Kiilerich P, Brejnrod A, et al. Eosinophilic airway inflam- mation in asthmatic patients is associated with an altered airway microbiome. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017;140(2):407-417.e411.

The effects of airway microbiome on corticosteroid responsiveness in asthma. E Goleva, L P Jackson, J K Harris, Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 18810Goleva E, Jackson LP, Harris JK, et al. The effects of airway micro- biome on corticosteroid responsiveness in asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013;188(10):1193-1201.

Sputum microbiota in severe asthma patients: relationship to eosinophilic inflammation. N Li, R Qiu, Z Yang, Respir Med. 131Li N, Qiu R, Yang Z, et al. Sputum microbiota in severe asthma patients: relationship to eosinophilic inflammation. Respir Med. 2017;131:192-198.

Bacterial microbiota of the upper respiratory tract and childhood asthma. M Depner, M J Ege, M J Cox, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1393e813Depner M, Ege MJ, Cox MJ, et al. Bacterial microbiota of the upper respiratory tract and childhood asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017;139(3):826-834.e813.

A metagenome-wide association study of gut microbiota in asthma in UK adults. Q I Wang, F Li, B Liang, BMC Microbiol. 181114Wang QI, Li F, Liang B, et al. A metagenome-wide association study of gut microbiota in asthma in UK adults. BMC Microbiol. 2018;18(1):114.

Airway microbiome in different inflammatory phenotypes of asthma: a cross-sectional study in Northeast China. Z Pang, G Wang, P Gibson, Int J Med Sci. 163Pang Z, Wang G, Gibson P, et al. Airway microbiome in different inflammatory phenotypes of asthma: a cross-sectional study in Northeast China. Int J Med Sci. 2019;16(3):477-485.

Inflammatory phenotypes in patients with severe asthma are associated with distinct airway microbiology. S L Taylor, L Leong, J M Choo, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1411e115Taylor SL, Leong L, Choo JM, et al. Inflammatory phenotypes in patients with severe asthma are associated with distinct airway microbiology. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2018;141(1):94-103.e115.

Neutrophilic asthma is associated with increased airway bacterial burden and disordered community composition. X Yang, H Li, Q Ma, Q Zhang, C Wang, Biomed Res Int. 9230234Yang X, Li H, Ma Q, Zhang Q, Wang C. Neutrophilic asthma is as- sociated with increased airway bacterial burden and disordered community composition. Biomed Res Int. 2018;2018:9230234.

Airway dysbiosis: Haemophilus influenzae and Tropheryma in poorly controlled asthma. J L Simpson, J Daly, K J Baines, Eur Respir J. 473Simpson JL, Daly J, Baines KJ, et al. Airway dysbiosis: Haemophilus influenzae and Tropheryma in poorly controlled asthma. Eur Respir J. 2016;47(3):792-800.

Pediatric asthma comprises different phenotypic clusters with unique nasal microbiotas. Microbiome. M Perez-Losada, K J Authelet, C E Hoptay, C Kwak, K A Crandall, R J Freishtat, 6179Perez-Losada M, Authelet KJ, Hoptay CE, Kwak C, Crandall KA, Freishtat RJ. Pediatric asthma comprises different phenotypic clusters with unique nasal microbiotas. Microbiome. 2018;6(1):179.

Biological exacerbation clusters demonstrate asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap with distinct mediator and microbiome profiles. M A Ghebre, P H Pang, S Diver, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1416Ghebre MA, Pang PH, Diver S, et al. Biological exacerbation clus- ters demonstrate asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary dis- ease overlap with distinct mediator and microbiome profiles. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2018;141(6):2027-2036.e2012.

Significant disparities in allergy prevalence and microbiota between the young people in Finnish and Russian Karelia. L Ruokolainen, L Paalanen, A Karkman, Clin Exp Allergy. 475Ruokolainen L, Paalanen L, Karkman A, et al. Significant disparities in allergy prevalence and microbiota between the young people in Finnish and Russian Karelia. Clin Exp Allergy. 2017;47(5):665-674.

The nasal microbiome in asthma. M Fazlollahi, T D Lee, J Andrade, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1423e832Fazlollahi M, Lee TD, Andrade J, et al. The nasal microbiome in asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2018;142(3):834-843.e832.

Extensive impact of non-antibiotic drugs on human gut bacteria. L Maier, M Pruteanu, M Kuhn, Nature. 5557698Maier L, Pruteanu M, Kuhn M, et al. Extensive impact of non-antibi- otic drugs on human gut bacteria. Nature. 2018;555(7698):623-628.

Influence of diet on the gut microbiome and implications for human health. R K Singh, H-W Chang, D I Yan, J Transl Med. 15173Singh RK, Chang H-W, Yan DI, et al. Influence of diet on the gut microbiome and implications for human health. J Transl Med. 2017;15(1):73.

Maturation of the gut microbiome and risk of asthma in childhood. J Stokholm, M J Blaser, J Thorsen, Nat Commun. 91141Stokholm J, Blaser MJ, Thorsen J, et al. Maturation of the gut microbiome and risk of asthma in childhood. Nat Commun. 2018;9(1):141.

Low gut microbiota diversity in early infancy precedes asthma at school age. T R Abrahamsson, H E Jakobsson, A F Andersson, B Bjorksten, L Engstrand, M C Jenmalm, Clin Exp Allergy. 446Abrahamsson TR, Jakobsson HE, Andersson AF, Bjorksten B, Engstrand L, Jenmalm MC. Low gut microbiota diversity in early infancy precedes asthma at school age. Clin Exp Allergy. 2014;44(6):842-850.

infancy microbial and metabolic alterations affect risk of childhood asthma. M-C Arrieta, L T Stiemsma, P A Dimitriu, Sci Transl Med. 7307Arrieta M-C, Stiemsma LT, Dimitriu PA, et al. infancy microbial and metabolic alterations affect risk of childhood asthma. Sci Transl Med. 2015;7(307):307ra152.

Shifts in Lachnospira and Clostridium sp. in the 3-month stool microbiome are associated with preschool age asthma. L T Stiemsma, M-C Arrieta, P A Dimitriu, Clin Sci (Lond). 13023Stiemsma LT, Arrieta M-C, Dimitriu PA, et al. Shifts in Lachnospira and Clostridium sp. in the 3-month stool microbi- ome are associated with preschool age asthma. Clin Sci (Lond). 2016;130(23):2199-2207.

Reduced diversity of the intestinal microbiota during infancy is associated with increased risk of allergic disease at school age. H Bisgaard, N Li, K Bonnelykke, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1283Bisgaard H, Li N, Bonnelykke K, et al. Reduced diversity of the intestinal microbiota during infancy is associated with increased risk of allergic disease at school age. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011;128(3):646-652.e1-5.

The infant nasopharyngeal microbiome impacts severity of lower respiratory infection and risk of asthma development. S Teo, D Mok, K Pham, Cell Host Microbe. 175Teo S, Mok D, Pham K, et al. The infant nasopharyngeal micro- biome impacts severity of lower respiratory infection and risk of asthma development. Cell Host Microbe. 2015;17(5):704-715.

Childhood asthma after bacterial colonization of the airway in neonates. H Bisgaard, M N Hermansen, F Buchvald, N Engl J Med. 35715Bisgaard H, Hermansen MN, Buchvald F, et al. Childhood asthma after bacterial colonization of the airway in neonates. N Engl J Med. 2007;357(15):1487-1495.

Antibiotic use in children is associated with increased risk of asthma. F Marra, C A Marra, K Richardson, Pediatrics. 1233Marra F, Marra CA, Richardson K, et al. Antibiotic use in chil- dren is associated with increased risk of asthma. Pediatrics. 2009;123(3):1003-1010.

Influence of antibiotic use in early childhood on asthma and allergic diseases at age 5. K Yamamoto-Hanada, Yang L Narita, M Saito, H Ohya, Y , Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 1191Yamamoto-Hanada K, Yang L, Narita M, Saito H, Ohya Y. Influence of antibiotic use in early childhood on asthma and allergic diseases at age 5. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2017;119(1):54-58.

Early life antibiotic use and the risk of asthma and asthma exacerbations in children. F Ahmadizar, S Vijverberg, H Arets, Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 285Ahmadizar F, Vijverberg S, Arets H, et al. Early life antibiotic use and the risk of asthma and asthma exacerbations in children. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2017;28(5):430-437.

Family size, infection and atopy: the first decade of the 'hygiene hypothesis'. D P Strachan, Thorax. 551SupplStrachan DP. Family size, infection and atopy: the first decade of the 'hygiene hypothesis'. Thorax. 2000;55(Suppl 1):S2-S10.

The 'hygiene hypothesis' for autoimmune and allergic diseases: an update. H Okada, C Kuhn, H Feillet, J F Bach, Clin Exp Immunol. 1601Okada H, Kuhn C, Feillet H, Bach JF. The 'hygiene hypothesis' for autoimmune and allergic diseases: an update. Clin Exp Immunol. 2010;160(1):1-9.

Exposure to farming in early life and development of asthma and allergy: a cross-sectional survey. J Riedler, C Braun-Fahrländer, W Eder, Lancet. 3589288Riedler J, Braun-Fahrländer C, Eder W, et al. Exposure to farming in early life and development of asthma and allergy: a cross-sec- tional survey. Lancet. 2001;358(9288):1129-1133.

Early exposure to dogs and farm animals and the risk of childhood asthma. T Fall, C Lundholm, A K Örtqvist, JAMA Pediatr. 16911153219Fall T, Lundholm C, Örtqvist AK, et al. Early exposure to dogs and farm animals and the risk of childhood asthma. JAMA Pediatr. 2015;169(11):e153219.

Breastfeeding protects against current asthma up to 6 years of age. K M Silvers, C M Frampton, K Wickens, J Pediatr. 1606e991Silvers KM, Frampton CM, Wickens K, et al. Breastfeeding pro- tects against current asthma up to 6 years of age. J Pediatr. 2012;160(6):991-996.e991.

Inverse association of farm milk consumption with asthma and allergy in rural and suburban populations across Europe. M Waser, K B Michels, C Bieli, Clin Exp Allergy. 375Waser M, Michels KB, Bieli C, et al. Inverse association of farm milk consumption with asthma and allergy in rural and suburban populations across Europe. Clin Exp Allergy. 2007;37(5):661-670.

Consumption of unpasteurized milk and its effects on atopy and asthma in children and adult inhabitants in rural Poland. B Sozanska, N Pearce, K Dudek, P Cullinan, Allergy. 685Sozanska B, Pearce N, Dudek K, Cullinan P. Consumption of unpas- teurized milk and its effects on atopy and asthma in children and adult inhabitants in rural Poland. Allergy. 2013;68(5):644-650.

Japanese guidelines for adult asthma 2017. M Ichinose, H Sugiura, H Nagase, Allergol Int. 662Ichinose M, Sugiura H, Nagase H, et al. Japanese guidelines for adult asthma 2017. Allergol Int. 2017;66(2):163-189.

Diet, gut microbiota and immune responses. K M Maslowski, C R Mackay, Nat Immunol. 121Maslowski KM, Mackay CR. Diet, gut microbiota and immune re- sponses. Nat Immunol. 2011;12(1):5-9.

Microbial 'Old Friends', immunoregulation and stress resilience. G A Rook, C A Lowry, C L Raison, Evol Med Public Health. 20131Rook GA, Lowry CA, Raison CL. Microbial 'Old Friends', im- munoregulation and stress resilience. Evol Med Public Health. 2013;2013(1):46-64.

Time to abandon the hygiene hypothesis: new perspectives on allergic disease, the human microbiome, infectious disease prevention and the role of targeted hygiene. S F Bloomfield, G A Rook, E A Scott, F Shanahan, R Stanwell-Smith, P Turner, Perspect Public Health. 1364Bloomfield SF, Rook GA, Scott EA, Shanahan F, Stanwell-Smith R, Turner P. Time to abandon the hygiene hypothesis: new perspec- tives on allergic disease, the human microbiome, infectious disease prevention and the role of targeted hygiene. Perspect Public Health. 2016;136(4):213-224.

Regulation of short-chain fatty acid production. S Macfarlane, G T Macfarlane, Proc Nutr Soc. 621Macfarlane S, Macfarlane GT. Regulation of short-chain fatty acid production. Proc Nutr Soc. 2003;62(1):67-72.

Role of intestinal bacteria in nutrient metabolism. J H Cummings, G T Macfarlane, JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 216Cummings JH, Macfarlane GT. Role of intestinal bacteria in nutri- ent metabolism. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 1997;21(6):357-365.

Short-chain fatty acids and human colonic function: roles of resistant starch and nonstarch polysaccharides. D L Topping, P M Clifton, Physiol Rev. 813Topping DL, Clifton PM. Short-chain fatty acids and human colonic function: roles of resistant starch and nonstarch polysaccharides. Physiol Rev. 2001;81(3):1031-1064.

Low vegetable intake is associated with allergic asthma and moderate-to-severe airway hyperresponsiveness. J L Protudjer, G P Sevenhuysen, C D Ramsey, A L Kozyrskyj, A B Becker, Pediatr Pulmonol. 4712Protudjer JL, Sevenhuysen GP, Ramsey CD, Kozyrskyj AL, Becker AB. Low vegetable intake is associated with allergic asthma and moderate-to-severe airway hyperresponsiveness. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2012;47(12):1159-1169.

High levels of butyrate and propionate in early life are associated with protection against atopy. C Roduit, R Frei, R Ferstl, Allergy. 744Roduit C, Frei R, Ferstl R, et al. High levels of butyrate and pro- pionate in early life are associated with protection against atopy. Allergy. 2019;74(4):799-809.

Gut microbiota metabolism of dietary fiber influences allergic airway disease and hematopoiesis. A Trompette, E S Gollwitzer, K Yadava, Nat Med. 202Trompette A, Gollwitzer ES, Yadava K, et al. Gut microbiota me- tabolism of dietary fiber influences allergic airway disease and he- matopoiesis. Nat Med. 2014;20(2):159-166.

The role of short-chain fatty acids in the interplay between diet, gut microbiota, and host energy metabolism. G Den Besten, K Van Eunen, A K Groen, K Venema, D-J Reijngoud, B M Bakker, J Lipid Res. 549den Besten G, van Eunen K, Groen AK, Venema K, Reijngoud D-J, Bakker BM. The role of short-chain fatty acids in the interplay be- tween diet, gut microbiota, and host energy metabolism. J Lipid Res. 2013;54(9):2325-2340.

Regulation of inflammatory responses by gut microbiota and chemoattractant receptor GPR43. K M Maslowski, A T Vieira, A Ng, Nature. 4617268Maslowski KM, Vieira AT, Ng A, et al. Regulation of inflamma- tory responses by gut microbiota and chemoattractant receptor GPR43. Nature. 2009;461(7268):1282-1286.

Metabolite-sensing receptors GPR43 and GPR109A facilitate dietary fibre-induced gut homeostasis through regulation of the inflammasome. L Macia, J Tan, A T Vieira, Nat Commun. 66734Macia L, Tan J, Vieira AT, et al. Metabolite-sensing receptors GPR43 and GPR109A facilitate dietary fibre-induced gut homeo- stasis through regulation of the inflammasome. Nat Commun. 2015;6:6734.

Soluble fibre meal challenge reduces airway inflammation and expression of GPR43 and GPR41 in asthma. I Halnes, K J Baines, B S Berthon, L K Macdonald-Wicks, P G Gibson, L G Wood, Nutrients. 9157Halnes I, Baines KJ, Berthon BS, MacDonald-Wicks LK, Gibson PG, Wood LG. Soluble fibre meal challenge reduces airway inflam- mation and expression of GPR43 and GPR41 in asthma. Nutrients. 2017;9(1):57.

Inhibition of histone-deacetylase activity by short-chain fatty acids and some polyphenol metabolites formed in the colon. M Waldecker, T Kautenburger, H Daumann, C Busch, D Schrenk, J Nutr Biochem. 199Waldecker M, Kautenburger T, Daumann H, Busch C, Schrenk D. Inhibition of histone-deacetylase activity by short-chain fatty acids and some polyphenol metabolites formed in the colon. J Nutr Biochem. 2008;19(9):587-593.

Histone deacetylases and their role in asthma. S G Royce, T C Karagiannis, J Asthma. 492Royce SG, Karagiannis TC. Histone deacetylases and their role in asthma. J Asthma. 2012;49(2):121-128.

Histone deacetylases and their inhibitors: new implications for asthma and chronic respiratory conditions. S G Royce, T C Karagiannis, Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 141Royce SG, Karagiannis TC. Histone deacetylases and their inhib- itors: new implications for asthma and chronic respiratory condi- tions. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014;14(1):44-48.

Commensal-induced regulatory T cells mediate protection against pathogen-stimulated NF-kappaB activation. C O&apos;mahony, P Scully, D O&apos;mahony, PLoS Pathog. 481000112O'Mahony C, Scully P, O'Mahony D, et al. Commensal-induced regulatory T cells mediate protection against pathogen-stimulated NF-kappaB activation. PLoS Pathog. 2008;4(8):e1000112.

Lactobacillus reuteri-induced regulatory T cells protect against an allergic airway response in mice. K Karimi, M D Inman, J Bienenstock, P Forsythe, Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1793Karimi K, Inman MD, Bienenstock J, Forsythe P. Lactobacillus re- uteri-induced regulatory T cells protect against an allergic airway response in mice. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009;179(3):186-193.

Treg induction by a rationally selected mixture of Clostridia strains from the human microbiota. K Atarashi, T Tanoue, K Oshima, Nature. 5007461Atarashi K, Tanoue T, Oshima K, et al. Treg induction by a rationally selected mixture of Clostridia strains from the human microbiota. Nature. 2013;500(7461):232-236.

Inhibition of dectin-1 signaling ameliorates colitis by inducing lactobacillus-mediated regulatory T cell expansion in the intestine. C E Tang, T Kamiya, Y Liu, Cell Host Microbe. 182Tang CE, Kamiya T, Liu Y, et al. Inhibition of dectin-1 signaling ame- liorates colitis by inducing lactobacillus-mediated regulatory T cell expansion in the intestine. Cell Host Microbe. 2015;18(2):183-197.

Probiotics ameliorate recurrent Th1-mediated murine colitis by inducing IL-10 and IL-10-dependent TGF-beta-bearing regulatory cells. Di Giacinto, C Marinaro, M Sanchez, M Strober, W Boirivant, M , J Immunol. 1746Di Giacinto C, Marinaro M, Sanchez M, Strober W, Boirivant M. Probiotics ameliorate recurrent Th1-mediated murine colitis by inducing IL-10 and IL-10-dependent TGF-beta-bearing regulatory cells. J Immunol. 2005;174(6):3237-3246.

Bifidobacterium infantis 35624 administration induces Foxp3 T regulatory cells in human peripheral blood: potential role for myeloid and plasmacytoid dendritic cells. P Konieczna, D Groeger, M Ziegler, Gut. 613Konieczna P, Groeger D, Ziegler M, et al. Bifidobacterium infantis 35624 administration induces Foxp3 T regulatory cells in human peripheral blood: potential role for myeloid and plasmacytoid den- dritic cells. Gut. 2012;61(3):354-366.

The surface-associated exopolysaccharide of bifidobacterium longum 35624 plays an essential role in dampening host proinflammatory responses and repressing local TH17 responses. E Schiavi, M Gleinser, E Molloy, Appl Environ Microbiol. 8224Schiavi E, Gleinser M, Molloy E, et al. The surface-associated exopolysaccharide of bifidobacterium longum 35624 plays an essential role in dampening host proinflammatory responses and repressing local TH17 responses. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2016;82(24):7185-7196.

Bacterial capsular polysaccharide prevents the onset of asthma through T-cell activation. J L Johnson, M B Jones, B A Cobb, Glycobiology. 254Johnson JL, Jones MB, Cobb BA. Bacterial capsular polysac- charide prevents the onset of asthma through T-cell activation. Glycobiology. 2015;25(4):368-375.

The relationship between bifidobacteria and allergic asthma and/or allergic dermatitis: a prospective study of 0-3 years-old children in Turkey. H K Akay, H Bahar Tokman, N Hatipoglu, Anaerobe. 28Akay HK, Bahar Tokman H, Hatipoglu N, et al. The relationship between bifidobacteria and allergic asthma and/or allergic der- matitis: a prospective study of 0-3 years-old children in Turkey. Anaerobe. 2014;28:98-103.

Nasopharyngeal lactobacillus is associated with a reduced risk of childhood wheezing illnesses following acute respiratory syncytial virus infection in infancy. C Rosas-Salazar, M H Shilts, A Tovchigrechko, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1425e9Rosas-Salazar C, Shilts MH, Tovchigrechko A, et al. Nasopharyngeal lactobacillus is associated with a reduced risk of childhood wheez- ing illnesses following acute respiratory syncytial virus infection in infancy. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2018;142(5):1447-1456.e9.

Synergistic proinflammatory responses induced by polymicrobial colonization of epithelial surfaces. A J Ratner, E S Lysenko, M N Paul, J N Weiser, Proc Natl Acad Sci. 1029Ratner AJ, Lysenko ES, Paul MN, Weiser JN. Synergistic proinflam- matory responses induced by polymicrobial colonization of epi- thelial surfaces. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005;102(9):3429-3434.

Integrating microbial and host transcriptomics to characterize asthma-associated microbial communities. E Castro-Nallar, Y Shen, R J Freishtat, BMC Med Genomics. 850Castro-Nallar E, Shen Y, Freishtat RJ, et al. Integrating microbial and host transcriptomics to characterize asthma-associated micro- bial communities. BMC Med Genomics. 2015;8:50.

Dual transcriptomic profiling of host and microbiota during health and disease in pediatric asthma. M Perez-Losada, E Castro-Nallar, M L Bendall, R J Freishtat, K A Crandall, PLoS ONE. 106131819Perez-Losada M, Castro-Nallar E, Bendall ML, Freishtat RJ, Crandall KA. Dual transcriptomic profiling of host and micro- biota during health and disease in pediatric asthma. PLoS ONE. 2015;10(6):e0131819.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma-associated Proteobacteria, but not commensal Prevotella spp., promote Tolllike receptor 2-independent lung inflammation and pathology. J M Larsen, H S Musavian, T M Butt, C Ingvorsen, A H Thysen, S Brix, Immunology. 1442Larsen JM, Musavian HS, Butt TM, Ingvorsen C, Thysen AH, Brix S. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma-associated Proteobacteria, but not commensal Prevotella spp., promote Toll- like receptor 2-independent lung inflammation and pathology. Immunology. 2015;144(2):333-342.

Expert consensus document. The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics consensus statement on the scope and appropriate use of the term probiotic. C Hill, F Guarner, G Reid, Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 118Hill C, Guarner F, Reid G, et al. Expert consensus document. The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics consensus statement on the scope and appropriate use of the term probiotic. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014;11(8):506-514.

Expert consensus document: The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics (ISAPP) consensus statement on the definition and scope of prebiotics. G R Gibson, R Hutkins, M E Sanders, Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 148Gibson GR, Hutkins R, Sanders ME, et al. Expert consensus doc- ument: The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics (ISAPP) consensus statement on the definition and scope of prebiotics. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;14(8):491-502.

Oral treatment with probiotics reduces allergic symptoms in ovalbumin-sensitized mice: a bacterial strain comparative study. S Hougee, A Vriesema, S C Wijering, Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 1512Hougee S, Vriesema A, Wijering SC, et al. Oral treatment with pro- biotics reduces allergic symptoms in ovalbumin-sensitized mice: a bacterial strain comparative study. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2010;151(2):107-117.

Bifidobacterium breve and Lactobacillus rhamnosus treatment is as effective as budesonide at reducing inflammation in a murine model for chronic asthma. S Sagar, M E Morgan, S I Chen, Respir Res. 1546Sagar S, Morgan ME, Chen SI, et al. Bifidobacterium breve and Lactobacillus rhamnosus treatment is as effective as budesonide at reducing inflammation in a murine model for chronic asthma. Respir Res. 2014;15:46.

Intranasal administration of probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG prevents birch pollen-induced allergic asthma in a murine model. I Spacova, M I Petrova, A Fremau, Allergy. 74Spacova I, Petrova MI, Fremau A, et al. Intranasal administration of probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG prevents birch pollen-in- duced allergic asthma in a murine model. Allergy. 2019;74:100-110.

Prophylactic Bifidobacterium adolescentis ATTCC 15703 supplementation reduces partially allergic airway disease in Balb/c but not in C57BL/6 mice. M C Casaro, A R Crisma, A T Vieira, Benef Microbes. 93Casaro MC, Crisma AR, Vieira AT, et al. Prophylactic Bifidobacterium adolescentis ATTCC 15703 supplementation re- duces partially allergic airway disease in Balb/c but not in C57BL/6 mice. Benef Microbes. 2018;9(3):465-476.

Probiotic treatment during neonatal age provides optimal protection against experimental asthma through the modulation of microbiota and T cells. C F Nunes, J S Nogueira, P Vianna, Int Immunol. 304Nunes CF, Nogueira JS, Vianna P, et al. Probiotic treatment during neonatal age provides optimal protection against experimen- tal asthma through the modulation of microbiota and T cells. Int Immunol. 2018;30(4):155-169.

Long term prevention of allergic lung inflammation in a mouse model of asthma by CpG oligodeoxynucleotides. S Sur, J S Wild, B K Choudhury, N Sur, R Alam, D M Klinman, J Immunol. 16210Sur S, Wild JS, Choudhury BK, Sur N, Alam R, Klinman DM. Long term prevention of allergic lung inflammation in a mouse model of asthma by CpG oligodeoxynucleotides. J Immunol. 1999;162(10):6284-6293.

Regulation of murine airway eosinophilia and Th2 cells by antigen-conjugated CpG oligodeoxynucleotides as a novel antigen-specific immunomodulator. H Shirota, K Sano, T Kikuchi, G Tamura, K Shirato, J Immunol. 16411Shirota H, Sano K, Kikuchi T, Tamura G, Shirato K. Regulation of murine airway eosinophilia and Th2 cells by antigen-conjugated CpG oligodeoxynucleotides as a novel antigen-specific immuno- modulator. J Immunol. 2000;164(11):5575-5582.

CpG-oligodeoxynucleotides inhibit airway remodeling in a murine model of chronic asthma. V V Jain, K Kitagaki, T Businga, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1106Jain VV, Kitagaki K, Businga T, et al. CpG-oligodeoxynucleotides inhibit airway remodeling in a murine model of chronic asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2002;110(6):867-872.

Treatment of established asthma in a murine model using CpG oligodeoxynucleotides. J N Kline, K Kitagaki, T R Businga, V V Jain, Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2831Kline JN, Kitagaki K, Businga TR, Jain VV. Treatment of established asthma in a murine model using CpG oligodeoxynucleotides. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2002;283(1):L170-179.

Oral administration of CpG-ODNs suppresses antigen-induced asthma in mice. K Kitagaki, T R Businga, J N Kline, Clin Exp Immunol. 1432Kitagaki K, Businga TR, Kline JN. Oral administration of CpG- ODNs suppresses antigen-induced asthma in mice. Clin Exp Immunol. 2006;143(2):249-259.

Adjuvanted rush immunotherapy using CpG oligodeoxynucleotides in experimental feline allergic asthma. C R Reinero, L A Cohn, C Delgado, C M Spinka, E K Schooley, A E Declue, Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1213-4Reinero CR, Cohn LA, Delgado C, Spinka CM, Schooley EK, DeClue AE. Adjuvanted rush immunotherapy using CpG oligode- oxynucleotides in experimental feline allergic asthma. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2008;121(3-4):241-250.

Immunostimulatory oligonucleotides attenuate airways remodeling in allergic monkeys. M V Fanucchi, E S Schelegle, G L Baker, Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 17011Fanucchi MV, Schelegle ES, Baker GL, et al. Immunostimulatory oligonucleotides attenuate airways remodeling in allergic mon- keys. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004;170(11):1153-1157.

Nanoparticle conjugation enhances the immunomodulatory effects of intranasally delivered CpG in house dust mite-allergic mice. M Ballester, L Jeanbart, A De Titta, Sci Rep. 514274Ballester M, Jeanbart L, de Titta A, et al. Nanoparticle conjugation enhances the immunomodulatory effects of intranasally delivered CpG in house dust mite-allergic mice. Sci Rep. 2015;5:14274.

In vitro and in vivo stimulation of Toll-like receptor 9 by CpG oligodeoxynucleotides incorporated into polypod-like DNA nanostructures. Y Takahashi, T Maezawa, Y Araie, Y Takahashi, Y Takakura, M Nishikawa, J Pharm Sci. 1069Takahashi Y, Maezawa T, Araie Y, Takahashi Y, Takakura Y, Nishikawa M. In vitro and in vivo stimulation of Toll-like receptor 9 by CpG oligodeoxynucleotides incorporated into polypod-like DNA nanostructures. J Pharm Sci. 2017;106(9):2457-2462.

Dietary galacto-oligosaccharides prevent airway eosinophilia and hyperresponsiveness in a murine house dust mite-induced asthma model. K Verheijden, L Willemsen, S Braber, Respir Res. 1617Verheijden K, Willemsen L, Braber S, et al. Dietary galacto-oligo- saccharides prevent airway eosinophilia and hyperresponsiveness in a murine house dust mite-induced asthma model. Respir Res. 2015;16:17.

Regulatory T cell depletion abolishes the protective effect of dietary galacto-oligosaccharides on eosinophilic airway inflammation in house dust mite-induced asthma in mice. K Verheijden, S Braber, T Leusink-Muis, J Nutr. 1464Verheijden K, Braber S, Leusink-Muis T, et al. Regulatory T cell depletion abolishes the protective effect of dietary galacto-oli- gosaccharides on eosinophilic airway inflammation in house dust mite-induced asthma in mice. J Nutr. 2015;146(4):831-837.

The combination of Bifidobacterium breve with non-digestible oligosaccharides suppresses airway inflammation in a murine model for chronic asthma. S Sagar, A P Vos, M E Morgan, Biochim Biophys Acta. 18424Sagar S, Vos AP, Morgan ME, et al. The combination of Bifidobacterium breve with non-digestible oligosaccharides sup- presses airway inflammation in a murine model for chronic asthma. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014;1842(4):573-583.

The development of allergic inflammation in a murine house dust mite asthma model is suppressed by synbiotic mixtures of non-digestible oligosaccharides and Bifidobacterium breve M-16V. K Verheijden, L Willemsen, S Braber, Eur J Nutr. 553Verheijden K, Willemsen L, Braber S, et al. The development of allergic inflammation in a murine house dust mite asthma model is suppressed by synbiotic mixtures of non-digestible oligosaccharides and Bifidobacterium breve M-16V. Eur J Nutr. 2016;55(3):1141-1151.

Cow milk allergy symptoms are reduced in mice fed dietary synbiotics during oral sensitization with whey. B Schouten, B Van Esch, G A Hofman, J Nutr. 1397Schouten B, van Esch B, Hofman GA, et al. Cow milk allergy symp- toms are reduced in mice fed dietary synbiotics during oral sensiti- zation with whey. J Nutr. 2009;139(7):1398-1403.

Probiotic supplementation during pregnancy or infancy for the prevention of asthma and wheeze: systematic review and meta-analysis. M B Azad, J G Coneys, A L Kozyrskyj, BMJ. 3476471Azad MB, Coneys JG, Kozyrskyj AL, et al. Probiotic supple- mentation during pregnancy or infancy for the prevention of asthma and wheeze: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2013;347:f6471.

Probiotic administration in early life, atopy, and asthma: a metaanalysis of clinical trials. N Elazab, A Mendy, J Gasana, E R Vieira, A Quizon, E Forno, Pediatrics. 1323Elazab N, Mendy A, Gasana J, Vieira ER, Quizon A, Forno E. Probiotic administration in early life, atopy, and asthma: a meta- analysis of clinical trials. Pediatrics. 2013;132(3):e666-676.

Recommending oral probiotics to reduce winter antibiotic prescriptions in people with asthma: a pragmatic randomized controlled trial. T D Smith, H Watt, L Gunn, J Car, R J Boyle, Ann Fam Med. 145Smith TD, Watt H, Gunn L, Car J, Boyle RJ. Recommending oral probiotics to reduce winter antibiotic prescriptions in people with asthma: a pragmatic randomized controlled trial. Ann Fam Med. 2016;14(5):422-430.

Delayed gut microbiota development in high-risk for asthma infants is temporarily modifiable by Lactobacillus supplementation. J Durack, N E Kimes, D L Lin, Nat Commun. 91707Durack J, Kimes NE, Lin DL, et al. Delayed gut microbiota devel- opment in high-risk for asthma infants is temporarily modifiable by Lactobacillus supplementation. Nat Commun. 2018;9(1):707.

Use of A-type CpG oligodeoxynucleotides as an adjuvant in allergen-specific immunotherapy in humans: a phase I/IIa clinical trial. G Senti, P Johansen, S Haug, Clin Exp Allergy. 394Senti G, Johansen P, Haug S, et al. Use of A-type CpG oligode- oxynucleotides as an adjuvant in allergen-specific immuno- therapy in humans: a phase I/IIa clinical trial. Clin Exp Allergy. 2009;39(4):562-570.

The novel TLR-9 agonist QbG10 shows clinical efficacy in persistent allergic asthma. K-M Beeh, F Kanniess, F Wagner, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1313Beeh K-M, Kanniess F, Wagner F, et al. The novel TLR-9 agonist QbG10 shows clinical efficacy in persistent allergic asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013;131(3):866-874.

Prebiotics for the prevention of allergies: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. C Cuello-Garcia, A Fiocchi, R Pawankar, Clin Exp Allergy. 4711Cuello-Garcia C, Fiocchi A, Pawankar R, et al. Prebiotics for the pre- vention of allergies: A systematic review and meta-analysis of ran- domized controlled trials. Clin Exp Allergy. 2017;47(11):1468-1477.

Crossspecies comparisons of host genetic associations with the microbiome. J K Goodrich, E R Davenport, J L Waters, A G Clark, R E Ley, Science. 3526285Goodrich JK, Davenport ER, Waters JL, Clark AG, Ley RE. Cross- species comparisons of host genetic associations with the micro- biome. Science. 2016;352(6285):532-535.

Crosstalk between the microbiome and epigenome: messages from bugs. Y Qin, P A Wade, J Biochem. 1632Qin Y, Wade PA. Crosstalk between the microbiome and epig- enome: messages from bugs. J Biochem. 2018;163(2):105-112.

Interplay between the human gut microbiome and host metabolism. A Visconti, Le Roy, C I Rosa, F , 561787Visconti A, Le Roy CI, Rosa F, et al. Interplay between the human gut microbiome and host metabolism. 2019:561787.

Thinking bigger: How early-life environmental exposures shape the gut microbiome and influence the development of asthma and allergic disease. H Sbihi, R C Boutin, C Cutler, M Suen, B B Finlay, S E Turvey, 10.1111/all.13812Allergy. 2019Sbihi H, Boutin RC, Cutler C, Suen M, Finlay BB, Turvey SE. Thinking bigger: How early-life environmental exposures shape the gut microbiome and influence the development of asthma and allergic disease. Allergy. 2019: 1-13. https ://doi.org/10.1111/ all.13812

Gut microbiota relationships to lung function and adult asthma phenotype: a pilot study. L Begley, S Madapoosi, K Opron, BMJ Open Respir Res. 51324Begley L, Madapoosi S, Opron K, et al. Gut microbiota relation- ships to lung function and adult asthma phenotype: a pilot study. BMJ Open Respir Res. 2018;5(1):e000324.

Gut microbiota components are associated with fixed airway obstruction in asthmatic patients living in the tropics. E Buendia, J Zakzuk, H San-Juan-Vergara, E Zurek, N J Ajami, L Caraballo, Sci Rep. 819582Buendia E, Zakzuk J, San-Juan-Vergara H, Zurek E, Ajami NJ, Caraballo L. Gut microbiota components are associated with fixed airway obstruction in asthmatic patients living in the tropics. Sci Rep. 2018;8(1):9582.

Association of nasal microbiome and asthma control in patients with chronic rhinosinusitis. H J Yang, P S Losavio, P A Engen, Clin Exp Allergy. Yang HJ, LoSavio PS, Engen PA, et al. Association of nasal micro- biome and asthma control in patients with chronic rhinosinusitis. Clin Exp Allergy. 2018.

Lower airway microbiota and mycobiota in children with severe asthma. D L Goldman, Z Chen, V Shankar, M Tyberg, A Vicencio, R Burk, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1412e807Goldman DL, Chen Z, Shankar V, Tyberg M, Vicencio A, Burk R. Lower airway microbiota and mycobiota in children with severe asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2018;141(2):808-811.e807.

Comparison of oropharyngeal microbiota from children with asthma and cystic fibrosis. S Boutin, M Depner, M Stahl, Mediators Inflamm. 2017Boutin S, Depner M, Stahl M, et al. Comparison of oropharyngeal microbiota from children with asthma and cystic fibrosis. Mediators Inflamm. 2017;2017:1-10.

Comparison study of oropharyngeal microbiota in case of bronchial asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in different severity levels. Vestn Ross Akad Med Nauk. L M Ogorodova, S V Fedosenko, A S Popenko, 70Ogorodova LM, Fedosenko SV, Popenko AS, et al. Comparison study of oropharyngeal microbiota in case of bronchial asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in different severity levels. Vestn Ross Akad Med Nauk. 2015;70(6):669-678.

Potentially pathogenic airway bacteria and neutrophilic inflammation in treatment resistant severe asthma. B J Green, S Wiriyachaiporn, C Grainge, PLoS ONE. 96100645Green BJ, Wiriyachaiporn S, Grainge C, et al. Potentially patho- genic airway bacteria and neutrophilic inflammation in treatment resistant severe asthma. PLoS ONE. 2014;9(6):e100645.

Oral microbiota maturation during the first 7 years of life in relation to allergy development. M Dzidic, T R Abrahamsson, A Artacho, M C Collado, A Mira, M C Jenmalm, Allergy. 7310Dzidic M, Abrahamsson TR, Artacho A, Collado MC, Mira A, Jenmalm MC. Oral microbiota maturation during the first 7 years of life in relation to allergy development. Allergy. 2018;73(10):2000-2011.

Nasopharyngeal microbiome diversity changes over time in children with asthma. M Perez-Losada, L Alamri, K A Crandall, R J Freishtat, PLoS ONE. 121170543Perez-Losada M, Alamri L, Crandall KA, Freishtat RJ. Nasopharyngeal microbiome diversity changes over time in chil- dren with asthma. PLoS ONE. 2017;12(1):e0170543.

Neonatal gut microbiota associates with childhood multisensitized atopy and T cell differentiation. K E Fujimura, A R Sitarik, S Havstad, Nat Med. 2210Fujimura KE, Sitarik AR, Havstad S, et al. Neonatal gut microbiota associates with childhood multisensitized atopy and T cell differ- entiation. Nat Med. 2016;22(10):1187-1191.

Additional supporting information may be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of the article. How to cite this article. S U Pp O Rti N G I N Fo R M Ati O N ; Abdel-Aziz, M I Vijverberg, Sjh Neerincx, A H Kraneveld, A D Maitland-Van Der Zee, A H , 10.1111/cea.13444Clin Exp Allergy. 49The crosstalk between microbiome and asthma: Exploring associations and challengesS U PP O RTI N G I N FO R M ATI O N Additional supporting information may be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of the article. How to cite this article: Abdel-Aziz MI, Vijverberg SJH, Neerincx AH, Kraneveld AD, Maitland-van der Zee AH. The crosstalk between microbiome and asthma: Exploring associations and challenges. Clin Exp Allergy. 2019;49:1067- 1086. https ://doi.org/10.1111/cea.13444