Informational Resources of Administering Regional Development in the System of Political Engineering


Pavel Zayats pavelzajats@gmail.com 
The Southern Federal University
105/42, Bolshaya Sadovaya Str344006Rostov-on-DonRussia

Oxana Posukhova 
The Southern Federal University


Diana Filyushkina 
The Pyatigorsk State Linguistic University


Informational Resources of Administering Regional Development in the System of Political Engineering
2039-2117 (online)8F92A1EE827FBB68735A3698BA9B476210.5901/mjss.2015.v6n4s2p519political engineeringpolitical administrationadministration of regional developmentinformation resourcesadministrative model
The article deals with the topical issues of administering regional development; the qualitative characteristics of information resources are analyzed, their effectiveness in the system of political engineering is interpreted.Therefore, while solving the above problem it is necessary: first, to examine 'the information field', 'the information space' and its components in the system of political engineering; second, to comprehend cognitively information as a social and administrative resource of state information policy and to fix the state of the information space of the regional administrative development.The article also reveals the key aspects of formation of the information regulation administrative model of managing system of regional development.The authors conclude that the formation and development of a single coherent system of regional information resources is the backbone factor of state information policy aimed at integration of information space.

Introduction 1.

The process of effective political administration of regional development is built on management of information resources on the basis of technologies and methods of political engineering as a set of objects with their relations and attributes (Hall, 1962).

Information flows management is manifested in the ability to create and control informational messages, send them to the desired point of application of the political will of various regional actors (Zayats, 2013).

New information technologies provide virtually unlimited opportunities for the information policy of administrative agencies at the regional level.This conditions the need to master the technological skills of pursuing information policy by regional bodies of state and municipal government -the organization and management of internal and external flows information for information exchange between the authorities and the public (Posukhova and Zayats, 2014).

Theoretical and methodological basis of the article is formed by the polytological, legal and social works and regulations which disclose genesis, essence, meaning and ways of regional development as well as work to interpret informational resources in the system of political engineering.

The paper is based on general scientific principles of knowledge of socio-political phenomena, primarily, principles of systemacy and integrity.The works of N. Wiener and L. von Bertalanffy had a considerable impact.The systemic view stimulates the search for unconventional approaches to the improvement of methodology of regional development analysis in the coordinates of processes of federalization and regionalization as well as of working out of optimized model of using informational resources at the regional level.

While studying the nature of political engineering, the heuristic potential was found in the ideas by A. Giddens, I. Wallerstein, P. Sorokin, the ideas of social typology by P. Bourdieu, "matrix of statehood" by Francis Fukuyama, "dynamic stability of social systems" by N. Luhmann.

Methodological basis of the article if formed by systematic as well as structural and functional methods which allow analyzing the characteristics of informational resources' effect on the regional development, and those having allowed analyzing principles of organization and functioning of the administration model.The paper uses institutional and functional method which allows studying the system of regional administration of modern federative state and its purpose.

The article aims at demonstrating the potential of using informational resources of the regional development in the system of political engineering in the modern federative state.To achieve the goal, the following research tasks were set: 1) to identify the meaning content of the analysis of cognitive categories 'information' and 'informational resources' in the humanitarian knowledge; 2) to characterize engineering as research technique /method/ which is used in the condition of social uncertainty and find out its potential in the political sphere; 3) to interpret the nature of informational and communication infrastructure in the system of public administration and analyze its macroelements /parameters/: informational field and informational space as system-forming factors of regional development in the system of political engineering.


Research Findings 2.

Information is a human activity consisting of four interdependent structural elements: the subject of information production (a person, a subject of political relations) information resource object of focus (a person, the object of political relations) information product (Morgan, 1963).

Provided that any sufficiently complete definition in the Humanities able to cover the whole range of characteristics of the system, becomes difficult to understand cognitively and loses its and practical value, the semantic content of the category of "information" is that the information resources of regional development can be processed into information products that will serve as a specific goal-setting (Jordan, 1968).

Given that uncertainty is, first, a necessary and useful feature of most social systems, and, secondly, the main parameter by which they are differentiated, and the factor causing pulsating impermanence, the object of application information efforts of management bodies is only inhabitant of the region which, in turn, acts also as a subject -producer of information (Katz, 1974).

Engineering is a research technique designing technology, techniques and methods of analysis of specified object through building of his ideal (holistic) model by determining clear boundaries of qualitative and quantitative characteristics of the object being studied.

Theoretic fundamental level of engineering synonymizes it with analysis as a whole and covers the basic conceptual researches of the socio-political sphere, its structural elements in statics and dynamics.Operational and instrumental level refers to engineering of technologies and methods to systematize the empirical material.As part of the empirical and custom interpretation of engineering the fore is taken not by building of the fundamental predictive theory and not by empirical data collection but by manipulative ways of assessing and solving the problem for a specific customer (Zayats and Posukhova, 2013).

It is suggested to combine theoretical-and-fundamental and operational-and-instrumental levels of engineering and objectify them through system units.The main tools of engineering are a system analysis (Zayats, 2014).

Independence of mass media from ideological control of state and legal regulation of these relations is extremely important in modern Russia.But the problem of understanding the relations of mass media and a citizen in the political administration system is no less important.

Under the coordination of regional mass media the bodies of state and municipal government should remember that non-government information agencies are created with two goals: either to express interests and promote values of the founders, or to make money.A journalist in the modern world is not always available (Pozner, 2013).

It should be noted that within the political engineering the system unit involves the idea that each element of the system has its own border environment where certain social transformations occur.Environment as a source of input is the lead component of the system which qualitatively defines its nature.Localization of environment is carried out during the stage of system design or transformation of its parameters.Information environment is closely linked with the social environment and depends on the personal conduct of the individual.It has unique system characteristics as a source of system input: variability (rate of change of the state), the range of changes in the environment, inertia (the range in which the environment is determined only by the action of its own system), as well as the allowable range of changes in the environment management made by the system (Alexander and Cooperband, 1985).

The region has an information field -the totality of existing information required for social interaction.Its sources and carriers are bodies of state and municipal government, business entities, information centers, mass media, which form the information space (Beardwell and Holden, 1997).

Information space is a sphere of distribution and functioning of social information (Harris, 1997).

The main components of the information space are information resources and information infrastructure.Information resources are a holistic set of individual documents and document sets in information systems.Information infrastructure is a system of organizational structures which ensure operation and development of the information space in the region and means of information exchange (Shaw, 1996).

The nature of the information space and its use fundamentally depends, of course, on the value attached to information as a resource by regional governance structures.

Within the framework of political engineering homogeneous components of solutions to problems of information policy are combined into single systems structuring the information space of the region into a single unit and determining the system backbone factors of the state information policy at the regional level.

Violation of the unity and integrity of even one of the subsystems of management will lead to violation of the unity and integrity of the whole information space of the state (Zayats, 2014).

The basic contradiction in the dissemination of information is freedom of information and the need to limit it (Przeworski et al. 2000).

In the political system both controlled (directed) and not controlled information processes take place (Ilyin, 1997).The distinction between them is rather relative.Purposeful manipulation of people's minds is the main characteristics of the political informing of citizens by the state and municipal government bodies (Kara-Murza, 2010).Moreover, the direction and the emotional coloring of information flows allow us to judge the value orientations of people in the region, their sustainability and preference.

The bottom line, in terms of political engineering as a system methodology, is the formation of relevant regional information resource base by state and municipal government bodies.

Unity and interrelatedness of regional information resources is a necessary condition to ensure rationality, unity and integrity of regional information space.

Formation and development of a single coherent system of regional information resources is a backbone factor of state information policy aimed at the integration of the information space.


Conclusions


3.

The unique feature of the market of information products and services at the regional level in modern Russia is that currently the main and performer and consumer is the government through its agencies, organizations and institutions.Such one-sided orientation consumer market orientation seriously limits opportunities of its development and leads to deformation of the information space through the development of information-and-legal sphere of state and municipal authorities at a faster pace compared to the communicative sphere of quasi-civil society.

The essential feature of a regional information market is its heterogeneity across regions due to the traditional for Russian development from the center to the regions and priority development in urban areas which are the largest scientific and industrial centers.Such market heterogeneity generates territorial unevenness of the information space deforming the space and threatening its integrity.

Information and communicative infrastructure in the regional administration system occupies a special place among the aggregated social infrastructures, as it is this infrastructure that plays a decisive role in the organizational and technological support both of unity and integrity of the information and legal space of the region and its successful social integration.

The need for a cognitive understanding of this problem in the context of the objective necessity of information and communication support of management decisions and reporting them to the primary customer -the inhabitants of the region -increases sharply.

The scientific and practical s well as theoretical significance of the article is conditioned by the topicality of the problem of using innovative methods of interpreting informational resources in the system of regional development administration.

The materials obtained in the course of study may be used in the educational process at the magistrate level, as well as during the development of training course on theoretical and methodological range of problems and public administration.

The authors' conclusions and theoretical development may be applied during the development of regional programs of social monitoring of the effectiveness of state and municipal administration systems in the federative state.
 MCSER Publishing, Rome-Italy Vol 6 No 4 S2July 2015
ISSN 2039-9340 (print)Mediterranean Journal of Social Sciences MCSER Publishing, July 2015
System training and research in team behavior. L T Alexander, A S Cooperband, 1985Santa Monica

Human Resources Management. A contemporary perspective. I Beardwell, L Holden, 1997London

Methodology for System Engineering. A D Hall, 1962Princeton

Human Resources management. A practical approach. M Harris, Orlando. 1997

M V Ilyin, Slova i smysly. Opyt opisaniya klyuchevykh politicheskikh ponyatiy. Moskva. 1997

N Jordan, Theses in Speculative Psychology. Tavistock, London1968

S G Kara-Murza, Manipulyatsiya soznaniem. Moskva. 2010813

Indeterminacy in the Structure of system. F E Katz, 1974New York

Human Engineering Guide to Equipment Design. C T Morgan, 1963New York

Social Engineering as a mechanism of optimization of human resources management in Rostov region. O Posukhova, P Zayats, Middle-East Journal of Scientific Research. 192014

V V Pozner, Proshchanie s illyuziyami. Moskva. 2013188

A Przeworski, M Alvarez, J Cheibub, F Limongi, Democracy and Development: Political Institutions and Well-Being in the World. Cambridge2000132

Customer -inspired quality. James G Shaw, 1996San Francisco

Inzhiniringovoe konstruirovanie v oblasti gumanitarnogo znaniya: dopustimost' ispol'zovaniya. Vestnik Rossiyskoy akademii estestvennykh nauk. P V Zayats, 2013341

Engineering of Political Party Systems: Experience of Methodological Designing in Socio-Humanitarian Knowledge. P Zayats, O Posukhova, World Applied Sciences Journal. 12262013. 2015Date Views 15.01

. P V Zayats, Inzhiniring v gumanitarnom issledovanii. Filosofiya prava. 162272014

Political engineering constructing in the field of humanitarian knowledge: the cognitive admissibility of use. P Zayats, Contemporary Science. Interdisciplinarity. Krakow. 1072014