Division of Infection
Kangdong Sacred Heart Hospital
Pediatrics


Republic of (South)
Hallym University College of Medicine
SeoulKorea


Spine Center
Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital
AnyangKorea, Republic


Division of Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
AtlantaGeorgia


Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
AtlantaGeorgia


Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
BS; Infectious Diseases
The University of Texas
Georgia, 4 CDC, MD Anderson Cancer CenterAtlanta, Atlanta, HoustonTexasGeorgia


Vanderbilt University Medical Center
NashvilleTennessee


Tennessee Department of Health
Division of Communicable and Environmental Diseases and Emergency Preparedness
NashvilleTennessee


Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
AtlantaGeorgia


Division of Viral Diseases
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
AtlantaGeorgia

Poster Abstracts • OFID 2018:5 (Suppl 1) • S329 bowel movements per day for one or more days with 7 diarrhea-free days between episodes. Diarrheal illnesses were identified through longitudinal household-based weekly symptom surveillance. The c 2 test, two-sample t-test, and log-binomial regression were performed to evaluate baseline characteristics and the association between diarrhea during pregnancy and adverse birth outcomes.Results. Of 3,682 women in the study, 527 (14.3%) experienced one or more episodes of diarrhea during pregnancy. Diarrhea incidence was not seasonal. Women with diarrhea had a median of one episode of diarrhea (interquartile range (IQR) 1-2 episodes) and two cumulative days of diarrhea (IQR 1-3 days). Of women with diarrhea, 16.1% (85) sought medical care. Mean maternal age, parity, biomass cook stove use, home latrine, water source, caste, and smoking did not differ in pregnant women with and without diarrhea. In crude and adjusted analyses, women with diarrhea during pregnancy were significantly more likely to have SGA infants (42.6% vs. 36.8%; adjusted risk ratio=1.20, 95% CI 1.06-1.36, P = 0.005). LBW and preterm birth incidence did not significantly differ between women with diarrhea during pregnancy and those without. There was no significant association between seeking medical care for diarrhea and birth outcomes.

Session: 133. Enteric Infections
 Friday, October 5, 2018: 12:30 PM 
Background. Patients with pyogenic vertebral osteomyelitis (PVO) are expected to have increased risk of bone loss. Therefore, early bisphosphonate therapy would be clinically effective for PVO patients with osteoporosis.

Methods. A retrospective case review was performed on PVO patients with osteoporosis. PVO patients were divided into three groups: group A (initiation of bisphosphonate within 6 weeks after PVO diagnosis); group B (initiation of bisphosphonate between 6 weeks and 3 months after PVO diagnosis), and group C (no treatment for osteoporosis). Cox proportional hazard model was used to evaluate long-term effectiveness and safety of bisphosphonate in PVO patients, and event of interests included surgical treatment, recurrence of infection, subsequent fracture of adjacent vertebral bodies, and death.

Results. A total of 360 PVO patients with osteoporosis were investigated for the four events of interest. Group A PVO patients had significantly lower hazard ratios for undergoing later (more than 6 weeks after diagnosis) surgery than group C PVO patients (P = 0.014 for model 1 and 2) ( Figure 1) despite similar occurrences of overall surgery. Significant difference was also observed in the occurrence of subsequent fractures at adjacent vertebral bodies (P = 0.001 for model 1 and P = 0.002 for model 2), and group A and B PVO patients had significantly lower hazard ratios for subsequent fracture than group C PVO patients ( Figure 2). There were no significant differences in the hazard ratios of recurrence and death among the three groups.

Conclusion. Early bisphosphonate treatment in PVO patients with osteoporosis was associated with significantly lower occurrence of subsequent vertebral fracture at adjacent vertebral bodies, and lower occurrence of later surgery.   Background. Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) is associated with potentially life-threatening dysentery, along with its most feared complication, the hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS), occurring in up to 20% of STEC-infected patients. 10-30% of patients may experience chronic renovascular and neurologic sequelae after acute resolution. We describe clinical features and outcomes of a young, male military recruit population hospitalized for STEC infection and HUS in 2017.


Clinical Features and Outcomes of United States Marine Corps Recruits Hospitalized With Shiga Toxin-Producing Escherichia coli Infection and Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome

Methods. Between October and November 2017, an STEC outbreak occurred at Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego (MCRD-SD) affecting 244 recruits, including 30 who required hospitalization. Polymerase chain reaction and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis of stool culture isolates demonstrated stx2-positive E. coli O157:H7. Thirty recruits required hospitalization; the remaining 214 underwent daily clinical evaluation and laboratory testing at MCRD with daily crystalloid volume expansion until the resolution of dysentery.

Results. 50% (15/30) of hospitalized recruits developed HUS and were initially managed with volume expansion until the onset of oliguria. Five recruits with severe HUS required hemodialysis; six required intensive critical care unit (ICU) admission; and three suffered from respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation. Average length of hospitalization was 10 days. Patients requiring hemodialysis received an average 7.4 days of renal replacement. Three patients experienced encephalopathy with seizures and were managed with levetiracetam and corticosteroids for Stx-induced cerebral edema. One patient received eculizumab, a terminal complement inhibitor approved for atypical HUS, with resolution of seizures and return to his neurocognitive baseline but with persistent electroencephalographic abnormalities. There were no deaths, and all recruits had recovery of renal function.

Conclusion. This case series represents the largest STEC-HUS outbreak affecting a military population. Rates of HUS and mortality were lower than seen in prior outbreaks, in part due to a high level of baseline health and early detection and management of suspect cases. Early volume expansion and close monitoring of cases may have reduced the risk for HUS progression and long-term renal sequelae.

Disclosures. All authors: No reported disclosures.

Figure 1 .
1Cumulative

Figure 2 .
2Cumulative probability of subsequent fracture on adjacent vertebral bodies.Disclosures. All authors:No reported disclosures.


Terrel Sanders, MD 1 ; Graham Ellis, MD 2 ; Philip Castrovinci, MD 2 ; Robert Deiss, MD 1,3,4 and Ryan Maves, MD, FCCP, FIDSA 1,3 ; 1 Infectious Diseases, Naval Medical Center San Diego, San Diego, California, 2 Medicine, Naval Medical Center San Diego, San Diego, California, 3 Infectious Diseases Clinical Research Program, Uniformed Services University, Bethesda, Maryland, 4 Henry M. Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine, Inc., Bethesda, Maryland Session: 133. Enteric Infections Friday, October 5, 2018: 12:30 PM
Background.Norovirus is a leading cause of acute gastroenteritis (AGE) in all age groups. Although at least 28 different genotypes infecting humans have been reported, most outbreaks over the last 15 years have been caused by genogroup II (GII) viruses, of which GII.4 viruses have caused more than 50%. Since clinical differences between different genotypes are poorly understood, we sought to compare clinical characteristics in children infected with GII.4 and non-GII.4 viruses.Methods. Children between 15 days and 17 years who presented with AGE defined as diarrhea (≥3 loose stools in a 24 hour period) or vomiting (≥1 episodes in a 24 hour period) within 10 days duration were recruited in outpatient, emergency, and inpatient settings in Nashville, TN, during 2012-2015. Stool specimens were tested by RT-qPCR for GI and GII norovirus. Norovirus-positive specimens were genotyped by sequencing of a partial region of the capsid gene. In this study, we excluded children infected with GI, mixed GI/GII and non-typeable GII viruses.(57%), of the GII infections, respectively. Compared with non-GII.4 subjects, GII.4 subjects were more likely to be younger (15.5 vs. 21.3 months, P < 0.01), and less likely to attend daycare (23% vs. 39%, P < 0.01). GII.4 subjects also were more likely to present with diarrhea (75% vs. 57%, P < 0.01) and had higher median modified Vesikari score (7 vs. 6, P < 0.01).ResultsConclusion. Children infected with GII.4 viruses were younger, less likely to attend child care, more likely to present with diarrhea, and had a more severe illness compared with those with non-GII.4 infections. These data provide important information on the genotype distribution of norovirus in children with AGE in Tennessee and highlight GII.4 as the most prevalent strain.Disclosures. N. Halasa, sanofi pasteur: Investigator, Research support. GSK: Consultant, Consulting fee. Moderna: Consultant, Consulting fee. Background. Food insecurity is defined as a lack of consistent access to food in adequate quantity or quality. Both cholera and food insecurity tend to occur in impoverished communities where poor access to food, inadequate sanitation, and an unsafe water supply often coexist. The relationship between the two, however, has not been previously studied.Food Insecurity and Reported History of Cholera in Haitian HouseholdsMethods. We performed a secondary analysis of household-level data from the 2012 Demographic and Health Survey in Haiti, a nationally and subnationally representative cross-sectional household survey conducted every 5 years. We used multivariable logistic regression to evaluate the relationship between household food insecurity (as measured by the Household Hunger Scale) and (1) reported history of cholera since 2010 by any person in the household and (2) reported death by any person in the household from cholera. We used survey commands to apply sampling probability weights and account for clustering and stratification in sample design. We performed a complete case analysis because there were no missing data on household food insecurity or cholera and <1% for the other covariates of interest.Results. There were 13,181 households in the survey, 2,104 of which reported at least one household member with history of cholera. Both moderate hunger in the household [adjusted odds ratio (AOR) 1.47, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.27-1.71;