Diatom of Escape Bay in Myeik Archipelago, Southern Taninthayi Coast of Myanmar


Zarni Ko 
Ko 
Diatom of Escape Bay in Myeik Archipelago, Southern Taninthayi Coast of Myanmar
10.21931/RB/2019.04.04.5972
A total of 53 species of diatom comprised 32 genera in the present study. The highest species composition (36 species) was found in July (monsoon season) and November (post-monsoon season), and the lowest number (23 species) was also found in October (post-monsoon season). Eucampia cornuta, Chaetoceros pervianum, C. compressus, and Surirella ovalis occurred rarely.

Introduction

Marine phytoplankton is made up of small plants, mostly microscopic in size and unicellular. Phytoplankton can be separated based on cell size into micro-phytoplankton (200-20 µm), nano-phytoplankton (20-2 µm), and pico-phytoplankton (2-0.2 µm). Phytoplankton is commonly composed of both eukaryotic and prokaryotic species. It colonizes the upper part of the water column, down to the limit of penetration of light. The structure and abundance of the phytoplankton populations are mainly controlled by inorganic nutrients such as nitrogen, phosphorus, silica, and iron. Phytoplankton populations are controlled by grazing and viral mortality, as well as nutrient availability and other biological and physicochemical factors.

In the phytoplankton, Diatoms (Order: Bacillariophyceae) and Dinoflagellates (Order: Dinophyceae) commonly predominate. Diatoms (Bacillariophyta) are remarkedly distinguishable into two orders, the Centrales and the Pennales.

Diatoms (Bacillariophyta) are remarkedly distinguishable into two orders, the Centrales and the Pennales. The Centrales, or centric diatoms, have radial symmetry and are thriving as plankton in marine waters. Their frustules, or shells, can also be triangular or quadrate. The centric diatoms are mostly planktonic and non-motile. (as cited in Hunter) 1 . The Centrales are divided into three major groups based on cell shape and are the presence or absence of particular processes. Genera such as Coscinodiscus, Cyclotella, and Melosira are disc-shaped with no means, whereas the valve surfaces of families such as Biddulphia and Chaetoceros have various horns. The third group containing genera such as Rhizosolenia and Corethron also have a complex girdle structure (Dhargalkar and Ingole 2 ). Escape Bay was developed with pearl oyster (Pinctada maxima) farms. The objective of the present study is to identify phytoplankton species in Escape Bay (pearl oyster farming area).


Materials and methods

Diatom samples were collected monthly from sampling station Escape Bay (Lat 12° 16' N and Long 98° 00' E), in the waters off Elphinstone Island, MyeikArchipelago, Taninthayi Region during June 2013 to February 2014. Phytoplankton net (60cm in length, 25cm in width (diameter) and 25 µm mesh size) was towed horizontally at every station. The collected samples were kept in clean small size plastic bottles and preserved in 2% formaldehyde immediately. Diatom samples were deposited in the Department of Marine Science, Myeik University. The specimens were identified up to species level with the following references; Newell and Newell 3 , Allen and Cupp 4 , Hendey 5 , Yamaji 6 , Tomas 7 , Wood 8 and Al-Kandari, Al-Yamani and Al-Rifaie 9 .


Results and Discussion

In the present study, a total of 53 species of diatom belonging under 32 genera under 16 families of 2 orders were recorded. The families of diatoms included Thalassiosiraceae, Melosiraceae, Leptolindraceae, Coscinodiscaceae, Rhizosoleniaceae, Hemiaulaceae, Chaetocerotaceae, Lithodesmaceae, Eupodiscaceae, Fragilariaceae, Thalassionemataceae, Naviculaceae, Bacillariaceae, Sururellaceae, and Diatomaceae, respectively.

During the study period, the systematic identification of diatom was made based on the references; Newell and Newe-ll3, Allen and Cupp 4 , Hendey 5 , Yamaji 6 , Tomas 7 , Wood 8 and Al-Kandari, Al-Yamani and Al-Rif 9 , Thu Hein 10 , Khin Yu Nwe 11 and Lett Wai Nwe 12 .

During the whole study period, monthly diatom species composition was ranged from 23 to 36 (Table 1). The highest number 36 of diatom species was found in July and November. However, minimum species number 23 was found in October that was post-monsoon season. The species Coscinodiscus occulus-irridis, Rhizosolenia imbricata, R. setigera, Bacteriastrum hyalium, Ditylum sol, Odontella sinensis, Thalassionema nitzschioides and Pleurosigma normanii are commonly occurred every month. Eucampia cornuta was found only in June. Besides, Chaetoceros pervianum, C. compressus and Surirella ovalis were occurred only in July. The species mentioned above were rarely observed during study period.

In Myeik Archipelago, Si Thu Hein 10 


Conclusions

In the present study, diatoms were dominantly found during the current research. The maximum species composition of diatom was found in monsoon and post-monsoon season. The study area (Escape Bay) was productive during survey period. The present study was conducted at monsoon and post-monsoon season. So, pre-monsoon season was studied in the future. The results obtained were not significantly influenced by monthly. Therefore, the abundance of diatoms was right and to success pearl oysters' culture. It can be concluded that the study waters were highly productive areas.

Figure 1 .
1Map showing the study area.

Figure 2 .
2Photographs of phytoplankton species (1) Cyclotella striata; (2) Lauderia annulata; (3) Skeletonema costatum; (4) Planktoniella sol; (5) Thalassiosira eccentrica; (6) Paralia sulcata; (7) Corethron criophilum; (8) Coscinodiscus occulus-irridis;(9) C. centralis; (10) C. granii; (11) C. radiatus; (12) Hemidiscus cuneiformis; (13) Rhizosolenia imbricata; (14) R. setigera; (15) R. robusta; (16) R. calcar-avis; (17) R. bergonii; (18) Proboscia alata; (19) Guinardia flaccida; (20) G. striata; (21) Eucampia zodiacus;


, Khin Yu Nwe 11 and Lett Wai Nwe 12 reported that diatoms are dominantly found in their study periods. Moreover, Zin Mar Aye 13 and Tin Tin Kyu 14 reported that diatoms were higher than dinoflagellates in Palaw Waters. Thida Nyunt 15 reported 99 species of diatoms from Mon Coastal Waters. Yin Yin Htay 16 identified 116 species of diatoms from Myeik Coastal Waters. Khin Khin Gyi 17 described 155 species of diatoms from Myeik Coastal Waters. In Khin Khin Gyi 17 , the genera; Coscinidiscus, Hemidiscus, Rhi-

Table 1 .Table 1 .
11Species composition of diatom of Escape Bay during study period. Species composition of diatom of Escape Bay during study period.zosolenia, Proboscia, Guinardia, Eucampia, Ditylum, Odentella, Thalassionema, Nitzschia were found as dominantly. Her finding was similar to the present study. However, Zin Lin Khine and Htay Aung 18 described dinoflagellates occurred to be more abundant than diatoms in the waters off Ayeyarwaddy and Taninthayi coast.Boonyapitwat 19 recorded that Oscillatoria erythrae, Pro-

boscia alata, Rhizosolenia calcar-avis, and Thalassionema 
frauenfeldii were dominant species in Vietnamese. Zin Lin 
Khin and Htay Aung 20 also recorded that Osciallatoria was 
dominant species in lower part of Taninthayi Waters. Moreo-
ver, Boonyapitwat, et al. 21 , reported Oscillatoria erythrae and 
Proboscia alata were the dominance species in north, west, 
and east of the Bay of Bengal. However, the genus Oscillatoria 

Zarni Ko Ko. 

Volumen 4 / Número 4 • http://www.revistabionatura.com 



Pseudo-nitzschia seriata; (52) Surirella ovalis and (53) Tabellaria fenestratea.(Trichodesmiun) was not found, but T. frauenfeldii and P. alata were found moderately in the present study. Besides, Zekaria and Soe Tint 22 recorded Coscinodiscus, Rhizosolenia, and Chaetoceros were located dominantly in the near Taungpyoe Village, Myeik. The genera Coscinodiscus, Chaetoceros, and Odontella found dominating the phytoplankton species from nearshore waters of Gwa were recorded by Kyaw Win and Nay Win23 . Besides, Maung Maung Myint, Aung Myint and Saw Han Shein 24 found that Coscinodiscus, Rhizosolania, Chaetoceros, and Odontella were dominant genera around Gwa, Kyaukphyu, and Sittway. Likewise, the genera mentioned above were observed commonly in the present study.Figure 2) E. cornuta; (23) Cerataulina pelagica; (24) Hemiaulus sinensis; (25) Bacteriastrum hyalium; (26) Chaetoceros decipiens; (27) 
C. curvisetum; (28) C. diversus; (29) C. denticulatus;(30) C. coastatus;(31) C. pervianum; (32) C. compressus; (33) Bellerochea 
horologicalis; (34) Ditylum sol; (35) Helicotheca tamensis; (36) Odontella sinensis; (37) O. mobiliensis; (38) O. aurita; (39) Tricera-
tium favus; (40) lampriscus shadboltianum; (41) Astrionellopsis glacialis; (42) Thalassionema nitzschioides; (43) T. frauenfeldii; 
(44) Pleurosigma nomanii; (45) P. angulatum; (46) P. elongatum; (47) Amphiprora alata; (48) Bacillaria paxillifera; (49) Nitzschia 
longissigma; (50) N. lorenzian; (51) 
Bibliographic references
Diatoms as Environmental Indicators: A case study in the bioluminescent Bays of. J M Hunter, Vieques, Puerto, RicoHunter, J. M. (2007). Diatoms as Environmental Indicators: A case study in the bioluminescent Bays of Vieques, Puerto, Rico. http:// kect.wooster.edu/publications.

Phytoplankton identification manual. National Institute of Oceanography, Dona Paula Goa. V K Dhargslkar, B S Ingole, 35Dhargslkar, V. K. & Ingole, B. S. (2004). Phytoplankton identifi- cation manual. National Institute of Oceanography, Dona Paula Goa. 35pp.

Marine plankton practical guide. G E Newell, R C Newell, Newell, G.E. and Newell, R.C. (1963). Marine plankton practical guide. Hutchinson Educational. 32-168.

Plankton diatoms of the Java Sea. The Scripps Institution of Oceanography of the University of California. W E Allen, E E Cupp, Allen, W.E. and Cupp, E.E. (1930). Plankton diatoms of the Java Sea. The Scripps Institution of Oceanography of the University of California.113-164.

An Introduction Account of the Smaller Algae of British Coastal Waters. Part V. Bacillariophyta (Diatoms). London: Her Majesty's Stationary Office, xxii +317 pp. N I Hendey, 45Hendey, N. I. (1964). An Introduction Account of the Smaller Al- gae of British Coastal Waters. Part V. Bacillariophyta (Diatoms). London: Her Majesty's Stationary Office, xxii +317 pp, 45 pl.

Illustration of the marine plankton of Japan. I Yamaji, Hoikusha Publishing Co.Ltd562ppYamaji, I. (1971). Illustration of the marine plankton of Japan. Hoikusha Publishing Co.Ltd. 562 pp.

Identifying Marine Phytoplakton. C R Tomas, Academic Press858UKTomas, C.R. (1997). Identifying Marine Phytoplakton. Academic Press, UK, iv+858pp.

Dinoflagellates of the Caribbean Sea and adjacent areas. E J F Wood, University of Miami Press143Wood, E .J. F. (1968). Dinoflagellates of the Caribbean Sea and adjacent areas. University of Miami Press. 143 pp.

Marine Phytoplankton Atlas of Kuwait's Waters. Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research. M Al-Kandari, F Y Al-Yamani, K Al-Rifaie, Lucky Printing Press351KuwaitAl-Kandari, M. Al-Yamani, F. Y. & Al-Rifaie, K. (2009). Marine Phytoplankton Atlas of Kuwait's Waters. Kuwait Institute for Sci- entific Research. Lucky Printing Press, Kuwait, 351 pp.

Si Thu Hein, Study on the Phyoplankton in Pahtaw-Pahtet Waters. Myeik, MyanmarDepartment of Marine Science, Myeik UniversityM.Sc. Thesis.Si Thu Hein (2010). Study on the Phyoplankton in Pahtaw-Pahtet Waters, Myeik. Unpublished. M.Sc. Thesis. Department of Marine Science, Myeik University, Myeik, Myanmar.

Study on the species identification, composition, distribution and abundance of phytoplankton from Myeik adjacent waters. Khin Yu Nwe, Myeik, MyanmarDepartment of Marine Science, Myeik UniversityM.Res. ThesisKhin Yu Nwe (2011). Study on the species identification, compo- sition, distribution and abundance of phytoplankton from Myeik adjacent waters. Unpublished. M.Res. Thesis. Department of Ma- rine Science, Myeik University, Myeik, Myanmar.

Study on the phytoplankton in Kalar-kyun and MA-aing-kyun near Myeik Waters. Unpublished. M.Sc. Thesis. Lett Wai Nwe, Mawlamyine, MyanmarDepartment of Marine Science, Mawlamyine UniversityLett Wai Nwe (2011). Study on the phytoplankton in Kalar-kyun and MA-aing-kyun near Myeik Waters. Unpublished. M.Sc. The- sis. Department of Marine Science, Mawlamyine University, Mawlamyine, Myanmar.

Study on the phytoplankton populations in Anyin-pho-anyin-ma, Me-laung-aw and Nat-aein-kan Waters, Palaw Towship, Taninthayi Region. Aye Zin Mar, Department of Marine Science, Myeik University, Myeik, MyanmarM.Sc. ThesisZin Mar Aye (2012). Study on the phytoplankton populations in Anyin-pho-anyin-ma, Me-laung-aw and Nat-aein-kan Waters, Palaw Towship, Taninthayi Region. Unpublished. M.Sc. Thesis. Department of Marine Science, Myeik University, Myeik, Myan- mar.

Study on the Phytoplankton in Leik-thaung, Kyauk-thin-baw And Phaw-taung Waters, Palaw Towship, Taninthayi Region. Tin Tin Kyu, Myeik, MyanmarDepartment of Marine Science, Myeik UniversityM.Sc. ThesisTin Tin Kyu (2012). Study on the Phytoplankton in Leik-thaung, Kyauk-thin-baw And Phaw-taung Waters, Palaw Towship, Tanin- thayi Region. Unpublished. M.Sc. Thesis. Department of Marine Science, Myeik University, Myeik, Myanmar.

Phytoplankton Communities in Mon Coastal Waters. Unpublished. PhD Dissertation. Thida Nyunt, Mawlamyine, MyanmarDepartment of Marine Science, Mawlamyine UniversityThida Nyunt (2013). Phytoplankton Communities in Mon Coastal Waters. Unpublished. PhD Dissertation. Department of Marine Science, Mawlamyine University, Mawlamyine, Myanmar.

Ecology of Phytoplankton Communities in Myeik Coastal Waters. Unpublished. PhD Dissertation. Department of Marine Science. Htay Yin Yin, Mawlamyine University, Mawlamyine, MyanmarYin Yin Htay (2014). Ecology of Phytoplankton Communities in Myeik Coastal Waters. Unpublished. PhD Dissertation. Depart- ment of Marine Science, Mawlamyine University, Mawlamyine, Myanmar.

Species Composition and Ecology of Phytoplankton in Thaninthayi Coastal Waters. Unpublished. PhD Dissertation. Gyi Khin Khin, Mawlamyine, MyanmarDepartment of Marine Science, Mawlamyine UniversityKhin Khin Gyi (2016). Species Composition and Ecology of Phyto- plankton in Thaninthayi Coastal Waters. Unpublished. PhD Dis- sertation. Department of Marine Science, Mawlamyine Universi- ty, Mawlamyine, Myanmar.

Distribution, abundance and diversity of plankton in Myanmar Territory Waters of North-east Andaman Sea. Htay Zin Lin Khine, Aung, Jour.Myan. Acada. Arts & Sci. 68Zin Lin Khine and Htay Aung (2009). Distribution, abundance and diversity of plankton in Myanmar Territory Waters of North-east Andaman Sea. Jour.Myan. Acada. Arts & Sci.6 (8): 250-270.

Distribution, Abundance and Species Composition of Phytoplankton in the Thermocline layer in the South China Sea, Area IV; Vietnamese Waters; Oceanic Fisheries Division, Department of Fisheries. S Bonnyapiwat, Parknan, Samutprakarn, ThailandBonnyapiwat, S. (1997). Distribution, Abundance and Species Composition of Phytoplankton in the Thermocline layer in the South China Sea, Area IV; Vietnamese Waters; Oceanic Fisher- ies Division, Department of Fisheries, Parknan, Samutprakarn, Thailand. 292-308.

Diversity of phytoplankton in the waters off Ayeyarwady, and Taninthayi Coasts. Zin Lin Khine, Department of Marine Science, Myeik University, Myeik, MyanmarM. Res.Thesis.Zin Lin Khine (2008). Diversity of phytoplankton in the waters off Ayeyarwady, and Taninthayi Coasts. Unpublished. M. Res.Thesis. Department of Marine Science, Myeik University, Myeik, Myan- mar.

Species Composition, Abundance and Distribution of Phytoplankton in the Bay of Bengal. The Ecosystem-Based Fishery Management in the Bay of Bengal. S Bonnyapiwat, M N Sada, J K Mandal, M K Sinha, Bonnyapiwat, S., Sada, M. N., Mandal, J. K. & Sinha, M. K. (2008). Species Composition, Abundance and Distribution of Phyto- plankton in the Bay of Bengal. The Ecosystem-Based Fishery Management in the Bay of Bengal. 53-64.

The first study on the plankton in water near Taungpyoe village, Myeik. Soe Zakaria, Tin, Mawlamyine, MyanmarDepartment of Botany, Mawlamyine UniversityZakaria and Soe Tin (1972). The first study on the plankton in water near Taungpyoe village, Myeik. Unpublished. Department of Botany, Mawlamyine University, Mawlamyine, Myanmar.

Study on the phytoplankton in Gwa. Kyaw Win, Nay Win, Rakhine; Mawlamyine, MyanmarDepartment of Botany, Mawlamyine UniversityKyaw Win and Nay Win (1972). Study on the phytoplankton in Gwa, Rakhine. Unpublished. Department of Botany, Mawlamyine University, Mawlamyine, Myanmar.

Plankton from Gwa, Kyauk-phyu and Sittway Waters. Unpublished. Aung Maung Maung Myint, Saw Han Myint, Shein, MyanmarDepartment of Botany, Mawlamyine University, MawlamyineMaung Maung Myint, Aung Myint and Saw Han Shein (1973). Plankton from Gwa, Kyauk-phyu and Sittway Waters. Unpub- lished. Department of Botany, Mawlamyine University, Maw- lamyine, Myanmar.