Study of marine gastropod species in Balasore, Odisha, India, focusing shell morphometric distinctiveness through PCA analysis


Suman Kumar Das 
Department of Zoology
Fakir Mohan University
Vyasa Vihar756089BalasoreOdishaIndia

Jiban Kumar Behera 
Department of Zoology
Fakir Mohan University
Vyasa Vihar756089BalasoreOdishaIndia

Pabitra Mishra 
Department of Zoology
Fakir Mohan University
Vyasa Vihar756089BalasoreOdishaIndia

Anway Kumar 
Bhaskar Behera 
Department of Zoology
Fakir Mohan University
Vyasa Vihar756089BalasoreOdishaIndia

Center of Excellence (CoE)
Fakir Mohan University
Vyasa Vihar756089BalasoreOdishaIndia

Department of Biosciences and Biotechnol-ogy
Fakir Mohan University
Vyasa Vihar756089BalasoreOdishaIndia

Manojit Bhattacharya mbhattacharya09@gmail.com 0000-0001-9669-1835
Department of Zoology
Fakir Mohan University
Vyasa Vihar756089BalasoreOdishaIndia

Study of marine gastropod species in Balasore, Odisha, India, focusing shell morphometric distinctiveness through PCA analysis
D61834D9D8A5EE28093A58E1D6A2711A10.1186/s41936-025-00439-4Received: 19 January 2024 Accepted: 1 March 2025MorphologyGastropodMorphometricBalasorePrincipal component analysis
Background Data on the taxonomic variety of marine organisms is important for understanding the reasons of underpinning species diversification in locations with low physical barriers.Morphology is widely used for the organization of life.Morphometrics is one approach to investigating and characterizing the wide variety of animal shapes and sizes.During April 2022-April 2023, we randomly collected samples of nine important marine mollusc species from the Balramgadi, Bahabalpur, and Talapada coasts in the Balasore district of Odisha, India.In the morphometric analysis, the specimens were categorized into several groups based on their ratios of SL/SW, SL/AL, SL/AW, SL/ SPL, and SL/BL.ResultIn this research, we examined the distribution of nine mollusc species.Balramgadi shows a higher concentration of Indothias lacerais compared to Bahabalpur.Conversely, Indothias lacerais is also more prevalent in Bahabalpur than in Balramgadi.Additionally, while Paratectonatica tigrina and Purpura bufo are abundant in the both areas, however their distributions vary.Using the study area as a backdrop, principal component analysis (PCA) shows the significant connection between different kinds of organisms.This study demonstrates a favorable correlation between shell length and body size for the available species of Talapada (T.duplicata and I. lacera) and Balaramgadi (C.magus, L. canarium, and P. bufo).Whereas in Bahabalpur, T. telescopium and V. cochlidium are found, there is an inverse association between SL and other factors.Shell widths of C. magus, P. tigrina, and L. canarium are inversely correlated; nevertheless, there is a much more in common across the six species found in both Talapada and Bahabalpur.Body length is positively correlated with total weight in the species P. bufo, T. duplicata, M. trapa, I. lacera, P. tigrina, Teliscopum teliscopium, L. canarium, C. magus, and V. cochlidium, but negatively correlated with shell width, as shown by the Pearson correlation test.ConclusionThe article explores the use of morphometric analysis to differentiate nine mollusc species in significant coastal areas of Odisha, India.The study aims to identify variations in surroundings across sites and establish a benchmarks for future morphometric studies.Morphometric data can be used to quantify population diversity and investigate environmental factors' impact on shell development and trait selection of selected molluscs.

Background

Gastropoda, the largest and most diverse class in the phylum Mollusca, exhibits a broader range of in forms, habit and habitat (Kershaw, 1983).After the biggest phylum Arthorpoda, Mollusca has the second-largest phylum which has received an extensive adaptive variation where more than 62,000-80,000 species are present in living species and 13,000 are extant and fossil genera (Holthuis, 1995;Anderson, Diebel et al. 2005;Ponder, Lindberg et al. 2019;Wall-Palmer, Janssen et al. 2020).Although gastropods are generally amphibious in nature, it is represented as a biotic component of natural ecosystem, predominantly marine, but also widely represent in freshwater system (Presley & Willig, 2023).In India, gastropods are extensively distributed, especially in coastal regions (Kurhe, Rodríguez et al. 2014;Parveen, Chakraborty et al. 2020).Detailed study about the importance of these species for their possible use in aquaculture and medicinal industries are quite impactful (Valarmathi, 2016).They are considered as important biota of the water ecosystem and act as good bio-indicators for the pale environment as well as to know the pollution and clinical implications on the basis of their adaptive extremes condition (Orabi, El-Badry et al. 2018;Prasad, Dahal et al. 2019).Many mollusca has influenced their relative growth of various body proportions in their development stages due to the impact of both biotic and abiotic factors (Clark, Peck et al. 2020).Therefore, it can create selective pressure which can affect the shell morphology.Various important factors like predators, pollution, depth variation and climate change influence the shell morphology of molluscs (Márquez, González-José et al. 2011;Dmitrović, Savić et al. 2016).Morphometric studies based on morphological analysis of length and weight relationships provide paramount baseline data for broad investigation to quantify a trait of population index, the significance of habitat quality in biological managements and its significant use in fisheries industries (Saleky, Setyobudiandi et al. 2016;Gu, Husemann et al. 2019).However, the shell shape and size changes have given to basic information about on their evolutionary relationship, physiology, ontogeny and its exploitation within the aquatic system (Dominguez & Abdala, 2019).Researchers have statistically analyzed the species production to test hypotheses based on the significant objective of morphometric plasticity (Van Bocxlaer, Ortiz-Sepulveda et al. 2020).Identifying species based on morphology can be quite complex techniques.However, morphometric tools help to establish relationships by determining body plasticity across the habitats, shell sizes, shapes, apertures, spires and growth patterns (Yousif, 2012;Ullah, Gao et al. 2022).Further, these parameters are useful for taxonomic identification of new species and are crucial for every organism (Xu, Wu et al. 2019).The body length and weight relationship is also vital for determining growth pattern of an organism as well as its habitat condition (Jisr, Younes et al. 2018).In India, several gastropods have been reported from different geographical regions based on their morphological aspects (Kohn, 1978).Most of studies have been done on morphological, physiological, biological, and other crucial aspects of freshwater and marine gastropods.However, limited researcher studied on mollusca morphometric in coastal regions of India.Although many morphometrical approach-based studies were performed on fishes worldwide, very few numbers of literature were available on morphometric analysis on various mollusca at coastal regions.Panda, Falguni, et al. (2021) investigated different morphometric parameter with the shell length and width and subsequently correlated with five relative condition factors studied on P. globosa (Panda, Pati et al. 2021). Routh, S. S. et al. (2022) found the extended distribution of 17 cone snail species from the Andhra Pradesh coast based on morphometric analysis (Rout, Dash et al. 2022).Similarly, Turritella maculata and Turritella fastigiata, both turritellid gastropods, were investigated based on morphometric analysis for the first time from coastal region of Kerala, India (Sary & Pramod Kiran, 2018).Additionally, Kaviarasan, T., Ret al. (2020) investigated on egg capsule of Rapana rapiformis and Hemifusus pugilinus based on their structural and morphometric analysis with rheological properties from the southeast coast of India (Kaviarasan, Sivasankar et al. 2020).For the first time, researchers have confined six unusual marine gastropods from India's eastern and central Indo-Pacific ecoregions based on morphometric analysis and species distribution (Choudhury, Vizhi et al. 2022).Researchers have not yet studied the lengthweight relationship, morphometric analysis, ecological factors, or the abundance of various gastropod species in the Balasore coastal region of India.Additionally, we have studied morphometric analysis from three different study areas of collected species along the Balasore coast.This present study provides the first baseline information regarding the marine habitat of mollusca species, including their sizes, length-weight relationships, and population density in Balasore district, Odisha, India.The consequences of present study will be definitely useful for comparison with future research to documented potential improvements or continued regression of ecological systems in the quality of aquatic ecosystems.Such phenomena not only support to the selected gastropod species, but it also signifies as promising to conservation and monitoring the best fisheries management practices.


Methods


Study sites

Balasore district is plain and coastal in the Indian state of Odisha and lies on the shores of the Bay of Bengal between 21°3′ and 21°59′ North latitude and 86°20′ and 87°29′ East latitude (Pramanik & Mohanty, 2016).This area has vast biological diversity because of India's coastal belt.Balaosre coast is stretch from between the Digha coast and the Bhadrak coastal belt (Sahoo & Bhaskaran, 2018).It covers four estuaries Subarnarekha, Panchupada, Budhabalanga, and Sona (Mishra, Chand et al. 2023).The total length of study area was around 32 km including Panchupada, Budhabalanga, and Sona delta.The area is placed between spring-tide and neap-tide levels and it is characterized by a shallow and swampy muddy environment.The study also continued around 5 km into the sea area due to unique pattern where the water recedes up to 5 km during the ebb tide.The area is a coastal alluvial tract with unconsolidated substrates, and this stretch of the coastline is geomorphologically dynamic, rich in habitat diversity, muddy and sandy beaches.


Sampling and collection

Various mollusca were randomly collected from 3 zones of Balasore coastal lines from Bhabalpur, Balaramgadi, and Talapada.This study was conducted from the middle of April 2022 to the end of April 2023 in the morning and  evening times from 3 collecting zones (Fig. 1) (Table 1).

The author visited the marshy area of the shoreline, which was suitable for sample collection, especially the intertidal zones of the beach area.A total of 1088 specimens were collected during this tenure with the help of small hand net, plastic bags, and picking methods; these are labeled with the site name, date, time and the record was maintained every month.We clean the collecting specimen by oxalic acid through brush and preserve these samples for identification and future study.


Sample identification with laboratory procedure

The collected specimens were identified through the keys and online database (https:// www.mollu scaba se.org/) (https:// www.disco verli fe.org/ 20/q?guide= Mollu scs).The taxonomic status, diversity assessment and its conservation status were adopted from WoRMS and IUCN guidelines (https:// www.marin espec ies.org/) (https:// www.iucnr edlist.org/).Further morphometric measurement were carried out at P.G.Department of Zoology, Fakir Mohan University, Odisha, India.Shell morphometric analysis includes shell length (SL) and shell width (SW), aperture length (AL) and aperture width (AW), spire length (SPL), basal length (BL) in cm and total body weight measured in gm (Fig. 2) (Matos, Matthews-Cascon et al. 2020).Each specimen's size and width were measure by Vernier slide caliper, but weights measurement was carried out with the help of a weighing machine.


Data analysis

The species density and morphometric analysis data were obtained by PAST software version 4.10 and R version 4.2, respectively (Hammer, Harper et al. 2001).The relationships of linear regression analysis were established considering the above morphometric parameters, and shell length intake as a basic index was established by among the parameters.Statistical analysis (correlation and regression) was calculated by PAST software version 4.10 (Hammer, Harper et al. 2001;Bewick, Cheek et al. 2003).The shell length, weight, height and width of spire, width, aperture length and width relationship was established by principal components analysis (PCA) in different habitats of our study sites (Vitt, Caldwell et al. 1997).


Results

Nine different significant species of gastropod were collected from three major coastal area of the Balasore district of Odisha, India, through random sampling (Fig. 3) (Table 2).The result of our study is mainly divided into three different direction, collected specimen from the study sites, a matrix plot has been generated concerning the relative density data (Fig. 4).Furthermore, multivariate principal component analysis (PCA) plots for the species from all three locations, Balaramgadi, Bahabalpur, and Talapada was performed on the basis of specific parameters to know the group similarity and dissimilarity.Then, linear Pearson's correlation of each species was carried out to obtain the linear relationship between the variables.

The relative densities of nine different species of snails across 3 distinct regions of Balasore, Odisha, namely Balramgadi, Bahabalpur, and Talapada, are displayed clearly with the help of matrix plot.The matrix plot has the lowest range, i.e., 9.4, which is shown in the deep blue color and the highest range of 13.3, displayed with the deep red color (Fig. 4).In the Balramgadi region, Indothias lacera is relatively higher than other species, whereas on the other hand species like Paratectonatica tigrina, Purpura bufo and Laevistrombus canarium are less abundant in the Balramgadi region.Likewise, in the region of Bahabalpur, Indothias lacera availability is relatively higher than Turritella duplicata, Volegalea cochlidium, Telescopium telescopium, Laevistrombus canarium and the plot shows notable observations about the Paratectonatica tigrina, Purpura bufo, as these two species are relatively low in both Balramgadi and Bahabalpur regions (Fig. 4).But in the Talapada region of Balasore, the Paratectonatica tigrina is relatively moderate leaving behind the Purpura bufo, which is still found low as compared to other species density in these three regions.The data also show a bright red spot upon the Murex trapa, which signifies the higher density of the mentioned species in Talapada region, which is less abundant in the Bahabalpur region.A few numbers of species such as Volegalea cochlidium, Conus magus, Telescopium telescopium, Turritella duplicata are almost moderately abundant in almost all the three regions of studied areas (Fig. 4).

However, investigating the morphometric and radular traits of Thais lacera, T. blanfordi, T. tissoti, T. rudolphi, T. bufo, and T. subnodulosa may help researchers resolve the taxonomic ambiguities associated with Thais species.The first denticle on the outer base of the lateral cusp in T. rudolphi was smaller than the other five denticles, whereas in T. blanfordi, all of the denticles were the same size from the Maharashtra coast of India (Kumar, Jaiswar et al. 2017).Similarly, with a relative abundance of 28.84, Pirenella cingulata was the species with the highest abundance.The other major species on Sonadia Island, Bangladesh, were Turritella duplicate, Cerithium columna, Umbonium vestiarium, and Paratectonatica tigrina with their respective relative abundances were 27.64, 15.81, 3.46, and 2.48 (Antu, Islam et al. 2023).Subsequently, Nassarious species of a few millimeters in length and Telescopium species with lengths of 10 cm or more make up the gastropod population of the outer channel region.The sea grass bed included species of Bullia vittata, Neritina smithii, Indothais lacera, and Natica tigrina among others (Mahapatro, Panigrahy et al. 2015).Further comparing Indian turritella e species' Drilling Frequency (DF) to average worldwide data values reveals that it is low.The Fig. 4 Matrix plot represents species density on the basis of a number of collected species of gastropods from the sampling sites majority of species found in India are bigger (> 4 cm) than those found elsewhere (Paul, Das et al. 2013).


Discussion

PCA of each parameter shows the correlation between the different species of the study area in reference.The shell length data of the above study found T. duplicata; I. lacera species from Talapada and C. magus, L. canarium, P. bufo from Balaramgadi are positively correlated (Fig. 5a).The SL of T. telescopium and V. cochlidium are negatively correlated with others at Bahabalpur.In case of spiral length only, M. trapa of Balaramgadi is adversely related, but all other species from Bahabalpur and Talapada have direct relation (Fig. 5b).Further shell width of C. magus, P. tigrina, and L. canarium of Talapada is negatively corresponding where all other six species from both Talapada and Bahabalpur are much similar (Fig. 5c).Additionally, aperture lengths of maximum taken species are correlated positively in all threestudy site except P. tigrina in Talapada coast (Fig. 5d).

Basal lengths of V. cochlidium, P. tigrina of Bahabalpur and P. bufo, L. canarium of Talapada are negatively allied (Fig. 5e).Again the aperture widths of major gastropod specimen from Bahabalpur and Talapada are quite analogous, whereas P. bufo, T. telescopium of Balaramgadi beach are unfavorably linked (Fig. 5f ).Lastly total weight of C. magus, P. bufo, T. duplicata, M. trapa, L. canarium, and P. tigrina from all three-study areas are positively interrelated (Fig. 5g).Even so I. lacera from Talapada and V. cochlidia, T. teliscopium from Balaramgadi have negative TW value.Some researchers found that the PCA reduced the variation by 82.383%, with three groups created: one that included Nerita fulgurans and N. peloronta, one that included Nerita tessellata only, and one that included Nerita versicolor (Altomari, Alves et al. 2021).Further the average SL and SW for S. canarium, S. urceus, S. marginatus, and S. vittatus at various locations in Taiwan were found to be 55.24 ± 0.32 mm and 35.13 ± 0.19 mm, 56.62 ± 0.60 mm and 24.53 ± 0.37 mm, 48.44 ± 1.32 mm and 24.66 ± 0.43 mm, and 83.74 ± 5.6 mm and 25.53 ± 3.38 mm, respectively (Chiu, Chen et al. 2002).Similarly the average shell length (SL) of N. albicilla measured 24.74 mm ± 3.40 and its average aperture length (AL) 11.09 mm ± 2.69 in the rocky intertidal zone of Oma Village, Central Moluccas, Eastern Indonesia (Haumahu & Uneputty, 2018).The Pearson correlation assesses how strongly two variables are correlated linearly.Its range of values is from −1 to 1, with −1 denoting a completely inverse linear correlation, 0 denoting no correlation, and 1 denoting a completely inverse positive correlation.In P. bufo, the body length and total weight are highly correlated, 0.28, whereas body length and shell width are less similar value, −0.24 (Fig. 6a).Similarly, the spiral length of T. duplicatais related maximally to shell length and minimally to aperture length having values 0.99 and −0.96, respectively (Fig. 6b).Weight of M. trapa is mostly correlated with aperture weight, i.e., 0.38, and adversely with aperture length, i.e., −0.38 (Fig. 6c).In I. lacera, the shell width and shell length are most comprehensive with the positive value being 0.35 (Fig. 6d).The relationship between aperture length and spiral length is relatively weak, with a correlation coefficient of -0.39.In contrast, in P. tigrina, the aperture width and shell width show a stronger positive correlation of 0.49.However, a negative correlation exists between aperture length and total weight (-0.35) when compared to shell width, spiral length and shell width (Fig. 6e).In Teliscopum teliscopium, body length is firmly correlated with aperture length by 0.50 and has an inverse correlation with shell width by −0.31 (Fig. 6f ).In L. canarium, the body length and aperture length have a strong correlation of 0.30, however aperture width and shell length have a weaker correlation of −0.24 (Fig. 6g).The body length and total width of C. magus are also maximally and minimally linked to shell width with values of 0.27 and −0.47 correspondingly (Fig. 6h).Lastly in V. cochlidium it shows a strong association between body length and aperture weight of 0.48 and an inverse correlation between shell length and spiral length is −0.31 (Fig. 6i).Similarly, Volegalea cochlidium morphometric measures were 2.9 cm in shell length, 1.8 cm in shell width, 1.8 cm in aperture length, and 1.2 cm in aperture width from Coastal Waters of Bangladesh (Sultana, Brishti et al. 2021).Further, T. telescopium shells length, diameter, and weight morphometric measurements ranged from 3.58 to 9.51 cm, 1.5 to 1.43 cm, and 3-69 g, respectively.The morphometric parameters of T. telescopium range from 3 to 87 g in total weight, 3.58 to 9.97 cm in length, and 1.51 to 5.01 cm in diameter in the Mangunharjo Mangrove Forest, Semarang City, at Indonesia (Rizaldi, Redjeki et al. 2022).Some researchers found that on the Southeast coast of India, the average SL of Turbinella pyrum at adult age was measured to be 10.148 ± 0.222 cm and average SW was 5.476 ± 0.118 cm (Arularasan, Viswanathan et al. 2016).


Conclusions

This article investigates whether the nine species analyzed may be distinguished using the morphometric ratios of their shells.Among the species examined, the ratios SL/SW, SL/AL, SL/AW, SL/SPL, and SL/BL are significantly different (Panda, Pati et al. 2021).The primary goal of this research was to conduct a morphometric examination of randomly collected specimens from the three most prominent coastal regions of the Balasore district (Balramgadi, Bahabalpur, and Talapada) of Odisha, India.The present investigation shows that environments may differ significantly across the locations.The current investigation provides valuable reference points for future morphometric research.Researchers can identify correlations and support various concepts by combining ecological, molecular, and environmental data with the morphometric data.However, due to specimen collection restrictions genetic diversity studies cannot utilize molecular data.Instated, morphometric data gathered through carefully taken photography can be used to measure population diversity and study the influence of environmental variables shell growth or trait selection.The study confines the morphological differences among various species, suggesting that these differences are adaptive responses to environmental factors such as ecological, substrate type, and the weave motion.The abundance study shows that species distribution patterns can influence seasonal fluctuations, human impacts, and habitat preferences.This phenomenon highlights the importance of preserving biodiversity in coastal areas, as some species demonstrate the ecological resistance.Overall, this study depends on our understanding of gastropod species and lays the groundwork for future studies on the environmental influences affecting marine molluscs and their morphological adaptations.It also encourages the integration of ecological modeling and genetic analysis to explore species interaction and evolutionary trends.

Fig. 1
1
Fig. 1 Study area of three sampling sites of coastal areas at Balasore district, Odisha, India


Fig. 2
2
Fig. 2 Schematic representation of the species V. cochlidium with measurements used in the morphometric ranges of shell length (SL), shell spire length (SPL), shell width (SW), aperture width (AW), aperture length (AL), and basal length (BL)


Fig. 5
5
Fig. 5 Principal component analysis (PCA) of diverse morphometric ranges of different gastropod species: a The PCA analysis indicates that shell length of T. duplicata; I. lacera species from Talapada and C. magus, L. canarium, P. bufo from Balaramgadi is positively correlated.b The PCA analysis indicates that spiral length of M. trapa at Balaramgadi is adversely related.c The shell width of C. magus, P. tigrina, and L. canarium of Talapada is negatively corresponding where all other six species from both the Talapada and Bahabalpur are much similar found in PCA analysis.d Aperture lengths of maximum species are correlated positively in all three-study site except P. tigrina in Talapada coast found in PCA analysis.e The PCA analysis found the basal lengths of V. cochlidium, P. tigrina of Bahabalpur and P. bufo, L. canarium of Talapada are negatively allied.f Aperture widths of these specimens from Bahabalpur and Talapada are quite analogous, whereas P. bufo, T. telescopium of Balaramgadi beach are unfavorably linked.g The PCA analysis concluded the total weight of C. magus, P.bufo, T. duplicata, M. trapa, L. canarium, and P. tigrina from all three-study areas is positively interrelated


Fig. 6
6
Fig. 6 Linear Pearson's correlation of diverse morphometric ranges of different gastropod species: a linear Pearson's correlation in P. bufo the body length and total weight is highly correlated, 0.28, whereas body length and shell width are less similar, −0.24.b Linear Pearson's correlation of spiral length of T. duplicata is related maximally to shell length and minimally to aperture length.c Linear Pearson's correlation of the total weight of M. trapa is mostly correlated with aperture weight.d Linear Pearson's correlation of I. lacera shell width and shell length is most comprehensive with the positive value being 0.35.e Linear Pearson's correlation of P. tigrina aperture width and shell width is more related ranging 0.49.f Linear Pearson's correlation of Teliscopum teliscopium body length is firmly correlated with aperture length by 0.50.g Linear Pearson's correlation of L. canarium, the body length, and aperture length has a strong correlation of 0.30.h Linear Pearson's correlation of the body length and total width of C. magus is also maximally and minimally linked to shell width.i Linear Pearson's correlation of V. cochlidium shows a strong association between body length and aperture weight of 0.48







Table 1
1
Bhabalpur, Balaramgadi, and Talapada are three coastal sample sites in the Balasore district of Odisha, India

S.


No Site name Latitude/longitude Direction and distance from Balasore Site characteristic
2Balaramgadi21°28′16.98"NNortheast distance 22 kmFishing with trawler and net87° 3′26.13"E3Talapada21°18′55.01"NSoutheast distance 20 kmFishing with hand net86°53′44.05"E
1 Bhabalpur 21°30′54.96"N87° 6′58.58"ENortheast distance 23 km Fishing with trawler and net


Table 2
2
Nine different species of gastropods, each with their common name, range, IUCN status, and potential hazard to humans that were collected from three different sampling sites in the Balasore coastal area, Odisha, India
Scientific nameCommon nameIUCN statusDistributionThreat to humanPurpura bufo (Lamarck, 1822)Toad PurpuraNot evaluatedWestern & eastern,HarmlessIndian oceannorthwest & West cen-tral, PacificTurritella duplicataDuplicate turretNot evaluatedEastern & Western,Harmless(Linnaeus, 1758)Indian oceanWestern central, PacificMurex trapaRare-spined MurexNot evaluatedEastern & Western,Harmless(Röding, 1798)Indian oceannorthwest & West cen-tral, PacificIndothais laceraCarinate rock snailNot evaluatedEastern & Western,Harmless(Born, 1778)Indian oceannorthwest & West cen-tral, PacificParatectonatica tigrinaTiger moon snailNot evaluatedEastern,Harmless(Röding, 1798)Indian oceanNorthwest, PacificEastern central & South-east, AtlanticTelecopium telescopiumTelescope snailLeast Concern (LC) 2010Eastern & Western,Harmless(Linnaeus, 1758)Indian oceannorthwest & West cen-tral, PacificLaevistrombus canariumDog conchNot evaluatedEastern & Western,Harmless(Linnaeus, 1758)Indian oceannorthwest & West cen-tral, PacificConus magusMagicians coneLeast Concern (LC) 2011Eastern & Western,Harmless(Linnaeus, 1758)Indian oceanWest central, PacificVolegalea cochlidiumSpiral melongenaNot evaluatedEastern & Western,Harmless(Linnaeus, 1758)Indian oceannorthwest & West cen-tral, Pacific
AcknowledgementsAll authors are thankful to R & D section, Fakir Mohan University, for Seed Money Project to carry out the research work.Availability of data and materialsAll data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article.AbbreviationsFundingNo funding received.DeclarationsEthics approval and consent to participate Not applicable.Consent for publicationNot applicable.Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.Publisher's NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Shell morphometric ratios as a tool for taxonomic determination in gastropods: A case study in Nerita (Gastropoda, Neritidae). L N Altomari, B H B Alves, Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom. 10142021

Consistency and variation in kelp holdfast assemblages: Spatial patterns of biodiversity for the major phyla at different taxonomic resolutions. M J Anderson, C E Diebel, Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology. 32012005

D R Antu, T T Islam, Diversity of bivalves and gastropods in Sonadia Island. 20239

Variation in shell morphology and adult specimen weight in three varieties of a commercially important gastropod turbinellapyrum (Linnaeus, 1767) from Southeast Coast of India. S Arularasan, M Viswanathan, J Marine Sci Res. Dev. 61842016

Statistics review 7: Correlation and regression. V Bewick, L Cheek, Critical Care. 762003

Morphometric analysis of shell and operculum variations in the viviparid snail. Y.-W Chiu, H.-C Chen, Cipangopaludina chinensis (Mollusca: Gastropoda). Taiwan200241

S Choudhury, R K Vizhi, First report of overlooked marine gastropods from India concerning their geographical distribution. 202238

Deciphering mollusc shell production: The roles of genetic mechanisms through to ecology, aquaculture and biomimetics. M S Clark, L S Peck, Biological Reviews. 62020

Discharge, substrate type and temperature as factors affecting gastropod assemblages in springs in northwestern Bosnia and Herzegovina. D Dmitrović, A Savić, Archives of Biological Sciences. 6832016

Morphology and evolution of the wing bullae in South American Leptophlebiidae (Ephemeroptera). E Dominguez, V Abdala, Journal of Morphology. 28012019

Q H Gu, M Husemann, Phylogeography of Bellamya (Mollusca: Gastropoda: Viviparidae) snails on different continents: Contrasting patterns of diversification in China and East Africa. 201919

PAST: Paleontological statistics software package for education and data analysis. Ø Hammer, D A Harper, Palaeontologia Electronica. 4192001

Morphometric variation of ten species of Nerita (Molluscs: Gastropods) in rocky intertidal zone of Oma Village, Central Moluccas, Eastern Indonesia. S Haumahu, P A Uneputty, International Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Studies. 632018

Evolution between marine and freshwater habitats: a case study of the gastropod Neritopsina. Doctoral dissertation. B V Holthuis, N Younes, G , Length-weight relationships and relative condition factor of fish inhabiting the marine area of the Eastern Mediterranean city. Tripoli-Lebanon1995. 201844University of Washington Jisr,

Structure and mechanical properties of gastropod egg capsules from southeast coast of India. T Kaviarasan, R Sivasankar, Proceedings of the Zoological Society. the Zoological SocietySpringer2020736

Phylum mollusca. D R Kershaw, 10.1007/978-94-011-6035-3_10Animal Diversity. 1983

The Conidae (Mollusca: Gastropoda) of India. A J Kohn, Journal of Natural History. 1231978

Comparative taxonomic evaluation of Thais species (Order: Gastropoda; Family: Muricidae) of Mollusca from Maharashtra coast of India. R Kumar, A Jaiswar, Indian Journal of Geo-Marine Sciences (IJMS). 46062017

Vertical distribution and diversity of gastropods molluscs from intertidal habitats of the Ratnagiri coast Maharashtra. A R Kurhe, M A Rodríguez, India. International Research Journal of Natural and Applied Sciences. 162014

Checklist of intertidal benthic macrofauna of a brackish water coastal lagoon on east coast of India: The Chilika lake. D Mahapatro, R Panigrahy, International Journal of Marine Science. 5332015

Combined methods to detect pollution effects on shell shape and structure in Neogastropods. F Márquez, R González-José, Ecological Indicators. 1122011

Morphometric analysis of the shell of the intertidal gastropod Echinolittorina lineolata (d'Orbigny, 1840) at different latitudes along the Brazilian coast. A S Matos, H Matthews-Cascon, Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom. 10052020

Quantitative assessment of present and the future potential threat of coastal erosion along the Odisha coast using geospatial tools and statistical techniques. M Mishra, P Chand, Science of the Total Environment. 8751624882023

Response of mollusk assemblages to environmental conditions: A case study from the Burullus Lagoon. O H Orabi, A E El-Badry, .-M A , Journal of the Geological Society of India. 912018

Temporal morphometric analyses of Pila globosa in India for its use in aquaculture and food industry. F Panda, S G Pati, The Journal of Basic and Applied Zoology. 8212021

Microstructure analysis and chemical and mechanical characterization of the shells of three freshwater snails. S Parveen, A Chakraborty, ACS Omega. 5402020

Predation on Recent turritelline gastropods from the Indian subcontinent and comparison with a revised global database. G Paul, A Das, Malacologia. 561&22013

Biology and Evolution of the Mollusca. W F Ponder, D R Lindberg, 2019CRC Press1

Seasonal variation of primary productivity of Bay of Bengal at Chandipur on Sea. D S Pramanik, S S Mohanty, Odisha. Int. J. Fish. Aquat. Stud. 422016

Artyfechinostomum sufrartyfex trematode infections in children. Y K Prasad, S Dahal, Emerging Infectious Diseases. 25815712019

S J Presley, M R Willig, Gradients and the Structure of Neotropical Metacommunities: Effects of Disturbance, Elevation, Landscape Structure, and Biogeography. Springer2023

Morphometric Characteristics of Mangrove Snails (Telescopium telescopium) in the Mangunharjo Mangrove Forest, Semarang City. M A Rizaldi, S Redjeki, Jurnal Moluska Indonesia. 622022

New records of Conidae (Mollusca, Gastropoda) from Andhra Pradesh, east coast of India. S Rout, B Dash, Indian Journal of Geo-Marine Sciences (IJMS). 50082022

Multi-hazard risk assessment of coastal vulnerability from tropical cyclones-A GIS based approach for the Odisha coast. B Sahoo, P K Bhaskaran, Journal of Environmental Management. 2062018

Length-weight relationship and population genetic of two marine gastropods species (Turbinidae: Turbo sparverius and Turbo bruneus) in the Bird Seascape Papua Indonesia. D Saleky, I Setyobudiandi, 10.13057/biodiv/d170130Biodiversitas Journal of Biological Diversity. 2016

Occurrence of two turritellid shells (mollusca: Gastropoda) along the kerala coast India. P Sary, R Pramod Kiran, Journal of Aquatic Biology & Fisheries. 62018

Morphological and molecular characterization of several neogastropod species (mollusca: Gastropoda) from coastal waters of bangladesh with one new record. K Sultana, P Brishti, 10.3329/jbs.v29i0.54824Journal of Bio-Science. 2021

Macro-morphological and ecological variation in rosa sericea complex. F Ullah, Y Gao, Agronomy. 12510782022

Potential antibacterial activity of the land snail cryptozona bistrialis in Nagapattinam. V Valarmathi, International Journal of Zoology and Applied Biosciences. 162016

Adaptive divergence in shell morphology in an ongoing gastropod radiation from Lake Malawi. B Van Bocxlaer, C M Ortiz-Sepulveda, BMC Evolutionary Biology. 2012020

The role of habitat shift in the evolution of lizard morphology: Evidence from tropical Tropidurus. L J Vitt, J P Caldwell, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 9481997

Fossil-calibrated molecular phylogeny of atlantid heteropods (Gastropoda, Pterotracheoidea). D Wall-Palmer, A W Janssen, BMC Evolutionary Biology. 2012020

Locking of the operculum in a water snail: Theoretical modeling and applications for mechanical sealing. X Xu, J Wu, Journal of Theoretical Biology. 4642019

Warped Ideas: Geometric morphometrics as a complementary technique for studying gastropod shell morphology. M Yousif, 2012