Proposed taxonomy of audit and related activities


MRCP, FFCMDavid H Stone 
University of Glasgow


Proposed taxonomy of audit and related activities
DDCF763E23F005568EFEE1642678FFE5
The quality of the current debate on medical audit has been compromised by semantic con- fusion.A simple taxonomy is suggested for six fre- quently cited terms: review, audit, evaluation, surveil- lance, appraisal and monitoring.Review is usually a clinically based professional scrutiny of a particular service.Continuous peer review is audit, which may be internal or external.Evaluation involves measuring health indices in relation to a reference point, such as an objective or a control group, and has a strong statis- tical or epidemiological flavour, as has surveillance which may be regarded as continuous evaluation.Appraisal is the managerial form of evaluation, while monitoring is its routine counterpart.Thus, review and audit are primarily clinically oriented activities, evalua- tion and surveillance tend to be more epidemiological, and appraisal and monitoring are largely managerial.Review, evaluation and appraisal may be described as one-off quality assessment methods, and audit, surveil- lance and monitoring as routine ones.This classifica- tion attributes a distinct theoretical identity to each of the six categories though they are not mutually exclu- sive.It also delineates boundaries between the neces- sarily separate professional worlds inhabited by clini- cians, public health staff and managers, and places various quality assessment methods within appropriate time-frames.The scheme preserves the fundamental

integrity of the six activities which collectively comprise the intelligence gathering arm of quality assurance.

The White Paper Working for patients [1] has stimulated a wide-ranging discussion on medical audit and its place within a reformed health service.Unfortunately the quality of the debate has been compromised by the indiscriminate use of a plethora of terms which may or may not be appropriate synonyms for audit.

Unless we can achieve agreement on basic definitions and concepts, progress towards implementing accept- able quality assessment procedures will be obstructed by unnecessary semantic confusion.The aim of this paper is to offer, in the interests of clarity, a simple tax- onomy of six of the more frequently cited terms: review, audit, evaluation, surveillance, appraisal and monitoring.

The notion of performance review has become increasingly prevalent in recent times, especially since the passage of legislation in 1972 in the United States obliging health care organisations to establish Profes- sional Standards Review Organisations [2].The usual dictionary definition of review is 'to look back upon' with a varying degree of reflective criticism, depending on its usage [3].Review is usually clinically based, descriptive, voluntary and conducted by clinicians wishing to assess their own performance.Peer review is an extension of this critical self-examination towards professional scrutiny by colleagues, and merges with audit if it becomes a continuous or routine activity.

The White Paper's accompanying working paper on the subject defined audit as the systematic, critical analysis of the quality of medical care, including the procedures used for diagnosis and treatment, the use of resources, and the resulting outcome and quality of life for the patient [4].This definition emphasises the largely clinical orientation of medical audit, which is implied to mean assessing the quality of patient care for both professional and (especially) managerial purposes.Audit, or continuous peer review, may be inter- nal (confined to clinicians within a team or institu- tion) or external (conducted by colleagues outwith the team or institution).Only external audit can be regarded as truly independent peer review.A distinc- tion is sometimes drawn between medical audit (in which the performance of doctors is reviewed) and clinical audit (which embraces all providers of clinical care).This is probably unhelpful and confusing, particularly when one considers that most 'medical audit' has been pioneered by surgeons [5].

Evaluation means, literally, to determine the value of some aspect of a system (in this case the health ser- vice).Though frequently used to imply clinical assess- ment, it has been a long-standing preoccupation of epidemiologists.Evaluation involves measuring health indices in relation to a reference point (such as an objective, or a control group).There is a strong statisti- cal flavour to the concept.In his epidemiological dic- tionary, Last defines evaluation as a process that attempts to determine as systematically and objectively as possible the relevance, effectiveness and impact of activities in the light of their objectives [6], In practice, this often requires the performance of an experiment such as a randomised controlled trial, the epitome of scientifically rigorous evaluation.Other approaches to evaluation include before-and-after comparisons,

Cochrane's view of efficiency and effectiveness [7],

and the classic Donabedian model of structure, process and outcome [8].

Both review and evaluation suggest discrete, ad hoc investigations.When review is conducted on a routine basis, it becomes audit.There is no satisfactory equivalent term for routine evaluation, though surveillance approximates to it.Surveillance is continuous epidemiological data collection for the purpose of assess- ing trends or deviations in health status or health care [9], Examples are child health surveillance and the post-marketing surveillance of new drugs.Surveillance may be regarded as bearing an analogous relationship to evaluation, in the public health domain, as audit bears to review.

If surveillance is largely concerned with detecting changes in health status and potential environmental hazards to health over time, then the term monitoring may be reserved for the more managerial counterpart of on-going data collection and analysis in the sphere of health care delivery.An ad hoc form of monitoring is appraisal, a familiar bureaucratic expression for the managerial assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of a service.

These concepts are all variations on the underlying theme of systematic health care quality assessment.Is there any possibility of distinguishing between them?And is any useful purpose served by doing so?

Figure 1 attempts to respond with a double affirma- tive.The classification is akin to a two-way table, simul- taneously assigning each of the six cells to the appro- priate professional perspective and time-scale.

According to this scheme, review and audit are primarily clinical activities, evaluation and surveillance are epidemiological, and appraisal and monitoring are managerial.Along the other axis, review, evaluation and appraisal are performed as one-off quality assess- ment activities within a discrete time-scale.Audit, surveillance and monitoring are routine processes sharing a common objective of continuous quality assessment, each linked by a feedback loop to clinical, public health and administrative action respectively.The six categories are not, of course, rigid and mutual- ly exclusive.

There are four main advantages to this classifica- tion:

1.It attributes a distinct theoretical identity to each of these six otherwise undifferentiated terms.

2. It delineates boundaries between the necessarily separate (though complementary) professional worlds inhabited by clinicians, public health and managerial personnel.3. It places these activities within a time frame, which in turn may reflect the extent to which they are conducted in a research or service context.This is an important issue administratively and financially.

4. The scheme preserves the fundamental conceptual integrity of these six activities which collectively comprise the intelligence gathering arm of quality assurance.

A cknowledgements I am grateful to colleagues in the Social Paediatric and Obstetric Research Unit for their invaluable help in the preparation of this paper.Journal of the Royal College of Physicians of London Vol. 24No. 1 January 1990

Fig. 1 .Fig. 1 .
11
Fig. 1.A taxonomy of quality assessment activities.

Journal of the Royal College of Physicians of London Vol. 24 No. 1 January 1990

Working for patients. Secretaries Of State For, Health, Northern Wales, Scotland Ireland, 1989HMSOLondonCmnd 555

PSRO: organisation for regional peer review. B Decker, P Bonner, 1973BallingerCambridge, Mass

of White Paper. LondonHMSO1989Secretaries of State for Health, Wales, Northern Ireland and ScotlandCmnd 555

Audit of surgical audit. R Gruer, A Gunn, D Gordon, C Ruckley, Lancet. 1986

Dictionary of epidemiology. J M Last, 1983Oxford University PressNew Yorkfor the International Epidemiological Association

Effectiveness and efficiency: random refactions on health services. A L Cochrane, 1971Oxford University PressOxfordfor Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust

Evaluating the quality of medical care. A Donabedian, Millbank Memorial Eund Quarterly. 196644

Report of expert committee on environmental health monitoring in occupational health. World Health Organisation. 5351973World Health Organisation