MD, MPH-Christina A Penfield christina.penfield@nyulangone.org 
MD, MSSara G Brubaker 
MDMeghana A Limaye 
MDJennifer Lighter 
MD, MPHAdam J Ratner 
MDKristen M Thomas 
MDJessica A Meyer 
MD, MPHAshley S Roman 

Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
NYU Langone Health New York
150 E 32nd Street10016NY


Department of Pathology
Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases Department of Infection Prevention and Control and Pediatrics
Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases Department of Pediatrics and Microbiology Hassenfeld Children's Hospital NYU Langone Health
NYU Langone Health
New York, New YorkNY, NY


Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
NYU Langone Health
New YorkNY


NYU Langone Health
New YorkNY
10.1016/j.ajogmfSince January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre -including this research content -immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active. Research Letter NYU Langone Health New York, NY


Detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 in placental and fetal membrane samples OBJECTIVE:

Since the first reports of the emergence of the novel coronavirus (severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus 2 [SARS-CoV-2]) and its associated disease (coronavirus disease 2019 ), concerns remain about whether the virus can be transmitted from the mother to the fetus either during the antepartum period or during the process of labor and delivery. In a previous review involving a small number of cases, 2 placental swabs for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing were sent in addition to neonatal and cord blood testing, and the PCR results of the swabs returned negative. 1 Other studies have reported findings of SARS-CoV-2 immunoglobulin M in neonates born to mothers who received a diagnosis of COVID-19 during pregnancy, 2,3 findings that may indicate vertical transmission of the virus in utero. In this study, PCR assays were performed to detect the presence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in placental and membrane samples. Samples were obtained after delivery from a series women who received a diagnosis of COVID-19 during pregnancy.


STUDY DESIGN:

Institutional Review Board approval was obtained for this study. All pregnant patients who received a diagnosis of COVID-19 and who delivered between March 1, 2020, and April 20, 2020, at NYU Langone Health were included. Participants were identified by searching through the electronic medical record. Charts were reviewed for documentation of reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing of placental or membrane samples for SARS-CoV-2 RNA within 30 minutes after delivery. PCR testing for SARS-CoV-2 was performed using the Cepheid Xpert Xpress SARS-CoV-2 assay (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) under Emergency Use Authorization. Results obtained in this study were for "Research Use Only." Placental swabs were obtained from the amniotic surface after clearing the surface of maternal blood (PCR of placental sample). Membrane swabs were obtained from between the amnion and chorion after manual separation of the membranes (PCR of membrane sample). Maternal COVID-19 status was categorized as mild, severe, or critical. 4 The time interval from maternal diagnosis of COVID-19 to delivery was calculated in days. Infants were tested for SARS-CoV-2 using PCR of nasopharyngeal swabs between day 1 of life and day 5 of life during hospitalization. Furthermore, the infants were assessed for clinical signs and symptoms of COVID-19, such as fever, cough, and nasal congestion.


RESULTS:

There were 32 pregnant patients with COVID-19 who delivered in this study, 11 of which had placental or membrane swabs performed (Table). Three of the 11 swabs returned positive for SARS-CoV-2. However, none of the infants tested positive for SARS-CoV2 on day 1 of life to day 5 of life, and none demonstrated symptoms of COVID-19.


CONCLUSION:

Of 11 placental or membrane swabs sent for testing after delivery, 3 swabs returned with positive results for SARS-CoV-2, all in women with severe to critical COVID-19 at time of delivery. This is the first study to find the presence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in placental or membrane samples. Although there were no clinical signs of vertical transmission, the findings indicate the possibility of intrapartum viral exposure. Given the mixing of maternal and fetal fluid and tissues at the time of delivery, the origin of the detected SARS-CoV-2 RNA in this study is unclear. The source may be from maternal blood, amniotic fluid, or fetal membranes and amniotic sac. For those infants who were delivered vaginally, vaginal secretions is also a possible source; however, previous studies have not been able to demonstrate the presence of SARS-CoV-2 in vaginal secretions. 5 Although the neonates in this study tested negative in the first 5 days of life, many were born through cesarean deliveries with decreased length of exposure to these tissues, which may be associated with a decreased likelihood of vertical transmission. In addition, if the exposure occurred at the time of delivery, the virus may require a longer incubation period before test swabs show positive results. As a consequence, nasopharyngeal testing immediately after delivery may not be the ideal approach to evaluate vertical transmission. In summary, the presence of viral RNA in placental and membranes samples by RT-PCR at the time of delivery indicates the need for further research into the possibility of vertical transmission and use of multiple testing methods for neonates after birth.
 Penfield. Detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 in placental and fetal membrane samples. AJOG MFM 2020.
This paper is part of a supplement that represents a collection of COVIDrelated articles selected for publication by the editors of AJOG MFM without additional financial support.The authors report no conflict of interest and no funding for this study.
An analysis of 38 pregnant women with COVID-19, their newborn infants, and maternal-fetal transmission of SARS-CoV-2: maternal coronavirus infections and pregnancy outcomes. D A Schwartz, Arch Pathol Lab Med. Epub ahead of printSchwartz DA. An analysis of 38 pregnant women with COVID-19, their newborn infants, and maternal-fetal transmission of SARS-CoV-2: maternal coronavirus infections and pregnancy outcomes. Arch Pathol Lab Med 2020. [Epub ahead of print].

Antibodies in infants born to mothers with COVID-19 pneumonia. H Zeng, C Xu, J Fan, JAMA. Epub ahead of printZeng H, Xu C, Fan J, et al. Antibodies in infants born to mothers with COVID-19 pneumonia. JAMA 2020. [Epub ahead of print].

Possible vertical transmission of SARS-CoV-2 from an infected mother to her newborn. L Dong, J Tian, S He, JAMA. Epub ahead of printDong L, Tian J, He S, et al. Possible vertical transmission of SARS- CoV-2 from an infected mother to her newborn. JAMA 2020. [Epub ahead of print].

Characteristics of and important lessons from the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in China: summary of a report of 72314 cases from the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Z Wu, J M Mcgoogan, JAMA. Epub ahead of printWu Z, McGoogan JM. Characteristics of and important lessons from the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in China: summary of a report of 72314 cases from the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. JAMA 2020. [Epub ahead of print].

SARS-CoV-2 is not detectable in the vaginal fluid of women with severe COVID-19 infection. L Qiu, X Liu, M Xiao, Clin Infect Dis. Epub ahead of printQiu L, Liu X, Xiao M, et al. SARS-CoV-2 is not detectable in the vaginal fluid of women with severe COVID-19 infection. Clin Infect Dis 2020. [Epub ahead of print].

All rights reserved. 10.1016/j.ajogmf.2020.100133Elsevier Incª 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajogmf. 2020.100133