A Review of Extraction Techniques for Avocado Oil
2016

Xiaoli Qin 
College of Food Science
Southwest University
400715ChongqingCHINA

Guangdong Province Key Laboratory for Green Processing of Natural Products and Product Safety
510640GuangzhouCHINA

Jinfeng Zhong 
College of Food Science
Southwest University
400715ChongqingCHINA

A Review of Extraction Techniques for Avocado Oil

Journal of Oleo Science J. Oleo Sci
6511201610.5650/jos.ess16063881


from the fruit. The oil from avocado can be considered a newcomer and have commercial importance in the industry of fats and oils due to its nutrients and health benefits. Avocado oil, thus, has potentially multiple uses as edible/ culinary oil, an ingredient in healthcare products and cosmetics. This review provides the relevant literature summary on the chemical composition and extraction methods of avocado oil.


CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF AVOCADO OIL

The lipid extracted from the mesocarp of the avocado fruit rather than the seed. Avocado seed contains little oil about 2 , and its seed oil even has some toxic factors i.e., hepatotoxic agents that cause some metabolic alterations in growing fats such as enhancement of liver lipogenesis, increase in hepatic-lipids amount in liver, and elevation of enzymes level involved in lipid biosynthesis 5 . Thus, most commercial avocado oil extracted from the flesh. The chemical composition in the mesocarp of avocado fruit is depended on the cultivar and harvesting time. For example, in Fuetre and Bacon cultivars, the lipid content is 18.7 and 21.8 , respectively 6 . Total lipids extracted from the mesocarp include neutral lipid, glycolipid and phospholipid. Among the total lipids content, more than 95 is neutral lipids of which 87 were triglyceride . Table 1 gives triglyceride composition, total fatty acid composition of avocado oil and its lipid-soluble compounds.

The fatty acid composition can be changed depending on variety, ripening stage, geographical growth location as well as extraction method 1, 7 . Avocado oil is characterized by the fact of having a high content of monounsaturated fatty acid oleic acid, 50 , which is similar to olive oil. Palmtic acid is a main saturated fatty acid and linoleic acid is a main polyunsaturated fatty acid present in avocado oil 8 . Also the triglyceride profile of avocado oil can be distinctly different from various cultivars. For example, the dominant triglyceride of avocado located in Malaysia were POO, followed by POL, OOO and PPO, while major triglyceride of Hass avocado variety imported from Australian were OOO, followed by POO, OOL and POL 9 . The triglyceride composition may vary by extraction methods. However, till now there is little information on the comparison of triglyceride profile of avocado fruit by various ex-traction methods.

In addition to the lipids, lipid-soluble antioxidants and bioactive phytochemicals are rich in the avocado oil Table  1 . Especially, carotenoids mainly lutein , tocopherols mainly vitamin E and phytosterols mainly β -sitosterol are three of the most important lipid-soluble compounds, which have positive health outcomes. For example, lutein is considered as beneficial for the improvement of eye diseases such as age-related macular degeneration and cataracts 11,12 . Phytosterols can reduce plasma or serum total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol by competing with cholesterol in the intestine for uptake in hypercholesterolemic people 13 . High concentration of chlorophylls is also found in virgin/crude avocado oil. It contributes to the appearance emerald-green color and health profile of avocado oil. However, a high level of chlorophylls can cause nega- avocado oil: extraction techniques tive effect on oxidative stability of crude avocado oil due to its easy photo-oxidation when it exposes to light and oxygen. The concentration of pigments including chlorophylls and carotenoids increases in the oil with increasing the proportion of skin added to avocado pulp during oil extraction. Wong et al. 14 reported lutein concentration and total chlorophyll concentration in the oils extracted by cold pressed extraction procedure increased from 1.13 to 3.21 μg/g and 7.3 to 27.5 μg/g as the amount of skin increasing from 0 to 100 added to the ripened avocado flesh.


EXTRACTION METHODS

Several investigations focus on the production technology of avocado oil, with the purpose of adding economic value and attaining a suitable product for various applications. Generally, crude oil could be obtained by techniques of centrifugation, pressing and solvent extraction. In addition to extraction process used, the pretreatment of oilseeds and/or oily fruits is one of important factors affecting oil extraction yield. Lipids are primarily found in avocado mesocarp that composed of numerous parenchyma cells and evenly scattered idioblasts Fig. 1a . The parenchyma cells contain finely dispersed oil emulsion, and the idioblasts are filled with one large oil sac 15,16 . The idioblastic oil cells have an average diameter of 75 μm and thicker cellular walls compared to the parenchyma cells. The primary walls of the parenchyma cells can be degraded by the activity of cellulase and polygalacturonase during ripening, but the suberized walls of the idioblastic cells remain intact due to the immunity of the activity of these enzymes 15 as shown in Fig. 1. To increase the release of oil from the cellular bodies and enhance oil extraction, extraction processes assisted with mechanical, enzymatic and thermal pretreatments are used to rupture the structure of the emulsion and the cell walls. Various extraction methods for recovering oil from avocado fruit are summarized in Table  2.


Aqueous separation

The water or aqueous extraction is a traditional process used to recover oil from plant resources. Water separation of avocado oil is performed by enzymatic or mechanical destruction of tissue cells contained lipids followed by centrifugation or gravity setting to separate the oil from the oil-water emulsion. According to destroying way of cells wall and the driving force of separating oil layer, aqueous separation methods can be mainly divided into three groups: 1 enzymatically assisted centrifugation separation, 2 mechanically assisted centrifugation separation, and 3 mechanically assisted hot water separation methods, as showed in Fig. 2. According to the first method, the extraction of oil from avocado fruit is primarily accomplished by degrading tissue cells wall with exogenous enzymes and using centrifugation-force separating oil from three phases aqueous, oil and fruit residues . While in the second and the third methods, the destruction of cells wall is by mechanical force. One of outstanding advantages of aqueous separation technique is that it does not need to remove a large quantity of water from fresh pulp, compared to solvent and pressing extraction process. The aqueous separation technique is practicable due to its simple operation and low cost, compared to other oil extraction methods like organic solvent extraction . Besides, the benefit of utilizing centrifugal force to separate lies in yielding a higher quality product with higher purity, which greatly simplifies the subsequent refining process.

In enzyme-assisted centrifugation technique, prior to centrifugation, endogenously cellulitic and the added exogenous enzymes together hydrolyze and degrade the cellular walls, favoring the release of oil from the cells. The added   The addition of a inorganic salt (such as NaC1, CaCO 3 , CaSO 4 ) assists oil separation from the emulsion by physical means


18)

Highest recovery (about 80%) were obtained at a 5:1 water-to-avocado ratio, pH 5.5 and centrifugal force of 12,300 g, 5% CaCO 3 or CaSO 4

It was possible to extract oil from avocado by mechanical assisted centrifugalization


19)

H o t w a t e r s e p a r a t i o n : f r e s h a v o c a d o flesh pounded and wrapped paste boiled in w a t e r p u t i n a w o o d e n t r o u g h a n d pressed oil/water mixture 12 h of standing to form oil layer scooped into a heating aluminum pot crude oil

Oil yield of 1.8%-11.6% (respect to fresh matter) with a extraction rate of 82%-85% from different samples Acid and peroxide values were satisfactorily low (4.5 mg KOH/g and 7.3 meqO 2 /kg), no apparent degradation or off-odor after 1 year storage A simple method for home production of avocado oil with acceptable peroxide and acid values Similar yields were obtained by the process scaled up to 40 kg batches 20)

Hot water separation: avocado flesh diluted slurry homogenized by a blender homogenization with high pressure heating crude oil (upper layer)

Oil yield increased from 21.4% to 23.2% with increasing homogenization pressure from 7 to 176 kg/cm 2 Free fatty acid and iodine value also increased with increasing homogenization pressure

The use of homogenization for better breakdown O/W emulsion leads to an increase in oil yield, but also increased iodine value and free fatty acid of the oil


21)

Microwave-assisted squeezing: avocado pulp microwave treatment squeezing/pressing the pulp crude oil Extraction yield of 65.2% was obtained at microwave energy of 1.8 KJ/g and exposure time of 11 min The content of free fatty acids, peroxide value and trans fatty acid of crude oil were 0.144%, 3.77 meq/kg and 0.29%, respectively Different extraction methods led to modification of physical and chemical characteristics of oil from avocado Microwave-assisted hexane extraction method provided the highest yield and the slightest modification to the characteristic of the oil In general, a lesser deterioration of the oils was produced with microwaves rather than solvents 7)

Solvent extraction with hexane: avocado pulp dehydrated (at 70 , ≤ 100 mmHg) pulp with 27% moisture extraction (Soxhlet method)

Extraction yield of 54% The content of free fatty acids, peroxide value and trans fatty acid of crude oil were 0.65%, 10.68 meq/kg and 0.3%, respectively

Microwave-assisted hexane extraction: avocado flesh paste heated by microwave extraction (Soxhlet method)

Extraction yield of 97% The content of free fatty acids, peroxide value and trans fatty acid of crude oil were 0.277%, 9.55 meq/kg and 0.09%, respectively Solvent extraction with acetone: avocado flesh small particles fresh acetone extraction at 25 (first extraction) fresh acetone extraction at 55 (second extraction)

Extraction yield of 12% The content of free fatty acids, peroxide value and trans fatty acid of crude oil were 2.84% 12.74 meq/kg and 0.45%, respectively

Solid additive-assisted press: avocado flesh mashed paste the addition of a solid additive moderate heating pressing crude oil Grains of sand and cereal seeds were good solid additives due to their hardness Grains of sand is the best additive and the sand addition of 30%-40% (respect to the fresh pulp used) yielded the highest oil recovery (about 70%)

Oil extraction yield could be significantly improved by the addition of solid additives, especially grains of sand


22)

Supercritical fluid extraction: oven-dried avocado slices grounded extracted in a supercritical fluid extractor crude oil Oil yield obtained by supercritical carbon dioxide (SC-CO 2 ) extraction (6 g/kg fruit weight on a dry basis) was under 3.5 107 Pa and temperature of 37 Higher oil yield was obtained with hexane extraction (9.3 g/kg fruit weight on a dry basis) SC-CO 2 may be more selective, leading to less complete extraction and lower oil yields under the experimental conditions


23)

Hexane extraction (Soxhelt method) Soxhlet extraction gave the most reproducible results (6.5 0.24 g/kg and 6.4 0.20 g/kg dry weight for Hass and Fuerte avocados, respectively) Microwave-assisted hexane extraction had the highest yield of oil (7 g/kg dry weight) from the Hass variety Oils from SC-CO 2 had wider range of fatty acids and the lowest amount of oxidizing metals such as Fe and Cu SC-CO 2 is more favorable to produce oils for food/pharmaceutical industries, because the method is free from solvent Both SC-CO 2 and microwave-assisted extraction techniques are reported to be applicable on a large scale operation


24)

Ultrasound water bath extraction: dried avocado samples sonicated in a water bath (60 ) with hexane for 1 h Ultra-turrax treatment-hexane extraction: dried avocado samples contain hexane treated with an ultraturrax tool extracted with hexane by Soxhlet method

Microwave assisted-hexane extraction: avocado paste treated by microwave oven fine powder extracted with hexane by Soxhlet method Supercritical fluid extraction: 5.0 g of dried avocado loaded into a10.0 g-extractor extract for 2 h with a SC-CO 2 fluid flow rate of 2.8-3.5 mL/min avocado oil: extraction techniques exogenous enzymes can be pectinases, α-amylase, proteases, celluloses and pectolytic enzyme. Many factors including enzyme type and concentration, enzymatic reaction temperature, reaction time and dilution ratio of paste to water are considered as important factors affecting oil extraction yield. It has been reported that extraction yield from avocado paste was greatly improved more than 25 folds by enzyme-assisted centrifugation compared with non-enzyme assisted centrifugation 17 . Freitas et al. evaluated the profitability of enzymatically-assisted aqueous extraction technology by using payback period and internal rate of return as criteria 25 . To reach a higher productivity, oil content in avocado pulp and extraction yield are required greater than 10 and 60 , respectively, when considering raw material price, plant capacity, enzyme price and selling price. They concluded that this process is economically attractive.

In mechanically assisted centrifugation method, cells in avocado flesh containing oil droplets are ruptured by mechanical force such as grinding by a mortar or pestle , and the oil released by centrifugation force. The particle size of ruptured cells is considered as more important factor than other factors such as pulp concentration, heating temperature, electrolyte concentration and centrifugal force for oil extraction from the slurry 26 . To ensure high oil yield, parenchyma and idioblastic cells of avocado fruit can be intensely ruptured, producing particles with small size. However, the degree of fine grinding is required to well control. Because the oil released from the cells is easily emulsified with water and other cellular substrates, resulting in difficult separation of oil from the mixture during centrifugation process. To prevent or reduce oil emulsification, a certain amount of demulsifying agent added to the slurries, adjusting pH value of the slurries and appropriate heating are included before centrifugation process. Bizimana et al. 19 reported oil recovery was higher at pH 5.5 71.45 than that at pH 4.0 65.77 . In addition, the addition of inorganic salts NaCl, CaCO 3 and CaSO 4 promoted the separation of oil from water 18,19 . It should be pointed out that the endogenously lipoxygenase activity may still present in the crude avocado oil extracted by the mechanically assisted centrifugation method without appropriate heating. This enzyme can degrade unsaturated fatty acids, which influences oil quality and nutritional properties of unsaturated fatty acids. Expect moderate heating before the centrifugation processing, additional treatments are developed to decrease the lipoxygenase activity in the crude oil. One of treatment for solution to this issue is the utilization of electric field treatment. Ariza-Ortega et al. 27 reported that, from a nutritional point of view, the changes in unsaturated fatty acids were negligible by observing Fourier transform infrared spectrograms of electric fieldtreated crude avocado oil, suggesting electric field technology is a suitable method to minimize the oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids for preserving the oil quality.

According to the mechanically-assisted hot water separation method, avocado fruits are subjected to mechanically mashed, then oil is released from slurries by boiling water and subsequent pressing, the oil layer is then separated by gravity setting. As mentioned, avocado fruit itself not only contains endogenously pectolitic and cellulitic enzymes, but also has lipolytic enzymes. The endogenously lipolytic enzymes cause oil hydrolysis and oxidation especially under their optimal temperature conditions, resulting in decreasing the quality of crude avocado oil 18 . The finegrounded slurries, thus, are diluted or treated with hot water to allow easy release of oil from the slurries and inactivation of lipolytic enzymes. Bizimana et al. reported that a inverse linear relationship R 2 0.999 was obtained between heating temperature from 75 to 98 , and thus a higher heating temperature with short time was chosen to minimize the chances for heat damage to the oil and to increase process efficiency 19 . In the process of hot water separation method, the diluted slurries are generally heated at a higher temperature 100-105 to separate the oil part 20 . The diluted slurries also can be homogenized using a blender prior to the heating 28 . However, quiet high temperature 105

is not enough to break down water-inoil emulsion. Proteins and carbohydrates existed in avocado fruit can improve the emulsion stability, leading to a harder break-down of the linkage between oil and these components during heating. To make it easier to break down the emulsion, homogenization pressure is employed prior to heating. Hamzah found that homogenization pressure from 7 kg/cm 2 to 71 kg/cm 2 significantly increased extraction yield, iodine value and free fatty acid of crude avocado oil, but there was no remarkable increase in extraction yield, iodine value and free fatty acid of crude avocado oil when the homogenization pressure increasing from 71 kg/cm 2 to 176 kg/cm 2 21 .


Pressing extraction

Pressing refer to oils are extracted by pressing or squeezing oily materials with screw press or hydraulic press. Pressing technology commonly used to squeeze oil from oilseed materials like sesame with relatively high oil content. Compared with oilseeds, avocado pulp contains higher moisture about 77 and its cellular contents are different. Water content of fruit pulp can significantly affect the oil yield. Pretreatment methods of avocado pulp, thus, can be different prior to pressing. The pretreatment approaches include 1 slicing and dying of avocado flesh, 2 microwave-oven drying and 3 the addition of solid additives. Traditional dying procedures such as oven-drying and sun-drying are time consuming to dry the slices to 4 -5 water content, accompanying with a relatively high risk of poor oil quality. In contract, microwave-oven drying process not only shortens the drying time, but also serves as a function of inducing cells structure disruption. Factors, such as quantity of samples, the intensity of microwave energy and time of microwave exposure, affect the oil extraction yield. Moreno et al. 7 reported that the oil extraction yield reached its lower level less than 30 when the energy was more than 2 kJ/g. A high temperature 100 is accompanied by this high microwave energy, resulting in severe transforming the structure of idioblastic oil cells. Such transformed structure has a negative effect on the oil extraction yield. When the highest oil extraction yield by microwave-assisted squeezing was obtained at the optimized energy 1.89 kJ/g , the idioblastic cells became empty with no major changes.

The addition of solid additives is another way to reduce avocado pulp s moisture and viscosity and to increase the oil extraction yield. Solid additives are supposed to have a certain hardness and granularity and to be non-toxic, insoluble in oil or water. For example, the squeezing effect was better by adding rice, sorghum rice and grains of sand than that by adding rice husk, sugar and salt 22 . After sufficient mixing avocado pulp with solid additives, appropriate heating is required for subsequent squeezing. Such heating favors accelerating the disruption of cell walls during the extrusion process, making the decrease of the viscosity of cellular oil to increase the oil extraction yield. Besides, moderate heating favors the inactivity of lipases, which reduces or eliminates the hydrolysis of avocado oil during the squeezing and storage period.


Solvent extraction

Organic solvent extraction is the most common method to separate oil from oily resources. In the organic solvent method, avocado fruit is sliced, dried and grounded, subsequently oil is extracted with organic solvents. Traditional solvents including hexane and acetone are widely used to extract oils from various sources 7, 16 . Moreno et al. 7 reported the extraction yield was 54 by hexane extraction and 12 by acetone extraction, respectively. The action of solvents to the oil cells mainly causes remarkable differences in their extraction yield. The hexane extraction method causes an irregular and rough shape of both idioblastic and parenchyma cells. However, for acetone extraction procedure, the strongest modification deformation on the cellular structure was observed and most of the oil held inside the idioblastic cells 16 . Although a higher oil extraction yield can be obtained by an appropriate solvent, this technique has some drawbacks like environmental pollution and solvent residue in the final products, which limits the use of avocado oil in food and pharmaceutical applications.

Recently, supercritical fluid extraction has been used in separating desired compounds from solid matrices used in pharmaceutical and food industries. The supercritical carbon dioxide SC-CO 2 as a green solvent is biological safety with no solvent residue in the final product, compared with organic solvents used in oil extraction. Besides, differences in SC-CO 2 solubility to a certain desired product and other lipid-soluble bioactive compounds can be controlled by operating conditions such as pressure and temperature. For example, lower temperature and lower pressure favor reducing co-extraction of chlorophyll when extracting oil from dried and grounded avocado; the amount of chlorophyll indicated as absorbance of 0.765 by SC-CO 2 extraction was still lesser even at higher pressure 5.4 10 7 Pa and higher temperature 81 , compared with that by hexane extraction absorbance of 0.876 29 . Thus, the level of unsaponifiable matter including chlorophyll in avocado oil could decrease during the SC-CO 2 extraction process. On the one hand, the removal of chlorophyll from avocado oil during SC-CO 2 process gives better oil quality. On the other hand, the unsaponifiable matter separated from avocado oil is considered as valuable fraction used in the cosmetic and pharmaceutical industries. In consequence, the extraction yield by SC-CO 2 is lower than that by hexane extraction because SC-CO 2 is more selective and discriminative during the extraction 23 . The SC-CO 2 extraction, thus, serves as double functions of extraction and purification of avocado oil, which exhibits superior advantages in industrial extraction of avocado oil.

The extractability and oil quality of avocado oil can be affected by factors such as fruit ripeness and pulp moisture and its corresponding dying method. Hydrolytic enzymes such as polygalacturonase and cellulases in avocado fruit degrade the parenchyma cells walls during ripening. As a result, the cell tissue is softened and more paths are created for the solvent accessing in the parenchyma cells. For both SC-CO 2 and hexane extraction methods, the oil extraction yield from oven or freeze-dried ripe avocado avocado oil: extraction techniques mesocarp average yield of 626 and 713.5 g/kg, respectively is higher than that from unripe one average yield of 555 and 653 g/kg, respectively 23 . High pulp moisture interferes with the oil extraction effect, thus the reduction of water content in fruit pulp is necessary prior to solvent extraction. To lower the fruit pulp moisture, there are two common drying approaches, namely oven-drying and freeze-drying. More brittle and powdery dried material is obtained by freeze-drying method, while a harder structure is obtained for oven-dried material. Such hardness structure probably caused by the denaturation and crosslinking of proteins and the gelatinization of starch which acts as physical barriers around oil cells and increases the mass transfer resistance for solvents transport to the cellular surface 7 . Mostert et al. 23 reported that the oil extraction yield was significantly higher from freeze-dried ripe avocado material extracted with SC-CO 2 than from ovendried ripe avocado material, while the oil extraction yield from freeze-dried ripe avocado material extracted with hexane was higher but not significantly than that from oven-dried material. It seems that freeze-drying is a better choice for the extractability of avocado oil if a higher oil yield is the objective. The quality or oxidative stability of oil extracted from ripe or unripe avocado fruit is highly related to the dying method of the fruit. The lipase enzyme activity might be still present in the freeze-dried fruit material, which leads to the deterioration of oil and the destruction of valuable minor-compounds 30 . For the industry, however, other factors like the cost and efficiency of drying methods freeze and oven-drying and the concentration of minor-compounds carotenoids, chlorophyll, tocopherols, etc. in the oil must be taken into account when considering the oil quality and oxidative stability.


Comparison of various extraction methods

A suitable extraction method depends not only on the oil extraction yield but also on chemical composition and oil quality. Several methods have been proposed to extract oil from avocado pulp and to investigate the efficiency of various extraction techniques. Moreno et al. 7 reported that microwave-assisted squeezing and microwave-assisted hexane extractions provided lower chemical properties such as the content of free fatty acids and peroxide value of the extracts than solvent extractions with hexane and acetone. Dramatic differences were observed in the fatty acid profiles of extracted oil processed with various extraction techniques, specifically for palmitic, palmitoleic cis , oleic cis , linoleic cis and linolenic cis acids. This may relate to different solubility of various fatty acids in hexane and acetone. Among these extraction methods, the total trans fatty acids concentration was the lowest with the microwave-squeezing technique. Another study demonstrated that the highest oil extraction yield from the Hass variety was obtained by microwave-assisted hexane extrac-tion 7 g/kg dry weight compared with hexane 6.5 g/kg dry weight , ultra-turrax treatment assisted hexane 6.4 g/kg dry weight and SC-CO 2 6.3 g/kg dry weight extractions 24 . For the fatty acid profiles, stearic acid C18:0 was only detected in Hass cultivar extracted by SC-CO 2 extraction, showing SC-CO 2 provided a wider range for fatty acids. Besides, high levels of heavy metals present in the extracted oils are considered detrimental to oil quality. Among the five extraction methods compared, the SC-CO 2 and microwave-assisted Soxhlet extractions gave the lowest dissolution percentages of oxidizing metals such as Fe and Cu. From the viewpoint of an industry, microwave-assisted hexane extraction and SC-CO 2 present poetical large-scale extraction operation.


CONCLUSIONS

Avocado fruit is outstanding for its high content of monounsaturated oil and an excellent source of important lipid-soluble compounds such as tocopherols, carotenoids and phytosterols, which plays a significant role in reducing the risk of cardiovascular diseases and in providing health benefits. With increasing production of this fruit, one of industrial processes is the production of oil from the fruit. The extraction efficiency and quality of avocado oil depend on various extraction methods including conventional and non-conventional extraction methods. The combination of non-conventional pretreatments like microwave drying of avocado flesh and extraction processes like SC-SO 2 , pressing shows its advantage in perusing a superior quality avocado oil.

Fig. 1
1Sketch illustrating avocado mesocarp cells during ripening. a Unripen mesocarp cells; b Ripen mesocarp cells; P, parenchyma cell; W, wall of idioblast; OD, oil droplet; PP, protoplasm, IO: idioblastic oil sac.


of 75.3% was obtained under optimal separation conditions: at 75 , with a pH of 5.5 and NaC1 concentration of 5%

Fig. 2
2Flow-chart of aqueous separation technique for the production of crude avocado oil.

Table 1
1Fatty acid composition, triglyceride composition and levels of minor compounds of avocado oil. exported from Flores et al. 8 b exported from Yanty et al. 9 c exported from Berasategi et al. 10 ; O: oleic; P: palmitc; L: linoleic; Ln: linolenic; S: stearic.Item 
Avocado oil 

sample A sample B 

Fatty acid composition 

a 

C16:0 
12.8 
13.4 

C16:1 
3.3 
3.8 

C18:0 
1.0 
0.6 

C18:1 
67.7 
65.4 

C18:2 
13.5 
15.2 

C18:3 
1.2 
1.3 

C20:0 
0.2 
0.1 

C20:1 
0.3 
0.2 

Triglyceride composition 

b 

LLLn 
1.2 
1.2 

OLL 
5.4 
2.3 

PLL 
2.2 
2.6 

OOL 
20.2 
9.75 

POL 
13.2 
18.0 

PPL 
2.4 

OOO 
29.0 
16.1 

POO 
22.4 
27.4 

PPO 
2.8 
10.9 

OOS 
0.4 
1.3 

Chlorophyll mg/kg a 
22.3 
69.8 

Carotenoids mg/kg a 
11.1 
46.9 

α-Tocopherol mg/kg a 
40.5 
103.5 

Total phytosterols mg/kg c 
3396.4 
a 

Table 2
2Overview of various extraction methods for crude avocado oil.Methods 
Results 
Conclusions 
Reference 

Enzyme-assisted centrifugation: fresh avocado 
flesh paste diluted paste enzymatic reac-
tion centrifugation crude oil (upper layer) 

Extraction yield was about 78% under optimized 
conditctions:1% of α-amylase, enzymatic reac-
tion time of 1 h, temperature of 65 , dilution 
rate of 1:5 

Oil extraction yield significantly increases from 
paste treated with the enzyme compared to 
from the control paste 


Ozdemir, F.; Topuz, A. Changes in dry matter, oil content and fatty acids composition of avocado during harvesting time and post-harvesting ripening period. Food Chem. 86, 79-83 2004 . 2 Pieterse, Z. Avocados monounsaturated fatty acids , weight loss and serum lipids. Energy kJ 26, 65-71
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThis work was made possible with funding provided by FundamentalResearchReferences
Hass avocado composition and potential health effects. M L Dreher, A J Davenport, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 53Dreher, M.L.; Davenport, A.J. Hass avocado composi- tion and potential health effects. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 53, 738-750 2013 .

Global Trends in main Avocado Markets. G Naamani, World Avocado. Naamani, G. Global Trends in main Avocado Markets. World Avocado 2011 .

Avocado oils and hepatic lipid metabolism in growing rats. M Werman, I Neeman, S Mokady, Food Chem. Toxicol. 29Werman, M.; Neeman, I.; Mokady, S. Avocado oils and hepatic lipid metabolism in growing rats. Food Chem. Toxicol. 29, 93-99 1991 .

Lipid and fatty acid composition of mesocarp and seed of avocado fruits harvested at northern range in Japan. F Takenaga, K Matsuyama, S Abe, Y Torii, S Itoh, J. Oleo Sci. 57Takenaga, F.; Matsuyama, K.; Abe, S.; Torii, Y.; Itoh, S. Lipid and fatty acid composition of mesocarp and seed of avocado fruits harvested at northern range in Japan. J. Oleo Sci. 57, 591-597 2008 .

Effect of different extraction methods on fatty acids, volatile compounds, and physical and chemical properties of avocado Persea americana Mill. oil. A O Moreno, L Dorantes, J Galíndez, R I Guzmán, J. Agric. Food Chem. 51Moreno, A.O.; Dorantes, L.; Galíndez, J.; Guzmán R.I. Effect of different extraction methods on fatty acids, volatile compounds, and physical and chemical prop- erties of avocado Persea americana Mill. oil. J. Agric. Food Chem. 51, 2216-2221 2003 .

Preliminary studies on composition, quality and oxidative stability of commercial avocado oil produced in Chile. M A Flores, M D C Perez-Camino, J Troca, J. Food Sci. Eng. 4Flores, M.A.; Perez-Camino, M.D.C.; Troca, J. Prelimi- nary studies on composition, quality and oxidative sta- bility of commercial avocado oil produced in Chile. J. Food Sci. Eng. 4, 21-26 2014 .

Effect of varietal differences on composition and thermal characteristics of avocado oil. N Yanty, J Marikkar, K Long, J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 88Yanty, N.; Marikkar, J.; Long, K. Effect of varietal dif- ferences on composition and thermal characteristics of avocado oil. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 88, 1997-2003 2011 .

Astiasarán, I. Stability of avocado oil during heating: Comparative study to olive oil. I Berasategi, B Barriuso, D Ansorena, Food Chem. 132Berasategi, I.; Barriuso, B.; Ansorena, D.; Astiasarán, I. Stability of avocado oil during heating: Comparative study to olive oil. Food Chem. 132, 439-446 2012 .

Double-masked, placebo-controlled, randomized trial of lutein and antioxidant supplementation in the intervention of atrophic age-related macular degeneration: the Veterans LAST study Lutein Antioxidant Supplementation Trial. S Richer, W Stiles, L Statkute, J Pulido, J Frankowski, D Rudy, K Pei, M Tsipursky, J Nyland, Optometr-J. Am. Optom. Assoc. 75Richer, S.; Stiles, W.; Statkute, L.; Pulido, J.; Frankows- ki, J.; Rudy, D.; Pei, K.; Tsipursky, M.; Nyland, J. Dou- ble-masked, placebo-controlled, randomized trial of lutein and antioxidant supplementation in the inter- vention of atrophic age-related macular degeneration: the Veterans LAST study Lutein Antioxidant Supple- mentation Trial . Optometr-J. Am. Optom. Assoc. 75, 216-229 2004 .

Lutein in patients with cataracts and age-related macular degeneration: a long-term supplementation study. B Olmedilla, F Granado, I Blanco, M Vaquero, C Cajigal, J. Sci. Food Agric. 81Olmedilla, B.; Granado, F.; Blanco, I.; Vaquero, M.; Ca- jigal, C. Lutein in patients with cataracts and age-re- lated macular degeneration: a long-term supplementa- tion study. J. Sci. Food Agric. 81, 904-909 2001 .

Cholesterol-lowering efficacy of a sitostanol-containing phytosterol mixture with a prudent diet in hyperlipidemic men. P J Jones, F Y Ntanios, M Raeini-Sarjaz, C A Vanstone, Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 69Jones, P.J.; Ntanios, F.Y.; Raeini-Sarjaz, M.; Vanstone, C.A. Cholesterol-lowering efficacy of a sitostanol-con- taining phytosterol mixture with a prudent diet in hy- perlipidemic men. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 69, 1144-1150 1999 .

Influence of proportion of skin present during malaxing on pigment composition of cold pressed avocado oil. M Wong, O B Ashton, T K Mcghie, C Requejo-Jackman, Y Wang, A B Woolf, J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 88Wong, M.; Ashton, O.B.; McGhie, T.K.; Requejo-Jack- man, C.; Wang, Y.; Woolf, A.B. Influence of proportion of skin present during malaxing on pigment composi- tion of cold pressed avocado oil. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 88, 1373-1378 2011 .

Idioblast oil cells of avocado: distribution, isolation, ultrastructure, histochemistry, and biochemistry. K Platt, W Thomson, Int. J. Plant Sci. 153Platt, K.; Thomson, W. Idioblast oil cells of avocado: distribution, isolation, ultrastructure, histochemistry, and biochemistry. Int. J. Plant Sci. 153,301-310 1992 .

Effect of a novel oil extraction method on avocado Persea americana Mill pulp microstructure. M Ortiz, A Dorantes, A L Gallndez, M J Cárdenas, S E , Plant Foods Hum. Nutr. 59Ortiz, M,A.; Dorantes, A.L.; Gallndez, M.J.; Cárdenas, S.E. Effect of a novel oil extraction method on avoca- do Persea americana Mill pulp microstructure. Plant Foods Hum. Nutr. 59, 11-14 2004 .

Enzymatic extraction of avocado oil. M Buenrostro, A C López-Munguia, Biotechnol. Lett. 8Buenrostro, M.; López-Munguia, A.C. Enzymatic ex- traction of avocado oil. Biotechnol. Lett. 8, 505-506 1986 .

Avocado oil production and chemical characteristics. M J Werman, I Neeman, J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 64Werman, M.J.; Neeman, I. Avocado oil production and chemical characteristics. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 64, 229-232 1987 .

Avocado oil extraction with appropriate technology for developing countries. V Bizimana, W M Breene, A S Csallany, J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 70Bizimana, V.; Breene, W.M.; Csallany, A.S. Avocado oil extraction with appropriate technology for developing countries. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 70, 821-822 1993 .

Water extraction of avocado oil in the High Lands of Cameroon. A Kameni, P Tchamo, Trop Sci. 43Kameni, A.; Tchamo, P. Water extraction of avocado oil in the High Lands of Cameroon. Trop Sci. 43, 10-12 2003 .

The effect of homogenization pressures on extraction of avocado oil by wet method. B Hamzah, Adv. J. Food Sci. Technol. 5Hamzah, B. The effect of homogenization pressures on extraction of avocado oil by wet method. Adv. J. Food Sci. Technol. 5, 1666-1667 2013 .

Extracting avocado pulp oil by the pressure technology. H Shen, M Wang, B Niyoyankana, E P Habonimana, P C Irakoze, C Nsabimana, China Oils and Fats. 24Shen, H.; Wang, M.; Niyoyankana, B.; Habonimana, E.P.; Irakoze, P.C.; Nsabimana, C. Extracting avocado pulp oil by the pressure technology. China Oils and Fats 24, 12-14 1999 .

Effect of fruit ripeness and method of fruit drying on the extractability of avocado oil with hexane and supercritical carbon dioxide. M E Mostert, B M Botha, L M D Plessis, K G Duodu, J. Sci. Food Agric. 87Mostert, M.E.; Botha, B.M.; Plessis, L.M.D.; Duodu, K.G. Effect of fruit ripeness and method of fruit drying on the extractability of avocado oil with hexane and supercritical carbon dioxide. J. Sci. Food Agric. 87, 2880-2885 2007 .

Fatty acid profile and elemental content of avocado Persea americana Mill. oil-effect of extraction methods. M Reddy, R Moodley, S B Jonnalagadda, J. Environ. Sci. Health. B. 47Reddy, M.; Moodley, R.; Jonnalagadda, S.B. Fatty acid profile and elemental content of avocado Persea americana Mill. oil-effect of extraction methods. J. Environ. Sci. Health. B. 47, 529-537 2012 .

Economic analysis of enzymatic extraction of avocado oil. S Freitas, R Lago, R Qassim, Riv. Ital. Sostanze Grasse. 75Freitas, S.; Lago, R.; Qassim, R. Economic analysis of enzymatic extraction of avocado oil. Riv. Ital. Sostan- ze Grasse 75, 15-19 1998 .

Study on extracting avocadooil by centrifugalization. L Wei, G He, X Liao, Food Machinery. 6Wei, L.; He, G.; Liao, X. Study on extracting avocado- oil by centrifugalization. Food Machinery 6, 21-23 1998 .

Effect of electric field treatment on unsaturated fatty acid in crude avocado oil. J A Ariza-Ortega, E Ramírez-Moreno, J Díaz-Reyes, Socorro Del, N Cruz-Cansino, Plant Foods Hum. Nutr. 69Ariza-Ortega, J.A.; Ramírez-Moreno, E.; Díaz-Reyes, J.; del Socorro Cruz-Cansino, N. Effect of electric field treatment on unsaturated fatty acid in crude avocado oil. Plant Foods Hum. Nutr. 69, 268-269 2014 .

Extraction of avocado oil by wet method. B Hamzah, International Conference on Food Science and Nutrition. Ed, Kota Kinabalu, sabahHamzah B, Extraction of avocado oil by wet method, in International Conference on Food Science and Nutrition, Ed, Kota Kinabalu, sabah, Malausia 2012 .

Supercritical fluid extraction of avocado oil. B M Botha, R I Mccrindle, South African Avocado Growers Association Yearbook. 27Botha, B.M.; McCrindle, R.I. Supercritical fluid extrac- tion of avocado oil. South African Avocado Growers Association Yearbook 27, 24-27 2004 .

Characterization of micro-components of avocado oil extracted with supercritical carbon dioxide and their effect on its oxidative stability. M E Mostert, University of Pretoria South AfricaMostert, M.E. Characterization of micro-components of avocado oil extracted with supercritical carbon di- oxide and their effect on its oxidative stability. Univer- sity of Pretoria South Africa 2007 .