Anti-Inflammatory Effects of Essential Oils from Rosmarinus officinalis and Populus alba on Experimental Models of Acute and Chronic Inflammation in Rats


Hamza Belkhodja hamzabelkhodja@yahoo.fr 
Department of Biology
University of Mascara
ALGERIA

Boumediene Meddah 
Department of Biology
University of Mascara
ALGERIA

Sevgi Gezici 
Department of Biology
Molecular Biology
University of Gaziantep
TURKEY


Department of Biology
University of Mascara
ALGERIA

Anti-Inflammatory Effects of Essential Oils from Rosmarinus officinalis and Populus alba on Experimental Models of Acute and Chronic Inflammation in Rats
FDF53616B31CFD3C326B9AC70E14E755Anti-inflammatoryEssential oilsExperimental modelRosmarinus officinalisPopulus alba
Objective / Purpose: Essential oils (EOs) distelled form aromatic plants have a wide range of uses because of their rich pharmacological activities including, antiinflammatory, antitumor, antimicrobial, antioxidant, antidiabetic and hepatoprotective.The present research aimed to investigate in-vivo anti-inflammatory effects of EOs from Rosmarinus officinalis and Populus alba as biomarker levels in well-defined acute and chronic inflammation models.Material and Methods: The anti-inflammatory activity of EOs of R. officinalis and P. alba was carried out using two model, one of them is acute inflammation that induction by dextran 1% at the rat paw 1 and another is chronic inflammation that induction by monoiodoacetic solution.2To evaluate the anti-inflammatory properties of EOs, a measure of paw thickness was carried out with the calculation of percent inhibition.Thus, monitoring of some biomarkers will be paramount.Results / Discussion: The results indicate the absence of severe clinical signs or dead in rats during the observation period.Therefore, the EOs of R. officinalis and P. alba are devoid of acute toxicity in rats.For treatment with the EOs of R. officinalis, P. alba and Diclofenac®, the results showed a significant reduction for responses induced by dextran.Treatments produced reductions in inflammation ranging from 2.19 to 15.15%.Treatment with EOs showed a recovery of values of biochemical markers during the experimental period.Conclusion: The EOs of R. officinalis and P. alba demonstrate anti-inflammatory effect on both acute and chronic inflammation models, thus they could be used for pharmacological purposes as anti-inflammatory agents.

INTRODUCTION

Currently, the side effects induced by the drugs concerned users who turn to less aggressive care for the body. 1 Indeed, several of the medicinal plants grown worldwide are well known for their essential oil (EO) which are aromatic, antimicrobial and possess curative potential against different disease states including osteoarthritis (OA) and other inflammatory conditions. 2,3,4Rosmarinus officinalis L. (Lamiaceae) and Populus alba L. (Salicaceae) were selected for the present study.Both the plants are rich source of EO, and commonly used in traditional system of medicine against inflammatory diseases and other ailments. 5,6Nevertheless, phenolic glycosides (salicin and populin) and EO of P. alba (white poplar) were reported earlier to possess anti-rheumatic properties. 7The EO of R. officinalis (rosemary) showed profound antiproliferative, antioxidant, antibacterial, and anti-inflammatory activities. 8,9The stability of essential oil and their use in food safety might lead to some serious questions. 10 Interestingly, the EO of R. officinalis demonstrated antimicrobial effect against resistant Klebsiella pneumonia strains. 11steoarthritis (OA) is a musculoskeletal disease affecting bone structure and stability of the articular cartilage. 12,13t is often classified under joint diseases which results from a complex system of mechanical, biological, biochemical or molecular interactions. 14The degeneration of joint cartilage originating from the destruction of the extracellular matrix of chondrocytes despite the repair with targeting the recovery of the homeostatic balance between synthesis and degradation of matrix components. 15In the present study we aimed to investigate the effects of natural bioactive components from rosemary and white poplar on OA induced experimental animals.


MATERIALS AND METHODS


Plant material

The aerial parts (leaves and flowers) of rosemary and white poplar were collected and identified in the Mascara region during the month of May 2013.


The experimental animals

Male Wistar rats of approximately two months of age were housed in standard environmental conditions of temperature (22 ± 3°C), humidity (60 ± 5%) and a 12h light/dark cycle.They were fed with granules food and water ad-libitum.This work was carried out with respect for the welfare of animals, as recommended by WHO. 16


Extraction of essential oil (EO)

The extraction of EOs was carried out by hydrodistillation using Clevenger apparatus.The pure EO was obtained and stored at +4 o C after the yield calculating.


Acute inflammation (Dextran model)

For acute inflammation model, 20 albino rats of body weight of 200 ± 10 g were used.The different treatments (essential oil, Ibuprofen) were administered orally for 1h, before the injection of dextran.After 1h treatment, the rats received 0.1 ml of a 1% dextran solution in saline in the sub-plantar region of the right hind paw. 17he thickness of the paw was measured both before and 1, 2, 4 and 6h after the injection of dextran using a caliper.


Chronic inflammation (MIA model)

25 male Wistar rats weighing 190 -260 g were used for chronic inflammation model.OA disorder was created by using mono-iodo acetate (MIA).The experimental groups were as follows: Group 1 (untreated normal rats), Group 2 (vehicle), Group 3 (MIA induced+ treatment with EO of Rosemary), Group 4 (MIA induced rats + treated with EO of white poplar), Group 5 (MIA induced rats + treated with Voltum).All experimental procedures were performed in accordance with the ethical guidelines of the Council Directive of the European Communities 86/609 / EEC.For the induction of osteoarthritis, the rats were anesthetized with isoflurane. 18In all cases, MIA was dissolved in water and administered (50 μl) to each rat.In control group, the left knee was injected with physiological saline water. 19IA is known to disrupt glycolysis by inhibiting the activity of dehydrogenase glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate enzyme, resulting in a decrease in metabolic synthesis of cells and optionally lead to necrosis. 20Treatment given to induced rats consisted of a dose of 50 μl of each essential oil (rosemary and white poplar) and a standard drug Voltum (Diclofenac).The body weight of rats was measured 5 days after the MIA injection.The blood samples were collected in tubes (containing EDTA anticoagulant).The selected parameters were as follows: the C-reactive protein, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and Calcium. 21


Statistical analysis

The values are expressed as mean ± SEM.The results of different tests were analyzed by ANOVA.The P values less than 0.05 (p < 0.05) are considered as statistically significant.


RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


Acute inflammation (Dextran model)

The essential oils of R. officinalis and P. alba showed significant anti-inflammatory activity to different degrees in the acute inflammation model of dextran in rats (Figure 1).Significant changes were observed between the rats treated with the extract of R. officinalis, P. alba and Ibuprofen compared to control rats.Acute pain can be effectively relieved by nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, which inhibited cyclooxygenase (COX-1 and COX-2). 22


Chronic inflammation (MIA model)


Body weight of rats

The results of present study showed a significant decrease in body weight in rats injected with MIA as compared to the control group (Figure 2).This could be explained by the direct effect of unconscionable injury and pathophysiological factors of osteoarthritis process.In several earlier studies, the body weight changes were used as a parameter of toxicity evaluation.Hence, the observed reduction in body weight of animals in the present study may be associated with the decrease in daily food in-take and toxicity of MIA treatment. 22nitially there was a statistically significant change (p < 0.05) in body weight of rats of group 03 and 05 as compared to other group of rats.Similarly, weight reduction was recorded in rats of group 04 after 15 days of experimentation.


Biochemical parameters

The C -reactive protein (CRP) The CRP values in rats of treated groups were remarkably high after 07 days of intra-articular injection of MIA, since they exceed the reference values in the normal rats (< 300 μg/mL). 23The administration of treatments (EOs of R. officinalis, P. alba, Voltum) will decrease gradually to these values that CRP take its normal value to the 28 th day (Figure 2).It also notes that the normal control group rats presented a stability of CRP values throughout the experiment.The assay of C-reactive protein (CRP) has shown some potential to predict the evolution of knee osteoarthritis. 24A serum concentration of CRP does not only reflect the activity of the disease but also the joint destruction. 25


Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)

The results showed a significant increase of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) in rats receiving the MIA compared  to normal rats (Figure 2).The recovery of ALP values can be explained by the action of the essential oil of R. officinalis, P. alba and even Voltum drug with some difference in the degree of influence.Phosphatases are critical enzymes in the biological system, responsible for the metabolism, detoxification, and the biosynthesis of energetic macromolecules for different physiological functions.In addition, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is used as an indicator of the state of absorption and transport channels in the cell membrane. 26


Calcium

There was an increase in calcium levels of the group of rats injected with MIA after 7 days of intra-articular administration (Figure 2).The average calcium concentration in rats of group 01 remains as increasing as and greater than the reference value obtained in the literature (2.35 ± 0.05). 27Our results are in agreement with the earlier reports on hypercalcemia which might occur due to malignancies, bone metastasis, primary hyperthyroidism, vitamin D intoxication, kidney failure, hypoparathyroidism and in hypomagnesaemia. 28


CONCLUSION

The result showed that the EOs of R. officinalis, P. alba can be useful in preventing the destruction of joint architecture in the osteoarthritis pathology.Despite the availability of modern OA treatment methods, natural healing methods are preferred in order to avoid side effects and use less expensive products with high efficiency.Thus, natural products including EOs are a great potential resource as anti-inflammatory agents.

Figure 1 :
1
Figure 1: Evolution of paw thickness and percentage of inhibition in control and treated groups.


Figure 2 :
2
Figure 2: Evolution of body weight and biochemical parameters in control and treated groups.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThe authors would like to express their sincere gratitude to all staff of the directorate of Education, Mascara and even the Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Gaziantep for their technical support.CONFLICT OF INTERESTSThe authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.ABBREVIATIONSALP: alkaline phosphatase; CRP: C-reactive protein; EDTA: ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; EOs: essential oils; MIA: mono-iodoacetate; OA: osteoarthritis; WHO: world health organization.PICTORIAL ABSTRACT
Effects of chronic treatment with ethanolic extract of Teucrium polium in mice. R M Al-Ashban, D A Barrett, A H Shah, Journal of Herbs, Spices & Medicinal Plants. 1142005

Systematic review of herbals as potential anti-inflammatory agents: Recent advances, current clinical status and future perspectives. S Beg, S Swain, H Hasan, M Abdul-Barkat, M S Hussain, 10.4103/0973-7847.91102Pharmacognosy Review. 5102011

. Aromatherapy, Online, 2014

Present status of anti-inflammatory and antirheumatic phytoconstituents: a review. G N Bader, P A Mir, Z A Bhat, World Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences. 3112014

Anti-Inflammatory Effects of Rosmarinus officinalis Essential Oil in Mice. S Juhas, A Bukovska, S Cikos, S Czikkova, D Fabian, J Koppel, Acta Veterinaria Brno. 7812009

Anti-inflammatory Activity of Some Essential Oils. S Perez, M Zavala, L G Arias, M Ramos-Lopez, 10.1080/10412905.2011.9700480Journal of Essential Oil Research. 2352011

Review Medicinal herbs for the treatment of rheumatic disorders. M Adam, C Berset, M Kessler, M Hamburger, Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 12132009

Rosmarinus officinalis essential oil: antiproliferative, antioxidant and antibacterial activities. A I Hussain, F Anwar, A Jabbar, S Mahboob, P S Nigam, Brazilian Journal of Microbiology. 4142010

Antioxidant activity of rosemary (Rosmarinusofficinalis L.) essential oil and its hepatoprotective potential. A Raskovic, I Milanovic, N Pavlovic, T Cebovic, S Vukmirovic, BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine. 7142252014

Stability of essential oils: A review. C Turek, F C Stintzing, 10.1111/1541-4337.12006Comprehensive Review in Food Sciences and Food Safety. 1212013

Antimicrobial activity of Cymbopogon citratus and Rosmarinus officinalis essential oil against carbapenems resistant Klebsiella pneumonia strains (as nosocomial pathogen) isolated from intensive care units of two hospitals. M A Abu-Gharbia, M N Agban, A El-Mewafy, R El-Ghadban, R Z Abdelmasieh, Global Advanced Research Journal of Medicine and Medical Sciences. 412015

Osteoarthritis -Diagnosis, Treatment and Surgery. Q Chen, Publisher: In Tech. 2012

Treat osteoarthritis with aromatherapy massage. J Bloom, Massage Magazine. 2014

Joint disorders, Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders. MSD Manual Professional Edition. R D Altman, OAOsteoarthritis, OA2012Merck & Co., Inc. USA

Osteoarthritis: Pathogenesis, Diagnosis, Available Treatments, Drug Safety, Regenerative and Precision Medicine. M Kapoor, Nn ( Mohamed, Oa), 2015CH-1

A report of the consultation meeting on traditional and modern medicine. W H O , 2015

. C A Winter, E A Risley, G W Nuss, Exp Bio Medic. 1111962

Prolonged effect of iodoacetate on articular cartilage and its modification by an anti-rheumatic drug. J Dunham, S Hoedt-Schmidt, D A Kalbhen, International Journal of Experimental Pathology. 7431993

Mono-iodoacetate-induced experimental osteoarthritis: a dose/response study of loss of mobility, morphology and biochemistry. C Guingamp, P Gegout-Pottie, Philippe L , Arthritis Rheum. 4091997

Chemical model of osteoarthritis-a pharmacological evaluation. D A Kalbhen, Journal of Rheumatology. 141987

Recommendations for the use of preclinical models in the study and treatment of osteoarthritis. R Poole, S Blake, M Buschmann, Osteoarthritis and Cartilage. 1832010

Kaff-e-Maryum (Anastatica hierochuntica L): Evaluation of gastro-protective activity and toxicity in different experimental models. A H Shah, M P Bhandari, Al-Harbi No, R M Al-Ashban, 10.4172/0974-8369.1000197Biology and Medicine Journal. 6112014

Electro immunoassay. C B Laurell, Scand J clin Lab Invest. 29124391972