Multidimensional Co-Exfoliated Activated Graphene-Based Carbon Hybrid for Supercapacitor Electrode Multidimensional co-exfoliated activated graphene-based carbon composite for supercapacitor electrode
Published: 01/01/2019

Josphat ; Phiri josphat.phiri@aalto.fi 
Patrick ; Gane patrick.gane@aalto.fi 
Thad C Maloney thaddeus.maloney@aalto.fi 
Josphat Phiri 
Patrick Gane 
Thad C Maloney 
ProfJosphat Phiri 
Patrick Gane 
ProfC Thad 
Maloney 
Josphat Phiri 
ProfPatrick Gane 
Josphat Phiri 
ProfPatrick Gane 

School of Chemical Engineering
Department of Bioproducts and Biosystems
School of Chemical Engineering
Department of Bioproducts and Biosystems
School of Chemical Engineering
Department of Bioproducts and Biosystems
Aalto University
P.O. Box 1630000076Aalto, AaltoFinland


Aalto University
P.O. Box 1630000076AaltoFinland Accepted


Article University
P.O. Box 1630000076AaltoFinland

Multidimensional Co-Exfoliated Activated Graphene-Based Carbon Hybrid for Supercapacitor Electrode Multidimensional co-exfoliated activated graphene-based carbon composite for supercapacitor electrode
Published: 01/01/201910.1002/ente.201900578Accepted Article graphene; nano we report a Accepted Article we report a simple route for fabrication of Accepted Article simple route for fabrication of for application Accepted Article which layer Accepted Article layer graphene Accepted Article graphene is Accepted Article is , an Accepted Article , an environmentally benign Accepted Article environmentally benign sustainable. The exfoliated product Accepted Article sustainable. The exfoliated product the Accepted Article the desired Accepted Article desired pore structure. The Accepted Article pore structure. The up to 72 Accepted Article up to 720 m Accepted Article 0 m 2 Accepted Article 2 g Accepted Article g -Accepted Article -1 Accepted Article 1 . Accepted Article . We also useAccepted Article -electrode system and Accepted Article electrode system and 1 Accepted Article 1This is an electronic reprint of the original article. This reprint may differ from the original in pagination and typographic detail. Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org) Published in: Energy Technology Document Version Peer reviewed version Please cite the original version: Phiri, J., Gane, P., & Maloney, T. C. (2019). Multidimensional Co-Exfoliated Activated Graphene-Based Carbon Hybrid for Supercapacitor Electrode. Energy Technology, [1900578]. https:// This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved Accepted Article Accepted Article Accepted Article Accepted Article for application in supercapacitors as electrode material Accepted Article in supercapacitors as electrode material renewable materials Accepted Article renewable materials which Accepted Article We also use friendly binder in the electrode application. Accepted Article friendly binder in the electrode application. -graphenenano-microfibrillated cellulosesupercapacitorselectrodeactivated carbon Keywords: Accepted Article Keywords: graphenenano
Herein, we report a simple route for fabrication of highly porous activated few-layer graphene for application in supercapacitors as electrode material. The process makes use of natural and renewable materials which is an essential prerequisite, especially for large scale application.Few-layer graphene is exfoliated in aqueous suspension with the aid of microfibrillated cellulose, an environmentally benign eco-friendly medium that is low-cost, biodegradable and sustainable. The exfoliated product is subsequently activated to increase the surface area and to form the desired pore structure. The prepared electrode materials exhibit a high surface area of up to 720 m 2 g -1 . We also use microfibrillated cellulose as a non-toxic environmentally friendly binder in the electrode application. The electrochemical performance was evaluated in a three-electrode system and the prepared samples showed a high specific capacitance of up to 120 F g -1 at a current density of 1 A g -1 . The samples also exhibit a high capacity retention rate of about 99 % after 5 000 cycles and 97 % after 10 000 cycles. The proposed method for This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved fabrication of graphene-based supercapacitor electrode material, based largely on renewable and sustainable materials, offers potential for commercially viable application.

two decades or so, carbon nanotubes (CNT) have also been extensively investigated for application in supercapacitors [16,17] . However, CNT have not reached the promised potential in terms of applications and performance due to high production cost and observed high resistance between the electrode and current collector [15,16,18] .

In recent years, graphene has emerged as a unique 2-dimensional technological material that has huge technical potential for application as electrode material in supercapacitors due its superlative properties, such as extremely high electrical conductivity, large surface area and excellent chemical stability and mechanical properties [19][20][21] . Unlike CNT and AC, the effective surface area of graphene does not depend on the pore distribution in the solid state, but rather on the number of graphene layers. A single graphene layer has a theoretical surface area of 2 600 m 2 g -1 and if the entire area is utilised, graphene based supercapacitors are capable of reaching specific capacitance values as high as 550 F g -1 [22] . However, despite all the excellent properties, graphene fabrication especially for large scale application is still the biggest challenge. Graphene is commonly produced by chemical oxidation of graphite. Large scale application, however, is still problematic due to the negative ecological effect from the traditional synthesis processes and toxic raw materials used in these process. Moreover, the harsh chemical treatment also introduces defects in graphene structure that leads to deterioration of the excellent graphene properties.

For high performance energy storage devices, electrodes are required to have excellent electrical and thermal conductivity, interconnected micro-and mesopores and good mechanical properties. [23] Unfortunately, none of the individual carbon-based electrode materials can meet these requirements. In order to overcome some of the limitations from these individual components, sp 2 hybrid carbon structures have been synthesized. For example, graphene and CNT can provide excellent electrical and mechanical properties but limited surface area and accessible pores mostly due to aggregation whilst activated carbons offer high surface area and abundant pore volume with a well-structured micro-and mesoporous network but poor electrical conductivity.

These hybrid structures can be tailored during synthesis to supplement the limitations of each other


Accepted Article Accepted Article

In recent years, graphene has emerged as a unique 2


Accepted Article

In recent years, graphene has emerged as a unique 2

Accepted Article that has huge Accepted Article that has huge technical Accepted Article technical potential for application as electrode material in supercapacitors Accepted Article potential for application as electrode material in supercapacitors [24,25] . For instance, hydrothermal prepared CNT/carbon composites [26] , CNT/activated carbon blends [27] , 3D graphene based framework [28] etc., have been used to fabricate high performance electrode materials for energy storage devices with superior electrochemical performance. The homogeneous distribution of sp 2 nanocarbons in the carbon matrix is essential in achieving the desired properties and generally requires one carbon phase to self-organize into the other carbon matrix or scaffold. The synthesis of hybrid structures with dispersed nanocarbons into a welldesigned and structured carbon matrix is vital in achieving the excellent electrochemical properties required to meet the growing high performance demand. However, the construction of these high performance carbon hybrid based electrodes is still a big challenge.

In the present study, we aimed to develop a novel and simple route for fabrication of few-layer graphene based composites for supercapacitor electrode application based largely on renewable materials. We showed in our earlier study that few-layer graphene sheets can be directly exfoliated from graphite in microfibrillated cellulose (MFC) suspension by high shear exfoliation [29] . MFC is renewable, biodegrade and sustainable and has a high potential for large scale application. MFC in aqueous suspension was also used as a binder for the electrode fabrication, which is more ecologically friendly in comparison to commonly used highly toxic binders such as poly(vinylidene fluoride) or poly(tetrafluoroethylene) and solvents such as N-Methyl-2pyrrolidone. We show in this study that this simple and yet ´green` approach for the synthesis of graphene/activated carbon after co-exfoliation of graphene in MFC suspension, can be used to synthesise high performance composites for supercapacitor electrode with high scalability potential. 


Accepted Article


Results and discussion

The general synthesis route of graphene/AC composite is schematically illustrated in Figure 1. Briefly, natural graphite was added into MFC suspension at a predetermined range of concentrations and subjected to high shear exfoliation [29] . The exfoliated few-layer graphene sheets together with MFC fibres were then activated with KOH at 800 °C for 1 h.

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was employed to study the morphologies of the samples (Figure 2 and 3). A porous structure with big pores is observed for G0-0% with quite smooth surfaces. However, a three-dimensional porous hierarchical structure is observed for samples with 5 % graphene, as shown in Figure 3. A randomly interconnected porous network with varying pore sizes is revealed in the magnified SEM image in Figure 2b,

showing that the graphene/carbon skeleton is formed around the pores to create a randomly porous multidimensional structure, very similar to that previously observed in activated carbon [30] . The addition of 5 % graphene led to a well-developed pore structure and enhanced surface area which is expected to increase the ionic transfer within the porous carbon network and, thus, improve the electrochemical performance [31] . At high graphene concentration of 10 % (Figure 2c), a more densely packed structure is observed with less cavities than those observed in G1-5%. At 15 % (Figure 2d), small clumps and agglomerates are visible throughout the structure and this is likely attributed to the agglomeration of graphene.

Chemical activation, with KOH for example, is widely implemented for the fabrication of highly porous activated carbon/graphene-based composites [32] . KOH is believed not only to digest the graphene/activated carbon composites but also plays a significant role in reorganization into highly porous hierarchical structure [33] .

Raman spectroscopy is the most used non-destructive method for characterization of the structure and quality of carbon based materials, particularly to determine the degree of defects and disorder. In Figure 4a, the Raman spectra show that all graphene doped samples display the three dominant bands, D-band (~1 540 cm -1 ), G-band (~1 567 cm -1 ) and 2D-band  showing that the graphene/carbon skeleton is formed around the pores to create a randomly


Accepted Article

showing that the graphene/carbon skeleton is formed around the pores to create a randomly porous multidimensional structure Accepted Article porous multidimensional structure [30] Accepted Article [30] .


Accepted Article

. The


Accepted Article

The addition of 5 % graphene led to a well  Accepted Article 2c (~2 678 cm -1 ), commonly present in graphene. However, for the reference sample without graphene, the 2D is not visible. The G-band is related to the relative vibration of the ordered sp 2 bonded carbon atoms, while the D-band is due to the ring breathing modes and arises due to defects and disorder in carbon atoms [34] . The 2D band is the second order of the D-band, and its presence is not dependent on defects and is always present even in pristine graphene.

The shape and position of the 2D-band in all prepared samples is consistent with that of fewlayer graphene sheets [35] . The I D /I G intensity ratio is a used to estimate the quantity or degree of disorder and defects. The reference sample showed a high degree of disorder as evident by the high I D /I G ratio, indicating a lower degree of graphitisation than all the graphene doped samples which showed a very low degree of disorder as shown by low I D /I G ratio in Table 1.

XPS analysis was used to study the surface chemistry of the samples. The XPS wide scans are shown in Figure 4b. The pronounced peaks with binding energies at around 284.8 and 533 eV are assigned to the elements C and O, respectively. The exact composition is shown in Table 1, and it is evident that almost no inorganic impurities are detected in any of the samples. Generally, the amount of graphene added in the samples did not have much effect on the chemical composition of the samples. The C1s for the pure carbonised MFC fibres shown in Figure 4c can be fitted by three components corresponding to C-C, C-O and C=O functional groups [36] . However, with the addition of graphene, the high resolution C1s spectra (Figure 4d-f) showed that all samples consist of four main groups. The peaks at binding energies of around 284.8, 285.5, 286.4 and 287.6 eV corresponding to C=C, C-C, C-O and C=O groups, respectively [37,38] . It can also be seen that all the samples are dominated by the sp 2 hybridised carbon atoms, evident by the large area occupied as identified C=C atoms [39] . The oxygen containing functional groups present in all the samples can aid in the wettability of the electrodes especially in aqueous based electrolyte which can lead to enhanced capacitive performance [36] . Moreover, heteroatoms such as oxygen can provide pseudocapacitance which can lead to an overall increase of effective capacitance.


Accepted Article

and its presence is not dependent on defects Accepted Article and its presence is not dependent on defects

The shape and position of the 2D


Accepted Article

The shape and position of the 2D layer graphene sheets Accepted Article layer graphene sheets [35] Accepted Article [35] Accepted Article  Table   Accepted Article Table 1 Accepted Article


1,


Accepted Article

, and it is evident that  specific surface area (SSA) of G1-5% is ~720 m 2 g -1 whilst for G2-10% and G3-15% is ~546 and ~424 m 2 g -1 , respectively. When the amount of graphene is increased, the distances between the graphene flakes are reduced, which, in turn, leads to a high overall intensity of the van der Waals forces acting between the graphene particles and, thus, high graphene aggregation. These results are in agreement with what was observed in SEM and Raman analyses. The electrochemical performance of carbon-based supercapacitors is greatly affected by the pore structure profiles. Micropores are considered to have a great effect on the specific capacitance [1,40] , whilst the mesopores are thought to have a big influence on capacitance retention especially at high scan rates [41] . The pore size distribution (PSD) and cumulative pore volume of the samples are shown in Figure 5b and c, and Table 2 shows some pore size characteristics. The PSD for G1-5% is dominated by both micro-and mesopores and peaks at 1.58 nm. As the concentration of graphene is increased, the peak is shifted to bigger pore width, i.e. 1.69 and 2.66 nm for G2-10% and G3-15%, respectively.

Moreover, at high graphene concentration, the composites consist of a wide range of PSD comprising a high amount of meso-and macrospores. Accepted Article specific capacitance [1,40] Accepted Article [1,40] capacitance retention especially at high scan rates The electrochemical performance testing of the samples was conducted in a threeelectrode system by using 6 M KOH aqueous solution as the electrolyte. Cyclic voltammetry (CV), galvanostatic charge-discharge and electrochemical impedance systems were employed for the analysis. The CV of the samples is shown in Figure 6a, c and e. The measurements were performed at room temperature within the potential window of 0 to -1 V. The shape for all three samples showed a typical rectangular form at all different sweep rates indicating excellent reversible electric double-layer capacitive behaviour [42] . Moreover, the absence of Faradic peaks also indicate the excellent capacitive charging and discharging behaviour with small equivalent series resistance and good electrochemical performance [43] . This behaviour was observed for all samples at various scan rates. It is also important to note that the broader voltammogram area observed for G1-5% indicates that it has a much more efficient cycle reversibility and higher electrical double layer capacitance during the charge/discharge cycles compared to samples G2-10% and G3-15%. showing that they have a very high rate of ion transfer inside and between the electrode and electrolyte. Furthermore, when comparing the three samples, the discharge slope of G1-5% at all current densities showed a straight line which indicates excellent stability and discharge properties [44] . Moreover, G1-5% also shows significantly longer charge-discharge times at the same current density in comparison to G2-10% and G3-15%, indicating higher capacitance and more efficient charge/discharge cycles caused by the higher number of 


Accepted Article

showing that they have a very high rate of ion transfer inside and between the electrode and electrons and ions rapidly transferring between the electrolyte and electrode. The linear and symmetrical charge/discharge curves observed even at very high current density also indicate the excellent electrochemical reversibility and very low voltage drop at the start of the discharge curve. In contrast, both G2-10% and G3-15% showed non-linear discharge curves at all current densities, being more pronounced at high current densities. This shows that at high graphene loading, there is a poor electrochemical reversibility caused by the low specific surface area and poorly formed pore structure caused by high concentration of graphene aggregation and, thus, poor electron and ion exchange between the electrolyte and electrode.


Figure 7a

shows the specific capacitance of the samples calculated from the discharge curves obtained at current densities ranging from 0.5 to 10 A g -1 . The decrease of specific capacitance is usually observed with an increase in current density due to the internal resistance of the electrode. G1-5% samples exhibit a high specific capacitance of 120 F g -1 at 1 A g -1 which decreases to 102 F g -1 at 10 A g -1 (85 % retention). However, for the G2-10% and G3-15%, 80 % and 69 % retentions are observed, respectively. The high retention of the G1-5% can be ascribed to low internal resistance, high surface area and well-developed porosity that leads to superior high-rate charge/discharge capability, which is in agreement with the BET measurements.

The electrochemical performance of the prepared electrodes was also analysed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Figure 7b shows the Nyquist plot measured in the frequency range of 0.01 Hz to 1 MHz, where the Z´axis displays the real part representing ohmic resistance while Z´´ the imaginary part represents the presence of non-resistive elements [45] . The Nyquist plot for all the three samples reveals three main segments. The first segment is the vertical line in the low frequency region. This represents the dominance of capacitive behaviour of the electrode [46,47] . The G1-5% shows more capacitive behaviour   Accepted Article electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). than the other two samples, as shown by the vertical line being more parallel to the imaginary axis. The second segment is the part of the curve having a slope of 45° in the middle frequency range, also known as Warburg resistance, represents ion diffusion and transport between the electrolyte and electrode [48] . Interestingly, the G1-5% has a shorter ion diffusion path than that of G2-10% and G3-15%, which allows easy access and rapid transfer of ions in and out of the electrode and, thus, leads to a higher capacitance. The third segment consists of a depressed semicircle or arc in the high frequency region. This is related to the faradic charge transfer resistance of the electrode and its pore structure. The lack of a more pronounced semicircle represents the low resistance of the electrodes. However, G1-5% shows the smallest arc indicating the smallest charge transfer resistance. This indicates a well-developed pore structure as earlier indicated by SEM and BET analyses. The semicircle radii of G2-10% and G3-15% are very similar and much larger than G1-5%, which indicates high resistance.

Furthermore, the intersection with the x-axis in the high frequency region represents the equivalent series resistance (ESR) of the supercapacitors [49] . ESR can be used to determine the rate capability of the charge-discharge cycles of the supercapacitors. The ESR also shows electron conduction and ionic transport resistance within the electrode and to and from the electrolyte [50] . For samples G1-5%, G2-10% and G3-15%, the ESR is determined to be 0.219, 0.393 and 0.481 Ω, respectively, which is relatively low. The range of the values is typical for carbon-based supercapacitors, as reported earlier [50,51] . It is important to note that the resistance is increasing with increase in graphene content. This is probably due to graphene aggregation which prevents the formation of a continuous network. The results are in agreement with what was observed in SEM and Raman analyses.

High stability and durability of electrode materials is required to ensure long term and high efficient operation. GCD was employed to study the stability of the electrode material (G1-5%) by constant charge-discharge cycles. As shown in Figure 8, the G1-5% electrode was tested at 5 000 cycles at the constant current density of 5 A g -1 . The insert  [50] Accepted Article [50] . Accepted Article resistance is increasing with increase in graphene content. This is probably due to graphene Accepted Article increasing with increase in graphene content. This is probably due to graphene aggregation which prevents the formation of a continuous network. The results are in Accepted Article aggregation which prevents the formation of a continuous network. The results are in shows the charge-discharge cycles at the beginning and end cycles. It is clear that the shape is not altered, indicating excellent stability of the electrode. After 5 000 cycles, the electrode retained 99.1 % of the initial capacitance, showing an excellent electrochemical stability rate and cycling reversibility. It is important to note that the slightly lower capacitance retention (~98 %) is observed after the initial 1 000 cycles and then started to increase after about 2 000 cycles. The initial capacitance decrease maybe ascribed to the existence of heteroatoms, such as oxygen, as confirmed by XPS, which can lead to the pseudocapacitance, and, after a few cycles, fades away after all the heteroatoms have been exhausted [52] . The further increases in the capacitance might be due to the complete wetting of the electrode with the KOH electrolyte. Besides, the swelling of the MFC binder used in this study increases with time and thus leads to a higher amount of ions stored, which, in turn, translates to high capacitance.


Conclusions

In summary, a simple and environmentally benign method is proposed for the synthesis of activated graphene-based carbon composites for supercapacitor electrodes. A natural and sustainable material, microfibrillated cellulose (MFC) is used for exfoliation of graphene and as a binder in the electrode fabrication. In comparison to commonly used toxic materials employed for exfoliation of graphene and as binders in supercapacitors, MFC is also biodegradable, renewable and readily available. The optimal graphene concentration for the system was found to be 5 %. At this concentration, a well-developed porosity and a high surface area of 720 m 2 g -1 insured an excellent electrochemical behaviour. Besides, the prepared showed a superior cycling stability by retaining 99 % capacitance after 5 000 cycles and 97 % after 10 000 cycles. This type of composite could find significant potential use in advanced applications such as catalysts, energy storage and adsorption.  


Accepted Article

, renewable and readily available.

system was found to be 5 %. At this concentration, a well Accepted Article system was found to be 5 %. At this concentration, a well


Materials and methods

Materials: Natural graphite flakes were provided by Asbury Carbon. Microfibrillated cellulose was provided by Suzano Pulp and Paper at 5 wt% solids. The MFC was a relatively course grade produced by mechanical defibrillation of hardwood Kraft pulp. The length weighted average fibre length was 0.52 mm measured using a FiberLab laser instrument from Metso Automation. Other properties of MFC can be found in our earlier published work [53] .

Deionised water was used throughout the experiments. subjected to high shear exfoliation for 60 min. The same procedure was repeated with 100 % MFC suspension alone. The prepared samples are denoted as G0-0%, G1-5%, G2-10% and G3-15%, where 0, 5, 10 and 15 %, represent the concentration of graphite in the initial production process. The detailed experimental procedure can be found in our earlier publication [29] .

After co-exfoliation, excess water from the suspensions was removed by vacuum filtration. The suspensions were then soaked in KOH solution at the mass ratio of 1:1 for 2 h followed by drying in an oven at 105 °C. The dried samples were then activated at 800 °C for 1 h, at a heating rate of 5 °C min -1 in nitrogen atmosphere. The yield of pure MFC after carbonization with KOH at a MFC/KOH ratio of 1 was estimated to be around 5 %. The overall yield was around 9.5 %. After carbonisation, the samples were thoroughly washed with HCl and water and subsequently dried for at least 24 h at 105 °C. Material characterization: The structure of carbonised materials was recorded using a Zeiss Sigma VP scanning electron microscope at 5 kV acceleration voltage. The powders were first sputtered with a gold film before SEM measurements. Raman spectra were measured using a WITec alpha300 R Raman microscope (alpha 300, WITec, Ulm, Germany) equipped with a piezoelectric scanner using a 532 nm linear polarised excitation laser. Surface area and pore volume were determined by nitrogen sorption using a Micromeritics Tristar II by Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) method and Barrett-Joyner-Halenda (BJH) theory, respectively.

Electrochemical measurement: Cyclic voltammetry, galvanostatic charge-discharge, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out using a Gamry 600+ Reference potentiostat, using a three-electrode cell configuration system. The measurements were conducted in 6 M KOH aqueous electrolyte solution at room temperature.

The KOH solution was purged with nitrogen before the experiment. A platinum wire and Ag/AgCl electrode were used as counter and reference electrodes, respectively. The specific capacitance was obtained from galvanostatic charge-discharge using the formula: C = IΔt/(ΔVm), (where, C (F g -1 ) is specific capacitance, I (A) is discharge current, Δt (s) is discharge time, ΔV (V) is the potential window, and m (g) mass of the active material).

To prepare the electrode, the carbonised materials were directly mixed with MFC suspension, diluted to 1 wt%, to form an electrode consisting of 90 wt% active material and 10 wt% MFC binder. No conductive additives were used. The prepared paste was then coated on a Ni foam and dried in an oven at 105 °C for at least 24 h. The areal mass loading was between 1.5-2 mg cm -2 . Before the measurements, the coated Ni foam was pressed at about 7 MPa for 30 s. Accepted Article measurements were conducted in 6 M KOH aqueous electrolyte solution at room temperature.

The KOH solution was purged with nitrogen before the exp


Accepted Article

The KOH solution was purged with nitrogen before the exp Ag/AgCl electrode were used as counter and reference electrodes, respectively. The specific


Accepted Article

Ag/AgCl electrode were used as counter and reference electrodes, respectively. The specific capacitance was obtained from galvanostatic charge 


Accepted Article

To prepare the electrode, the carbonised materials were directly mixed with MFC


Accepted Article

To prepare the electrode, the carbonised materials were directly mixed with MFC suspension, diluted to 1 wt%, to form an electr   


Accepted Article

Cycling stability tests of the best performing sample G1 Accepted Article Accepted Article  Table 2 Porosity characteristics of the samples and specific capacitance at the current density of 1 A g -1

Figure 2
2varying pore sizes is revealed in the magnified SEM image in Accepted Article network with varying pore sizes is revealed in the magnified SEM image in


which is expected to increase the ionic transfer within the porous carbon network Accepted Article is expected to increase the ionic transfer within the porous carbon

Figure 2
2Figure 2


and defects. The reference sample showed a high degree of disorder as evident by Accepted Article ts. The reference sample showed a high degree of disorder as evident by a very low degree of disorder as shown by low Accepted Article showed a very low degree of disorder as shown by low XPS analysis was used to study the surface chemistry of the samples.Accepted ArticleXPS analysis was used to study the surface chemistry of the samples.


Figure


article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved The capacitance of supercapacitors is greatly dependent on the surface are and pore structure of the electrode materials. The pore structure of the samples was analysed by N 2 sorption measurements at 77 K (Figure 5). The nitrogen isotherm in Figure 5a for all the samples shows a typical International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) type-IV isotherm curve with a well-pronounced hysteresis in the p/p° region of around 0.4-1.0, indicating the presence of mesopores. Besides, the steep increase of adsorbed nitrogen at low relative pressure indicates the presence of microspores. The Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET)


the pore structure profiles. Micropores are considered to have a great effect on the Accepted Article affected by the pore structure profiles. Micropores are considered to have a great effect on the specific capacitance


The galvanostatic charge/discharge cycles (GCD) curves for all samples at different scan rates are shown inFigure 6b, d and f. All the charge-discharge curves show a similar symmetrical triangular curve which is a typical charge/discharge characteristic of carbonbased electrical double-layer capacitators. A sharp and sudden initial potential drop (known as iR drop) is usually seen at the start of current discharge in electro double layer capacitors.This iR drop is caused by high electrolyte resistance and limited diffusion mobility of electrolyte ions in the electrode. The iR drop is virtually negligible in the prepared samples,


is usually seen at the start of current discharge in electro double layer capacitors. Accepted Article drop) is usually seen at the start of current discharge in electro double layer capacitors. Accepted Article drop is caused by high electrolyte resistance and limited diffusio Accepted Article drop is caused by high electrolyte resistance and limited diffusio electrolyte ions in the electrode. The Accepted Article electrolyte ions in the electrode. TheAccepted Articleshowing that they have a very high rate of ion transfer inside and between the electrode and


loading, there is a poor electrochemical reversibility caused by the low specific Accepted Article high graphene loading, there is a poor electrochemical reversibility caused by the , poor electron and ion exchange between the electrolyte and electrode.Accepted Article thus, poor electron and ion exchange between the electrolyte and electrode.


Figure Accepted Article Figure 7


the specific capacitance of the samples calculated from the Accepted Article shows the specific capacitance of the samples calculated from the discharge curves obtained at current densities ranging from 0.5Accepted Articledischarge curves obtained at current densities ranging from 0.5 specific capacitance is usually observed with an increase in current density Accepted Article specific capacitance is usually observed with an increase in current


semicircle or arc in the high frequency region. This is related to Accepted Article a depressed semicircle or arc in the high frequency region. This is related to resistance of the electrode Accepted Article resistance of the electrode semicircle represents the low resistance of th Accepted Article semicircle represents the low resistance of th smallest arc indicating the smallest charge transfer resistance. Accepted Article smallest arc indicating the smallest charge transfer resistance. pore structure as earlier indicated by SEM and BET analyses.Accepted Article pore structure as earlier indicated by SEM and BET analyses. and ionic transport resistance within the electrode and to and from the Accepted Article electron conduction and ionic transport resistance within the electrode and to and from the electrolyte Accepted Article electrolyte


the heteroatoms have been exhausted the capacitance might be due to the complete wetting of the electrode with the KOH Accepted Article the capacitance might be due to the complete wetting of the electrode with the KOH electrolyte. Besides, the swelling of the carbon composites for supercapacitor electrodes.


Preparation of graphene/MFC suspensions: Co-exfoliation of graphene in MFC suspension was achieved using an IKA Magic Lab micro-plant equipped with a single-walled open 1-dm3 vessel). The MFC was first diluted to a consistency of 0.8 wt%. Subsequently, natural graphite was added to the suspension in various proportions to yield a graphite solid content of 5, 10 and 15 wt% with respect to that of solid MFC. The resulting mixtures were then


was used throughout the experiments. Preparation of graphene/MFC suspensions: Accepted Article Preparation of graphene/MFC suspensions: was achieved using an IKA Magic Lab micro Accepted Article was achieved using an IKA Magic Lab micro dm3 vessel). The MFC was first diluted to a consistency of 0.8 wt%. Subsequently, natural Accepted Article dm3 vessel). The MFC was first diluted to a consistency of 0.8 wt%. Subsequently, natural graphite was added to the suspension in various proportions to yield a graphite solid content Accepted Article graphite was added to the suspension in various proportions to yield a graphite solid content of 5, 10 and 15 wt% with respect


conducted in 6 M KOH aqueous electrolyte solution at room temperature.


diluted to 1 wt%, to form an electr wt% MFC binder. No conductive additives were used. The prepared paste was then coated Accepted Article wt% MFC binder. No conductive additives were used. The prepared paste was then coated on a Ni foam and dried in an oven at 105 °C for at least 24 h. Accepted Article on a Ni foam and dried in an oven at 105 °C for at least 24 h.

Figure 7
7(a) Specific capacitance as a function of current density and (b) Nyquist plots showing the imaginary part versus the real part of impedance with the insert showing the magnification of the high-frequency region

Figure 8
8Cycling stability tests of the best performing sample G1-5% at a current density of 5 A g -1 ; the insert shows the charge-discharge cycles at different intervals Accepted Article(a) Specific capacitance as a function of current density and (b) Nyquist plots Accepted Article (a) Specific capacitance as a function of current density and (b) Nyquist plots showing the imaginary part versus the real part of impedance with the ins Accepted Article showing the imaginary part versus the real part of impedance with the ins magnification of the high Accepted Article magnification of the high Cycling stability tests of the best performing sample G1


Accepted Article desired properties and generally requires one carbon phase to self Accepted Article and generally requires one carbon phase to self Accepted Article matrix or scaffold. The synthesis of hybrid structuresAccepted ArticleThe synthesis of hybrid structures carbon hybrid based electrodes is still a big challenge. hybrid based electrodes is still a big challenge.Accepted Article. We showed in our earlier study that fewAccepted ArticleWe showed in our earlier study that fewAccepted Article exfoliated from graphite in microfibrillated cellulose (MFC) suspension by high shear exfoliation Accepted Article exfoliated from graphite in microfibrillated cellulose (MFC) suspension by high shear exfoliation Accepted Article . MFC is renewable, biodegrade an Accepted Article . MFC is renewable, biodegrade anAccepted Article 

desired properties 

Accepted Article 

matrix or scaffold. 

Accepted Article 

and s 

Accepted Article 

and structured 

Accepted Article 

tructured 

Accepted Article 

required to meet the growing 

Accepted Article 

required to meet the growing 

Accepted Article 

performance 

Accepted Article 

performance carbon 

Accepted Article 

Accepted Article 

Accepted Article 

In the 

Accepted Article 

In the present study 

Accepted Article 

present study 

Accepted Article 

graphene 

Accepted Article 

graphene based composites for 

Accepted Article 

based composites for 

Accepted Article 

renewable materials 

Accepted Article 

renewable materials. 

Accepted Article 

application. MFC 

Accepted Article 

application. MFC in aqueous 

Accepted Article 

in aqueous 

Accepted Article 
Accepted Article 

which is more ecological 

Accepted Article 

which is more ecological 

poly(vinylidene fluoride) or poly(tetrafluoroethylene) 


Table 1
1Average I D/G value and XPS chemical composition of the samplesSamples 
I D/G 

Composition, (at. %) 

C 
O 

G0-0% 
0.864 
88.4 
11.0 

G1-5% 
0.147 
81.0 
14.7 

G2-10% 
0.153 
96.8 
2.9 

G3-15% 
0.201 
97.3 
2.2 


Accepted Article c) Accepted Article ), Accepted Article , a more densely pa Accepted Article a more densely pa observed in G1 Accepted Article observed in G1-Accepted Article -5% Accepted Article 5%. At 15 Accepted Article . At 15 throughout the structure and Accepted Article throughout the structure and Chemical activation, with KOH for example, is widely implemented for the fabrication ofAccepted ArticleChemical activation, with KOH for example, is widely implemented for the fabrication of highly porous activated carbon/ Accepted Article highly porous activated carbon/ Accepted Article digest the graphene/activated carbon composites but also plays a significant Accepted Article digest the graphene/activated carbon composites but also plays a significant
h, at a heating rate of 5 Accepted Article 1 h, at a heating rate of 5
AcknowledgementsThe authors appreciate financial support from Omya International AG. This work made use of the Aalto University Nanomicroscopy Centre (Aalto-NMC) for SEM imaging and XPS. The authors also appreciate support from Dr. Jouko Lahtinen for conducting the XPS experiments. The authors would also like to extend their appreciation to Asbury Carbons for the supply of free graphite samples.Received: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff)) Revised: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff)) Published online: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))Accepted ArticlePublished online: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff)) References Accepted ArticleAccepted Article production process. The detailed experimental procedure can be found in our earlier publication Accepted Article publication[29]Accepted Article[29].Accepted Article.After coAccepted ArticleAfter co-
. J Chmiola, G Yushin, Y Gogotsi, C Portet, P Simon, P L Taberna, Science. 1760J. Chmiola, G. Yushin, Y. Gogotsi, C. Portet, P. Simon, P. L. Taberna, Science 2006, 313, 1760.

. R Kötz, M Carlen, Electrochim. Acta. 45R. Kötz, M. Carlen, Electrochim. Acta 2000 45, 2483-2498.

. J S Bonso, A Rahy, S D Perera, N Nour, O Seitz, Y J Chabal, K J Balkus, J P Ferraris, D J Yang, J. Power Sources. J. S. Bonso, A. Rahy, S. D. Perera, N. Nour, O. Seitz, Y. J. Chabal, K. J. Balkus, J. P. Ferraris, D. J. Yang, J. Power Sources 2012 203, 227-232.

. G A Snook, P Kao, A S Best, J. Power Sources. 196G. A. Snook, P. Kao, A. S. Best, J. Power Sources 2011 196, 1-12.

. Q Meng, K Cai, Y Chen, L Chen, Nano Energy. 36Q. Meng, K. Cai, Y. Chen, L. Chen, Nano Energy 2017 36, 268-285.

. C D Lokhande, D P Dubal, O Joo, Curr. Appl. Phys. 11C. D. Lokhande, D. P. Dubal, O. Joo, Curr. Appl. Phys. 2011 11, 255-270.

. M - Wu, P - J Chiang, Electrochem. Solid State Lett. 7References Accepted ArticleM. -. Wu, P. -. J. Chiang, Electrochem. Solid State Lett 2004, 7, A123-A126. References Accepted Article

. J Chmiola, G Yushin, Y Gogotsi, C , Portet Accepted Article. J. Chmiola, G. Yushin, Y. Gogotsi, C. Portet Accepted Article

. J Chmiola, G Yushin, Y Gogotsi, C Portet, J. Chmiola, G. Yushin, Y. Gogotsi, C. Portet

. R Kötz, M Carlen, Accepted ArticleR. Kötz, M. Carlen, Accepted Article

. R Kötz, M Carlen, R. Kötz, M. Carlen,

. J S Bonso, A Rahy, S D Perera, N Nour, O Seitz, Y J Chabal, K J Balkus, J. P. Accepted Article. J. S. Bonso, A. Rahy, S. D. Perera, N. Nour, O. Seitz, Y. J. Chabal, K. J. Balkus, J. P. Accepted Article

. J S Bonso, A Rahy, S D Perera, N Nour, O Seitz, Y J Chabal, K J Balkus, J , J. S. Bonso, A. Rahy, S. D. Perera, N. Nour, O. Seitz, Y. J. Chabal, K. J. Balkus, J. P.

. T Cottineau, M Toupin, T Delahaye, T Brousse, D Bélanger, Applied Physics A. 82T. Cottineau, M. Toupin, T. Delahaye, T. Brousse, D. Bélanger, Applied Physics A 2006, 82, 599-606.

. L L Zhang, R Zhou, X S Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. 20L. L. Zhang, R. Zhou, X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. 2010, 20, 5983-5992.

. Q Ke, J Wang, J of Materiomics. 2Q. Ke, J. Wang, J of Materiomics 2016 2, 37-54.

. G Wang, L Zhang, J Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev. 41G. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2012, 41, 797-828.

. Z S Wu, K Parvez, X Feng, K Mullen, Nat. Commun. Z. S. Wu, K. Parvez, X. Feng, K. Mullen, Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2487.

. Q Cheng, J Tang, J Ma, H Zhang, N Shinya, L Qin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 13Q. Cheng, J. Tang, J. Ma, H. Zhang, N. Shinya, L. Qin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2011, 13, 17615-17624.

. Z S Iro, C Subramani, S Dash, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 11Z. S. Iro, C. Subramani, S. Dash, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 2016, 11, 10628-10643.

. M M Shaijumon, F S Ou, L Ci, P M Ajayan, Chem. Commun. M. M. Shaijumon, F. S. Ou, L. Ci, P. M. Ajayan, Chem. Commun. 2008, 2373-2375.

. K H An, W S Kim, Y S Park, J Moon, D J Bae, S C Lim, Y S Lee, Y H Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater. 11K. H. An, W. S. Kim, Y. S. Park, J. Moon, D. J. Bae, S. C. Lim, Y. S. Lee, Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2001, 11, 387-392.

. C Niu, E K Sichel, R Hoch, D Moy, H Tennent, Appl. Phys. Lett. 70C. Niu, E. K. Sichel, R. Hoch, D. Moy, H. Tennent, Appl. Phys. Lett. 1997, 70, 1480- 1482.

. M F De, S H Volder, R H Tawfick, A J Baughman, Hart, Science. 339M. F. De Volder, S. H. Tawfick, R. H. Baughman, A. J. Hart, Science 2013, 339, 535- 539.

. J Phiri, P Gane, T C Maloney, Mater. Sci. Eng. 215J. Phiri, P. Gane, T. C. Maloney, Mater. Sci. Eng. , B 2017, 215, 9-28.

. H A Becerril, J Mao, Z Liu, R M Stoltenberg, Z Bao, Y Chen, ACS Nano. 2H. A. Becerril, J. Mao, Z. Liu, R. M. Stoltenberg, Z. Bao, Y. Chen, ACS Nano 2008, 2, 463-470.

. Y Si, E T Samulski, Chem. Mater. 20Y. Si, E. T. Samulski, Chem. Mater. 2008, 20, 6792-6797.

. C Liu, Z Yu, D Neff, A Zhamu, B Z Jang, Nano Lett. 10C. Liu, Z. Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu, B. Z. Jang, Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 4863-4868.

. C Liu, F Li, L Ma, H Cheng, Adv Mater. 22C. Liu, F. Li, L. Ma, H. Cheng, Adv Mater 2010, 22, E28-E62.

. H Peng, J Huang, M Zhao, Q Zhang, X Cheng, X Liu, W Qian, F Wei, Advanced functional materials. 24H. Peng, J. Huang, M. Zhao, Q. Zhang, X. Cheng, X. Liu, W. Qian, F. Wei, Advanced functional materials 2014, 24, 2772-2781.

. B Huang, L Peng, F Yang, Y Liu, Z Xie, Journal of energy chemistry. 26B. Huang, L. Peng, F. Yang, Y. Liu, Z. Xie, Journal of energy chemistry 2017, 26, 712- 718.

. X Fan, C Yu, Z Ling, J Yang, J Qiu, ACS applied materials & interfaces. 5X. Fan, C. Yu, Z. Ling, J. Yang, J. Qiu, ACS applied materials & interfaces 2013, 5, 2104-2110.

. E Raymundo-Piñero, M Cadek, M Wachtler, F Béguin, ChemSusChem. 4Accepted ArticleE. Raymundo-Piñero, M. Cadek, M. Wachtler, F. Béguin, ChemSusChem 2011, 4, 943- 949. Accepted Article

. G Wang, L Zhang, J Zhang, Accepted ArticleG. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Zhang, Accepted Article

. G Wang, L Zhang, J Zhang, G. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Zhang,

. Z S Wu, K Parvez, X Feng, K Mullen, Accepted ArticleZ. S. Wu, K. Parvez, X. Feng, K. Mullen, Accepted Article

. Z S Wu, K Parvez, X Feng, K Mullen, Z. S. Wu, K. Parvez, X. Feng, K. Mullen,

Accepted Article. Q Cheng, J Tang, J Ma, H Zhang, N Shinya, L Qin, Q. Cheng, J. Tang, J. Ma, H. Zhang, N. Shinya, L. Qin, Accepted Article

. Q Cheng, J Tang, J Ma, H Zhang, N Shinya, L Qin, Accepted Article -17624Q. Cheng, J. Tang, J. Ma, H. Zhang, N. Shinya, L. Qin, - Accepted Article -17624.

Accepted Article 17624. Accepted Article 17624.

Accepted Article. Z S Iro, C Subramani, S Dash, Z. S. Iro, C. Subramani, S. Dash, Accepted Article

. Z S Iro, C Subramani, S Dash, Z. S. Iro, C. Subramani, S. Dash,

Accepted Article. M M Shaijumon, F S Ou, L Ci, P M Ajayan, M. M. Shaijumon, F. S. Ou, L. Ci, P. M. Ajayan, Accepted Article

. M M Shaijumon, F S Ou, L Ci, P M Ajayan, M. M. Shaijumon, F. S. Ou, L. Ci, P. M. Ajayan,

. K H An, W S Kim, Y S Park, J Moon, D J Bae, S , Adv. Funct. Mater. Accepted Article Adv. Funct. Mater. K. H. An, W. S. Kim, Y. S. Park, J. Moon, D. J. Bae, S. Adv. Funct. Mater. Accepted Article Adv. Funct. Mater. 2001

Accepted Article. Accepted Article 2001

Accepted Article. C Niu, E K Sichel, R Hoch, D Moy, H Tennent, C. Niu, E. K. Sichel, R. Hoch, D. Moy, H. Tennent, Accepted Article

. C Niu, E K Sichel, R Hoch, D Moy, H Tennent, C. Niu, E. K. Sichel, R. Hoch, D. Moy, H. Tennent,

Accepted Article. M F De, S H Volder, R H Tawfick, A J Baughman, Hart, M. F. De Volder, S. H. Tawfick, R. H. Baughman, A. J. Hart, Accepted Article

. M F De, S H Volder, R H Tawfick, A J Baughman, Hart, M. F. De Volder, S. H. Tawfick, R. H. Baughman, A. J. Hart,

. J Phiri, P Gane, T C Maloney, Accepted ArticleJ. Phiri, P. Gane, T. C. Maloney, Accepted Article

. J Phiri, P Gane, T C Maloney, J. Phiri, P. Gane, T. C. Maloney,

Accepted Article. H A Becerril, J Mao, Z Liu, R M Stoltenberg, Z Bao, Y Chen, H. A. Becerril, J. Mao, Z. Liu, R. M. Stoltenberg, Z. Bao, Y. Chen, Accepted Article

Accepted Article. H A Becerril, J Mao, Z Liu, R M Stoltenberg, Z Bao, Y Chen, 21] Y. Si, E. T. SamulskiH. A. Becerril, J. Mao, Z. Liu, R. M. Stoltenberg, Z. Bao, Y. Chen, [21] Y. Si, E. T. Samulski, Accepted Article

. Y Si, E T Samulski, Y. Si, E. T. Samulski,

. C Liu, Z. Accepted Article. C. Liu, Z. Accepted Article

. C Liu, Z Accepted Article, D Yu, A Neff, B Z Zhamu, Jang, Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu, B. Z. JangC. Liu, Z. Accepted Article Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu, B. Z. Jang, Accepted Article Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu, B. Z. Jang,

. C Liu, F Li, L Ma, H Cheng, Accepted ArticleC. Liu, F. Li, L. Ma, H. Cheng, Accepted Article

. C Liu, F Li, L Ma, H Cheng, C. Liu, F. Li, L. Ma, H. Cheng,

. H Peng, J Huang, M Zhao, Q Zhang, X Cheng, X Liu, W Qian, F Wei, Accepted ArticleH. Peng, J. Huang, M. Zhao, Q. Zhang, X. Cheng, X. Liu, W. Qian, F. Wei, Accepted Article

H Peng, J Huang, M Zhao, Q Zhang, X Cheng, X Liu, W Qian, F Wei, functional materials Accepted Article functional materials. H. Peng, J. Huang, M. Zhao, Q. Zhang, X. Cheng, X. Liu, W. Qian, F. Wei, functional materials Accepted Article functional materials 2014

Accepted Article. Accepted Article 2014

. B Huang, L Peng, F Yang, Y Liu, Z Xie, B. Huang, L. Peng, F. Yang, Y. Liu, Z. Xie,

. Z Wu, Y Sun, Y Tan, S Yang, X Feng, K Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134Z. Wu, Y. Sun, Y. Tan, S. Yang, X. Feng, K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 19532-19535.

. J Phiri, L Johansson, P Gane, T C Maloney, Nanoscale. 10J. Phiri, L. Johansson, P. Gane, T. C. Maloney, Nanoscale 2018, 10, 9569-9582.

. J Huang, Y Liang, H Hu, S Liu, Y Cai, H Dong, M Zheng, Y Xiao, Y Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A. 5J. Huang, Y. Liang, H. Hu, S. Liu, Y. Cai, H. Dong, M. Zheng, Y. Xiao, Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A 2017, 5, 24775-24781.

. A Magasinski, P Dixon, B Hertzberg, A Kvit, J Ayala, G Yushin, Nat Mater. 9A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala, G. Yushin, Nat Mater 2010, 9, 353-358.

. J Wang, S Kaskel, J. Mater. Chem. 22J. Wang, S. Kaskel, J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22, 23710-23725.

. A Bhatnagar, W Hogland, M Marques, M Sillanpää, Chem. Eng. J. 219A. Bhatnagar, W. Hogland, M. Marques, M. Sillanpää, Chem. Eng. J. 2013 219, 499- 511.

. D Pan, S Wang, B Zhao, M Wu, H Zhang, Y Wang, Z Jiao, Chem. Mater. 21D. Pan, S. Wang, B. Zhao, M. Wu, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Jiao, Chem. Mater. 2009, 21, 3136-3142.

. Z Ni, Y Wang, T Yu, Z Shen, Nano Res. 1Z. Ni, Y. Wang, T. Yu, Z. Shen, Nano Res 2008, 1, 273-291.

. L Zhang, Y Jiang, L Wang, C Zhang, S Liu, Electrochim. Acta. 196L. Zhang, Y. Jiang, L. Wang, C. Zhang, S. Liu, Electrochim. Acta 2016, 196, 189-196.

. S Utsumi, H Honda, Y Hattori, H Kanoh, K Takahashi, H Sakai, M Abe, M Yudasaka, S Iijima, K Kaneko, J. Phys. Chem. C. 111S. Utsumi, H. Honda, Y. Hattori, H. Kanoh, K. Takahashi, H. Sakai, M. Abe, M. Yudasaka, S. Iijima, K. Kaneko, J. Phys. Chem. C 2007, 111, 5572-5575.

. S Wang, F Tristan, D Minami, T Fujimori, R Cruz-Silva, M Terrones, K Takeuchi, K Teshima, F Rodríguez-Reinoso, M Endo, Carbon. 76S. Wang, F. Tristan, D. Minami, T. Fujimori, R. Cruz-Silva, M. Terrones, K. Takeuchi, K. Teshima, F. Rodríguez-Reinoso, M. Endo, Carbon 2014, 76, 220-231.

K Xia, Q Li, L Zheng, K You, X Tian, B Han, Q Gao, Z Huang, G Chen, C Zhou, Microporous and Mesoporous Materials. 237K. Xia, Q. Li, L. Zheng, K. You, X. Tian, B. Han, Q. Gao, Z. Huang, G. Chen, C. Zhou, Microporous and Mesoporous Materials 2017, 237, 228-236.

. E Raymundo-Piñero, K Kierzek, J Machnikowski, F Béguin, Carbon. 44E. Raymundo-Piñero, K. Kierzek, J. Machnikowski, F. Béguin, Carbon 2006 44, 2498- 2507.

. H Zhou, S Zhu, M Hibino, I Honma, J. Power Sources. 122H. Zhou, S. Zhu, M. Hibino, I. Honma, J. Power Sources 2003 122, 219-223.

. M Yu, X Cheng, Y Zeng, Z Wang, Y Tong, X Lu, S Yang, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 55M. Yu, X. Cheng, Y. Zeng, Z. Wang, Y. Tong, X. Lu, S. Yang, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2016, 55, 6762-6766.

. H Xia, Y S Meng, G Yuan, C Cui, L Lu, Electrochemical and Solid-State Letters. 15H. Xia, Y. S. Meng, G. Yuan, C. Cui, L. Lu, Electrochemical and Solid-State Letters 2012, 15, A60-A63.

. M Boota, K Hatzell, E Kumbur, Y Gogotsi, ChemSusChem. 8M. Boota, K. Hatzell, E. Kumbur, Y. Gogotsi, ChemSusChem 2015, 8, 835-843.

. L Li, H Song, X Chen, Electrochim. Acta. 51L. Li, H. Song, X. Chen, Electrochim. Acta 2006 51, 5715-5720.

. W Chen, T Wen, H Teng, Electrochim. Acta. 48W. Chen, T. Wen, H. Teng, Electrochim. Acta 2003 48, 641-649.

. J Gamby, P L Taberna, P Simon, J F Fauvarque, M Chesneau, J. Power Sources. 101Accepted ArticleJ. Gamby, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon, J. F. Fauvarque, M. Chesneau, J. Power Sources 2001 101, 109-116. Accepted Article

Accepted Article. A Magasinski, P Dixon, B Hertzberg, A Kvit, J Ayala, G Yushin, A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala, G. Yushin, Accepted Article

. A Magasinski, P Dixon, B Hertzberg, A Kvit, J Ayala, G Yushin, A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala, G. Yushin,

. J Wang, S Kaskel, Accepted ArticleJ. Wang, S. Kaskel, Accepted Article

. J Wang, S Kaskel, J. Wang, S. Kaskel,

. A Bhatnagar, W Hogland, M Marques, M Sillanpää, Accepted ArticleA. Bhatnagar, W. Hogland, M. Marques, M. Sillanpää, Accepted Article

. A Bhatnagar, W Hogland, M Marques, M Sillanpää, A. Bhatnagar, W. Hogland, M. Marques, M. Sillanpää,

Accepted Article. D Pan, S Wang, B Zhao, M Wu, H Zhang, Y Wang, Z Jiao, D. Pan, S. Wang, B. Zhao, M. Wu, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Jiao, Accepted Article

. D Pan, S Wang, B Zhao, M Wu, H Zhang, Y Wang, Z Jiao, 3142D. Pan, S. Wang, B. Zhao, M. Wu, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Jiao, 3142

. Z Ni, Y Wang, T Yu, Z. S Accepted Article. Z. Ni, Y. Wang, T. Yu, Z. S Accepted Article

. Z Ni, Y Wang, T Yu, Z , Z. Ni, Y. Wang, T. Yu, Z. S

Accepted Article. L Zhang, Y Jiang, L Wang, C Zhang, S Liu, L. Zhang, Y. Jiang, L. Wang, C. Zhang, S. Liu, Accepted Article

. L Zhang, Y Jiang, L Wang, C Zhang, S Liu, L. Zhang, Y. Jiang, L. Wang, C. Zhang, S. Liu,

Accepted Article. S Utsumi, H Honda, Y Hattori, H Kanoh, K Takahashi, H Sakai, M Abe, M , S. Utsumi, H. Honda, Y. Hattori, H. Kanoh, K. Takahashi, H. Sakai, M. Abe, M. Accepted Article

. S Utsumi, H Honda, Y Hattori, H Kanoh, K Takahashi, H Sakai, M Abe, M Yudasaka, S Iijima, K Kaneko, S Accepted Article Yudasaka, K Iijima, Kaneko, S. Utsumi, H. Honda, Y. Hattori, H. Kanoh, K. Takahashi, H. Sakai, M. Abe, M. Yudasaka, S. Iijima, K. Kaneko, Accepted Article Yudasaka, S. Iijima, K. Kaneko,

. S Wang, F Tristan, D Minami, T Fujimori, R Cruz, Accepted ArticleS. Wang, F. Tristan, D. Minami, T. Fujimori, R. Cruz Accepted Article

. S Wang, F Tristan, D Minami, T Fujimori, R Cruz, K Teshima, F , Rodríguez Accepted ArticleS. Wang, F. Tristan, D. Minami, T. Fujimori, R. Cruz K. Teshima, F. Rodríguez Accepted Article

. K Teshima, F Rodríguez, K. Teshima, F. Rodríguez

Accepted Article. K Xia, Q Li, L Zheng, K You, X Tian, B Han, Q Gao, Z Huang, K. Xia, Q. Li, L. Zheng, K. You, X. Tian, B. Han, Q. Gao, Z. Huang, Accepted Article

. K Xia, Q Li, L Zheng, K You, X Tian, B Han, Q Gao, Z. Huang, Microporous and Mesoporous Materials. K. Xia, Q. Li, L. Zheng, K. You, X. Tian, B. Han, Q. Gao, Z. Huang, Microporous and Mesoporous Materials

. E Raymundo-Accepted Article -Piñero, K Kierzek, J Machnikowski, F Béguin, K Accepted Article Piñero, J Kierzek, F Machnikowski, Béguin, Accepted ArticleE. Raymundo- Accepted Article -Piñero, K. Kierzek, J. Machnikowski, F. Béguin, Accepted Article Piñero, K. Kierzek, J. Machnikowski, F. Béguin, Accepted Article

. H Zhou, S Zhu, M Hibino, I Honma, Accepted ArticleH. Zhou, S. Zhu, M. Hibino, I. Honma, Accepted Article

. H Zhou, S Zhu, M Hibino, I Honma, H. Zhou, S. Zhu, M. Hibino, I. Honma,

Accepted Article. M Yu, X Cheng, Y Zeng, Z Wang, Y Tong, X Lu, S Yang, M. Yu, X. Cheng, Y. Zeng, Z. Wang, Y. Tong, X. Lu, S. Yang, Accepted Article

. M Yu, X Cheng, Y Zeng, Z Wang, Y Tong, X Lu, S Yang, 6762M. Yu, X. Cheng, Y. Zeng, Z. Wang, Y. Tong, X. Lu, S. Yang, , 6762

. X Du, P Guo, H Song, X Chen, Electrochim. Acta. 55X. Du, P. Guo, H. Song, X. Chen, Electrochim. Acta 2010, 55, 4812-4819.

. M Arulepp, L Permann, J Leis, A Perkson, K Rumma, A Jänes, E Lust, J. Power Sources. 133M. Arulepp, L. Permann, J. Leis, A. Perkson, K. Rumma, A. Jänes, E. Lust, J. Power Sources 2004 133, 320-328.

. Y Li, T Shang, J Gao, X Jin, Adv, 7Y. Li, T. Shang, J. Gao, X. Jin, RSC Adv. 2017, 7, 19098-19105.

. Y Kim, B Lee, H Suezaki, T Chino, Y Abe, T Yanagiura, K C Park, M Endo, Carbon. 44Y. Kim, B. Lee, H. Suezaki, T. Chino, Y. Abe, T. Yanagiura, K. C. Park, M. Endo, Carbon 2006, 44, 1592-1594.

. C Shi, L Hu, K Guo, H Li, T Zhai, Adv. Sustainable Syst. C. Shi, L. Hu, K. Guo, H. Li, T. Zhai, Adv. Sustainable Syst. 2017, 1, 1600011.

. J Phiri, L Johansson, P Gane, T Maloney, Compos. Part B: Engin. 147Accepted ArticleJ. Phiri, L. Johansson, P. Gane, T. Maloney, Compos. Part B: Engin. 2018 147, 104-113. Accepted Article

Accepted Article. Y Kim, B Lee, H Suezaki, T Chino, Y Abe, T Yanagiura, K C Park, M Endo, Y. Kim, B. Lee, H. Suezaki, T. Chino, Y. Abe, T. Yanagiura, K. C. Park, M. Endo, Accepted Article

. Y Kim, B Lee, H Suezaki, T Chino, Y Abe, T Yanagiura, K C Park, M Endo, Y. Kim, B. Lee, H. Suezaki, T. Chino, Y. Abe, T. Yanagiura, K. C. Park, M. Endo, 2006