June, 1931
June, 1931EDITORIALS.

Indian Medical Gazette. JUNE. TROPICAL TYPHUS.
The annual reports of the Institute for judical Research, Federated Malay States, f^uala Lumpur, are always of exceptional invest, and that for 1929 by Dr. Neave Kingsbury is no exception, for its first 49 pages are devoted to reports on medical research work a very high order. The chief interest in this section is a full report of the recent work parried out on tropical typhus, and this is so lrnportant that we propose to review it in our ^ditorial columns. An interesting departure rpm usual procedure is that Dr. L. Anigstein ?* Warsaw was appointed to the institute as a research scholar on this disease during the year.

Between January 1927 and April 1929 there ?ccurred 164 cases of tropical typhus, of ^hich 129 occurred in endemic form on an oil Palm estate near Kuala Lumpur, and the emainder were scattered elsewhere in Malaya. curious feature of the disease is the frequent ss?ciation of only slight grades of fever with ^upor or delirium; such cases may end fatally, p mild suffusion of the eyes is very characterise of the disease and the chief complication is r?nchitis or broncho-pneumonia, usually superening in the second week. The case mortality ?se from 4 per cent, in 1927 to 14.7 per cent. ** 1929.

At post-mortem there is no characteristic I a^ed-eye change; the heart may show minute sernorrhages ^enea^1 the epicardium or on the Papillary muscles. In the brain there is a ^ !ght but definite perivascular infiltration of the jailer pre-capillaries with mononuclear cells. The many attempts made to isolate the causative organism from man and from infected animals yielded only partially successful results. In some animals pathological changes corresponding to those of the natural disease occurred, and the Weil-Felix reaction was positive. Complement deviation tests also gave only partially positive results. There is usually mild leucopenia during the first week of the disease, followed by a rise in the leucocyte count, and with the onset of broncho-pneumonia this rise may be marked. There is a definite drop in the percentage of polymorphonuclears.

Turning to epidemiology, the disease is not seasonal and cases have occurred in every month of the year. Tamils especially are affected, and no less than 121 out of the 139 cases recorded in Tamils occurred on the oil palm estate mentioned. Males, especially those working among oil palms, are far more affected than females. Cases have also been encountered amongst Europeans engaged in engineering work in the jungles. It is especially in Tamil coolies engaged in harvesting and pruning oil palms that the chief incidence of the disease occurs, and there is a close connection between tropical typhus and oil palms. With the onset of the pruning season the disease sets in virulently, and drops off as the pruning season ends. It is likely that the vector of the disease may be found in the bunches of over-ripe fruit and lower leaves that accumulate and decay around the base of the tree during the process of pruning.

Recovery from the disease is apparently accompanied by a lasting immunity. Fletcher and Lesslar having suggested in a previous report that rats may be a reservoir of the infection, a systematic examination of the rats on the oil palm estate concerned was carried out. In 6 out of 80 rats caught on the estate pathological lesions corresponding to those in experimentally-infected rats were seen, Rickettsia-like bodies were present, and in one instance a rat's serum gave a positive Weil-Felix reaction to the " K" strain of Proteus -XT-19 to a dilution of 1 : 250 ; this rat showed marked testicular lesions and the presence of Rickettsia-like bodies in smears from the tunica vaginalis.

The patients are free from lice, and attempts at experimental transmission by lice (brought from Poland by Dr. Anigstein) were only partially successful. A small number showed Rickettsia-like bodies, and passage of emulguinea-pigs caused no fever, but death after sions of positive lice into two out of three 20 days with loss of body weight, enlargement of the spleen, and characteristic lesions in the testes. On the other hand the louse cannot be existent in that country, and head lice cannot the vector in Malaya; the body louse is nonbe associated with the epidemiological observations on the oil palm estate.

THE INDIAN MEDICAL GAZETTE. [June, 1931. An examination of coolies the moment they came in from work among the oil palms was next instituted; the men were stripped and examined by assistants provided with magnifying glasses. As a result of 464 such examinations, 88 arthropods in all were collected, of which the majority were larval Trombidiida).

Collections of mites were made from the decayed male flowers of oil palms, and these yielded a large amount of material which is still under investigation. The ectoparasites of rats were studied, and in all 21 species were identified; Trombicula deliensis was found to be a common ectoparasite of rats?especially of those coming from the infected oil palm estate.

At this point, this most interesting report terminates, but it is clear that further investigations will be pursued. Certainly the ffitiology of this curious disease must be very fully investigated. Whilst clinically closely resembling typhus, all the evidence shows that it cannot be louse-borne. Its chief characteristic is its sporadic incidence, and, in Malaya, its very close association with the oil palm.

R. K.


these pre-capillaries, and usually in an intracellular position, are minute gjplococcal bodies?apparently Rickettsia, imilar forms are also found in the large pyraidal cells of the cerebral cortex. A few focal <reas of cellular infiltration are also present. th^f laboratory animals the guinea-pig and j e rat are the most susceptible, but results fe se animals are uncertain. There may be AtVer f?r 5-8 days with decline in body weight. autopsy the lungs are congested with hsemorjn??1,c infarcts. A very constant finding in ge ePtecl male guinea-pigs is a hemorrhagic Ji /^"gelatinous exudate in lesions in the testis, ? marked injection of the tunica vaginalis. ie same pathological and histological changes a e. tound in the brains of infected guinea-pigs y ^ man. When the local strain of Proteus sh r 1S use<^> majority of animals infected a definite rise in agglutination titre.