Tumour necrosis factor-= production and immune cell activation in tuberculous meningitis


C M Mastroianni 
Institute of Infectious Diseases
University 'La Sapienza'
Policlinico Umberto I, Viale Regina Elena 33100161RomeItaly

F Paoletti 
Institute of Infectious Diseases
University 'La Sapienza'
Policlinico Umberto I, Viale Regina Elena 33100161RomeItaly

C Valenti 
Institute of Infectious Diseases
University 'La Sapienza'
Policlinico Umberto I, Viale Regina Elena 33100161RomeItaly

A P Massetti 
Institute of Infectious Diseases
University 'La Sapienza'
Policlinico Umberto I, Viale Regina Elena 33100161RomeItaly

V Vullo 
Institute of Infectious Diseases
University 'La Sapienza'
Policlinico Umberto I, Viale Regina Elena 33100161RomeItaly

S Delia 
Institute of Infectious Diseases
University 'La Sapienza'
Policlinico Umberto I, Viale Regina Elena 33100161RomeItaly

Tumour necrosis factor-= production and immune cell activation in tuberculous meningitis
Research Paper Mediators of Inflammation 3, 57-60 (1994)Adenosine deaminasefl2-microglobulinCere- brospinal fluidImmune activationTuberculous meningitisTumour necrosis factor-cz
THE local production of tumour necrosis factor-0t (TNF0t) was evaluated in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from ten patients with tuberculous meningitis (TBM). The degree of intrathecal immune activation was also studied by assessing the CSF levels of 2-microglobulin (2-M) and adenosine deaminase activity (ADA). Results indicate that elevated CSF concentrations of TNF0t, 12-M and ADA were found in all TBM patients. Moreover, TNF0t is produced and selectively concentrated for a long period of time, while 2-M and ADA values progressively decline during the course of TBM. Our findings suggest that in TBM patients, after an early activation of immune cells, there is an enhanced and continuous production of TNF0t at the site of infection.

Introduction

Tumour necrosis factor-o (TNFo 0 is a cytokine mainly released by cells of the monocytemacrophage lineage in response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and other immune and inflammatory stimuli. It has been recognized as a primary mediator in the pathogenesis of infection, injury and inflammation and in the beneficial processes of host response. In particular, TNFe is an important macrophage-activating factor for antibacterial resistance against infections caused by facultative intracellular organisms, such as mycobacteria. 2 In experimental models it has been reported that TNF enhances macrophage phagocitic capacity and mycobacterial killing by human macrophages. In addition, recent lines of evidence indicated that TNF is synthesized in large amounts in pulmonary tuberculosis and it is locally concentrated at the site of disease activity. 4,s To date, little is known about the intrathecal production of TNF during the course of tuberculous meningitis (TBM). 6 Therefore, it appears to be of interest to evaluate the local production and release of TNFo in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients with TBM.

In the present study, TNFo concentrations were measured in CSF specimens obtained from hospital patients on admission and during the course of TBM. In order to determine the extent to which cell-mediated immunity is involved in the disease, the CSF levels of two markers of immune activation, such as fl2-microglobulin (/2-M) and adenosine deaminase activity (ADA), were also measured.


Materials and Methods

Patients: Ten patients with TBM (five males, five females) admitted to the Institute of Infectious Diseases of the University of Rome 'La Sapienza', were enrolled in this study. The mean age was 34.4 years (range, 12-55 years). TBM was diagnosed on the basis of findings in the CSF. In six cases CSF smears were positive by acid-fast staining and fluid cultures grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis; in the remaining patients, diagnosis was made by compatible cytological and biochemical findings, supported by clinical features and symptomatic improvement with antituberculous therapy. All patients were sero-negative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and did not  In all patients CSF levels of TNF were low on admission, then progressively increased and remained detectable for a long period of time. Antibiotic treatment did not appear to influence the TNF levels. Similarly, there was no correlation between the cytokine concentrations and the clinical course of the disease. 


Discussion

Cetl-mediated immunity plays an important role in the control of infections by M. tuberculosis. It is widely assumed that T-lymphocytes, through lymphokine-mediated macrophage activation, are the major immune cells involved both in the pathogenesis and protective mechanisms in human tuberculosis. 1 5'0 In the case of TBM, it is conceivable that the involvement of cellular immune system mainly occurs in the central nervous system (CNS). In this respect, the dosage in the CSF of two markers of immune activation, such as fl2-M and ADA, represents a useful tool to investigate the degree to which cell-mediated immunity is stimulated in the CNS. /2-M is a portion of the major histocompatibility complex class I antigen (MHC-1) and is expressed on the surface of lymphocytes and macrophages. With regard to the adenosine deaminase, the activity of this enzyme is increased in lymphoid cells, especially during T-cell proliferation and differentiation.

Previous investigations have already demon-$0 strated a close correlation between elevated CSF ADA values and TBM, 1'12 while an increase in the CSF concentrations of/2-M has been reported only in viral and pyogenic meningitis. 13 In the present Mediators of Inflammation. Vol 3.1994 59 study, both /2-M and ADA levels were found to be elevated in the CSF of all TBM patients, thus indicating a marked stimulation of immune system within the CNS. The increased CSF levels of/2-M were possibly a consequence of cell-mediated cytotoxicity directed against macrophages infected by M. tuberculosis. 14 The elevation of CSF ADA values was most likely related to the local immune response as the result of proliferating lymphocytes in response to mycobacterial antigen.

Intrathecal immune activation appears to be also associated with increased cytokine expression in the CNS. Indeed, our results showed that TBM patients had significantly higher CSF TNFo concentrations than those found in control subjects with non-infectious neurological diseases. The local production of TNF is low in the initial phase of TBM, while the peak in the CSF concentration was obtained later. Moreover, the CSF levels of this cytokine did not decrease during the course of the disease, but they were elevated for a long time in all patients, irrespective of the antibiotic therapy and the clinical course of TBM. This pattern is quite different from that observed in the case of/2-M and ADA, whose levels declined rapidly during the course of the disease. Only two patients who developed neurological complications showed a further increase in the CSF/2-M and ADA values.

Taken together, our findings suggest that a great stimulation of immune T-cells primarily occurs in the acute phase of TBM and may account for the early increase in the CSF /2-M and ADA values.

On the contrary, the enhancement of cytokine expression related to TNF production is a later but more prolonged phenomenon. It is likely that brain macrophages activated by T-cell-mediated pathway are the source of TNFo in TBM patients. This hypothesis is also supported by previous investigations that have demonstrated that M. tuberculosis cell wall components can trigger the release of TNFo from human and murine macrophages, as well as from pleural fluid mononuclear cells of patients with pulmonary tuberculosis. 5,15,16 In conclusion, our data provide direct evidence that TNFo is produced and selectively concentrated for a long period of time in the CSF from patients with TBM. The chronic release of TNFo at the site of the infection suggests that this cytokine may be involved in the complex immunoregulatory mechanism that contributes to mycobacterial containment and elimination.

FIG. 1 .FIG. 2 .
12On the contrary,/2-M and ADA values resulted to be elevated on admission. Later, a progressive decline was observed. Only two patients with culture-proven TBM showed a further increase in CSF/2-M and ADA values, despite the administration of antituberculous treatment. The peak of Levels of/t2-M, ADA and TNF in the CSF samples (n 66) from TBM patients compared with those (n 15) obtained in controls with non-infectious neurological diseases. Data are expressed as the mean _ _ _ SEM. Comparisons between groups are made by non-parametric test (Mann-Whitney U-test) and differences in CSF levels of/Y2-M, ADA and TN F were statistically significant (p < 0.0001 for all). Time course of TNF levels in sequential CSF samples from the ten TBM patients. .3. Time course of J2-M and ADA levels in sequential CSF samples from the ten TBM patients. immune activation markers was associated with the development of complications (hydrocephalus, hemiplegia) and an unfavourable clinical course of meningitis.


have other disturbances of immunity.A total of 66 CSF samples was collected from TBM patients before starting treatment and subsequently at various intervals of time during the course of infection.instructions. The IMx system is based on a rapid microparticle enzyme immunoassay (MEIA), in which submicron particles are coated with a mouse monoclonal antibody specific for/2-M. The use of microparticles increases the assay kinetics and decreases the assay incubation. The sensitivity of the IMx /2-M was calculated to be better than 5 tg/1. Normal/2-M values were considered equal or less than 3 mg/1. A DA activity measurement: ADA activity was measured in fresh CSF samples after centrifugation at 300 g for 10 min. ADA assay was performed at 37C by using the colorimetric method ofGiusti, v    based on the determination of the amount of NH3CSF specimens were also obtained from 15 
patients with non-infectious neurological disorders, 
including cerebrovascular disease, hydrocephalus, 
encephalomyelitis and epilepsy. 
CSF specimens, upon collection, were placed in 

a refrigerated centrifuge (4C) and spun at 

3 000 rpm for 10 min. Cell supernatants were stored 
at -80C until use. 

Assay for TNF: TNF concentrations in CSF were 

measured by a quantitative immunoenzymatic 

sandwich assay (Quantikine, R&D Systems, Min-
neapolis, MN, USA). Samples and standards were 

(C) 1994 Rapid Communications of Oxford Ltd 

Mediators of Inflammation. Vol 3. 1994 57 
incubated in anti-TNF monoclonal antibody-
coated polystyrene microtiter wells. A horseradish 
peroxidase-conjugated anti-TNF0 polyclonal anti-
body was then added and allowed to bind the TNF 
captured by the first antibody, completing the 
sandwich. After washing, substrate solution was 
added to the wells. The reaction was stopped by 

addition of 2N HiSO4 and optical density (OD) at 

492 nm was measured using an ELISA microreader. 
To estimate the amount of TNFz in the CSF 
samples we constructed a standard curve by using 
concentrations of TNF ranging from 0 to 
1000pg/ml. Unknown values of TNF in the 
samples were determined by referring to the 
standard curve and expressed as pg/ml. The 
detection limit of the assay was 4.8 pg/ml. 

Assay for fie-M: /2-M concentrations were assessed 

by the IMx system (Abbott Laboratories, North 
Chicago, IL, USA), according to the manufacturer's 

released in the reaction mixture. The enzymatic 

activity was calculated by referring to a standard 
curve of ammonium sulphate in buffer and was 

expressed as IU/37C/1. Normal ADA values were 

considered equal or less than 4 IU/1. 

Statistical analysis: The Mann-Whitney U-test was 
used for statistical analysis. 

Results 

CSF levels of TNF, /2-M and ADA were 

measured in ten patients with TBM and in 15 
control subjects with non-infectious CNS disorders. 
Data are shown in Figure 1 and are expressed as 

mean + SEM. TNF concentrations in TBM 

patients (155_21.62pg/ml) were significantly 
higher than those found in controls (5.69-+-0.77 
pg/ml) (p < 0.0001). Similarly, TBM patients had 

elevated CSF values of/32-M (8.69 _ _ _ 

1.07 mg/1) and 

ADA (10.83 _+ 1.61 IU/37C/1)in comparison with 

those observed in the non-TBM cases (1.34 -t-0.12 

mg/1 and 1.02 0.16 IU/37C/1, respectively) (p < 

0.0001 for both). 
The kinetics of TNF0 and both j2-M and ADA 
values during the course of TBM were illustrated 

respectively in Figures 2 and 3. 

Mediators of Inflammation. Vol 3.1994
Mediators of Inflammation. Vol 3.1994

Tumor necrosis factor : multifaceted peptide hormone. M G Rosenblum, N J Donato, Crit Rev Immunol. 9Rosenblum MG, Donato NJ. Tumor necrosis factor : multifaceted peptide hormone. Crit Rev Immunol 1989; 9: 21-44.

Evidence that tumor necrosis factor has important role in antibacterial resistance. E A Havell, J Immunol. 143Havell EA. Evidence that tumor necrosis factor has important role in antibacterial resistance. J Immunol 1989; 143: 2894-2899.

Tumor necrosis factor, alone in combination with IL-2, but not IFN-gamma, is associated with macrophage killing of Mycobacterium avium complex. Lem Bermuduz, L S Young, J Immunol. 1403006Bermuduz LEM, Young LS. Tumor necrosis factor, alone in combination with IL-2, but not IFN-gamma, is associated with macrophage killing of Mycobacterium avium complex. J Immunol 1988; 140: 3006.

Local production of tumor necrosis factor and IFN-y in tuberculous pleuritis. P F Barnes, S-E Fong, Brennan Pj, P E Twoney, A Mazumder, R L Modlin, J. 145Barnes PF, Fong S-E, Brennan Pj, Twoney PE, Mazumder A, Modlin RL. Local production of tumor necrosis factor and IFN-y in tuberculous pleuritis. J Immuno11990; 145: 149-154.

Production of tumor necrosis factor alpha by monocytes from patients with tuberculous pleuritis. T Takashima, C Ueta, I Tsuyuguchi, S Kishimoto, Infect Immun. 58Takashima T, Ueta C, Tsuyuguchi I, Kishimoto S. Production of tumor necrosis factor alpha by monocytes from patients with tuberculous pleuritis. Infect Immun 1990; 58: 3286-3292.

Tumor necrosis factor-(TNF00 in cerebrospinal fluid from patients with meningitis at different etiologies: high levels of TNF indicate bacterial meningitis. M Glimaker, P Kragsbjerg, M Forsgren, P Olc&amp;n, J Infect Dis. 167Glimaker M, Kragsbjerg P, Forsgren M, Olc&n P. Tumor necrosis factor- (TNF00 in cerebrospinal fluid from patients with meningitis at different etiologies: high levels of TNF indicate bacterial meningitis. J Infect Dis 1993; 167: 882-889.

Adenosine deaminase. G Giusti, Enwmatic Analysis. Wienhen: Verlag Chemie. Bergmeyer HUGiusti G. Adenosine deaminase. In: Bergmeyer HU, ed. Methods in Enwmatic Analysis. Wienhen: Verlag Chemie, 1974; 1092-1099.

T-cell mediated protection in mice against virulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis. C Leveton, B Barnass, B Champion, Infect Immun. 57Leveton C, Barnass B, Champion B, et al. T-cell mediated protection in mice against virulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Infect Immun 1989; 57: 390-395.

Immunologic aspects of mycobacterial infections. J Ellner, R S Wallis, Rev Infect Dis. 22SupplEllner J, Wallis RS. Immunologic aspects of mycobacterial infections. Rev Infect Dis 1989; 2 (Suppl 2): S455-S459.

T-lymphocytes mediating protection of mice against cytolysis during the course of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. Evidence for different kinetics and recognition of wide spectrum of protein antigens. I M Orme, E S Miller, A D Robert, J. 148Orme IM, Miller ES, Robert AD, et al. T-lymphocytes mediating protection of mice against cytolysis during the course of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. Evidence for different kinetics and recognition of wide spectrum of protein antigens. J Immuno11992; 148: 189-196.

Adenosine deaminase levels in cerebrospinal fluid in the diagnosis of tuberculous meningitis. C Malan, P R Donald, M Golden, Taljaard Jjf, J Trop Med Hyg. 87Malan C, Donald PR, Golden M, Taljaard jjF. Adenosine deaminase levels in cerebrospinal fluid in the diagnosis of tuberculous meningitis. J Trop Med Hyg 1984; 87: 33-40.

Activity of adenosine deaminase in cerebrospinal fluid for the diagnosis and follow-up of tuberculous meningitis in adults. E Ribera, J M Martinez-Vazquez, I Ocana, R Segura, C Pascual, J Infect Dis. 155Ribera E, Martinez-Vazquez JM, Ocana I, Segura R, Pascual C. Activity of adenosine deaminase in cerebrospinal fluid for the diagnosis and follow-up of tuberculous meningitis in adults. J Infect Dis 1987; 155: 603-607.

Beta-2-microglobulin levels in the cerebrospinal fluid: their value disease marker. N Adachi, Eur Neurol. 31Adachi N. Beta-2-microglobulin levels in the cerebrospinal fluid: their value disease marker. Eur Neurol 1991; 31: 181-185.

Influence of tuberculosis human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1): enhanced cytokine expression and elevated fle-microglobulin in HIV-1 associated tuberculosis. R S Wallis, M Vjecha, M Amir-Tahmasseb, J Infect Dis. 167Wallis RS, Vjecha M, Amir-Tahmasseb M, et al. Influence of tuberculosis human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1): enhanced cytokine expression and elevated fle-microglobulin in HIV-1 associated tuberculosis. J Infect Dis 1993; 167: 43-48.

Lipoarabinomannan from Mycobacterium tuberculosis induces the production of tumour necrosis factor from human and murine macrophages. C Moreno, J Taverne, A Mehlert, Clin Exp. 76Moreno C, Taverne J, Mehlert A, et al. Lipoarabinomannan from Mycobacterium tuberculosis induces the production of tumour necrosis factor from human and murine macrophages. Clin Exp Immuno11989; 76: 240-245.

Cytokine production induced by Mycobacterium tuberculosis lipoarabinomannan. Relationship to chemical structure. P F Barnes, D Chatterjee, J S Abrams, J. 149Barnes PF, Chatterjee D, Abrams JS, et al. Cytokine production induced by Mycobacterium tuberculosis lipoarabinomannan. Relationship to chemical structure. J Immuno11992; 149: 541-547.

This work supported in part by grant from. We thank Dr Pietro Gallo. M.U.R.S.T.Rome, ItalyISS COAACKNOWLEDGEMENTS. This work supported in part by grant from M.U.R.S.T. (40% 1991), Rome, Italy. We thank Dr Pietro Gallo (ISS COA,