Journal of English Language Teaching


Sondang Manik sondangmanik21758@gmail.com 
Nommensen HKBP University Medan
Indonesia

Christine O S Tarigan 
Nommensen HKBP University Medan
Indonesia

Jubil Ezer Sihite 
Nommensen HKBP University Medan
Indonesia

Journal of English Language Teaching
2541-0326 | e- 2541-0334 |394986E3FB8FB8A795B08A862876F0D110.30998/scope.v9i1.23555Rhetoric DevicesSpeechPresidential Candidates
Rhetoric is a field of science that studies how to speak in a way that has enchanting appeal so that people who listen to it can understand and their feelings are moved.This research tried to analyze rhetoric devices in presidential candidates.This study aimed to describe the types of rhetoric devices and the most dominant types of rhetoric devices from Anies Baswedan, Ganjar Pranowo, and Prabowo Subianto about their ideas.This research used a descriptive qualitative method.So, the researcher used the documentation method to collect the data.The data were found from the presidential candidate's speeches.The researcher used Aristotle's theory (1954)  to classify the use of rhetorical devices based on the types of ethos, pathos, and logos used by presidential candidates in their speeches.From the analysis of the data, the researchers found three types of rhetorical devices based on Aristotle's theory.There were 300 pieces of data from 3 candidates' speeches about their ideas with the frequencies from Anies Baswedan were: ethos 13%, pathos 26%, logos 61%, and logo was the most dominant rhetorical device occurred.While the frequencies that occurred from Ganjar Pranowo were: ethos 22%, pathos 42%, logos 36%, and the most dominant rhetorical device of was pathos.The frequencies that occurred from Prabowo Subianto's speech were: ethos 39%, pathos 37%, logos 24%, and the most dominant rhetorical device that occurred in this speech was ethos.The research findings identified three types of rhetorical devices-ethos, pathos, and logos-according to Aristotle's theory, with specific proofs for each type.The most dominant rhetorical devices in the speeches are logos for Anies Baswedan (61%), pathos for Ganjar Pranowo (42%), and ethos for Prabowo Subianto (39%).

INTRODUCTION

Rhetoric is a general speaking skill in public.Rhetoric is a field of science that studies how to speak in a way that has enchanting appeal so that people who listen to it can understand and their feelings are moved.So, rhetoric is not just any ability to speak, in this case, the charm is how the speech can move many people.As Katamba (2022) and Kumlu (2023) said, "Rhetoric means the use of language as an artistic technique, both spoken and written, which is based on structured knowledge."Related to this, two important aspects need to be understood regarding rhetoric.The first is knowledge of the language and its use.The second is knowing the object that will be the target of the language user.

According to Jalaludin Rakhmat (2011), Rhetoric is the science of making speeches (the art of oratory), the art of using language effectively (the art of using language effectively).The art of speaking well is achieved based on natural talent and technical skills, namely the science and art of teaching people to skillfully compose effective speech or the art of "manipulating" conversations (the art of fake speech).According to West & Turner (2013), rhetoric is a communication theory that was originally developed by Aristotle as a means of challenging several prevailing assumptions regarding effective presentations.Aristotle defined rhetoric as a means available for the purpose of persuasion.

Aristotle believed the communication process is dynamic; the communication process is not a single or linear process.According to Rhetorical Theory, communicating and presenting information is not just sending a static message and hoping the audience reads or listens; the process is much more dynamic.While Aristotle also added that rhetoric is a reliance on various emotions, questions, facts and figures, moving language, and information making the message easier to understand and more likely to persuade.Rhetoric is an important tool for speechwriters, advertisers, lawyers, legislators, scholars, teachers, and media writers.

Aristotle's rhetorical theory in Nadhmy et al (2021) has two assumptions as follows:

1. Effective speakers must consider their audience 2. Effective speakers use some evidence in their presentations.In the first assumption, Aristotle emphasizes that the relationship between the speaker and the audience must be considered.The second assumption relates to what speakers do in the preparation of their speeches and the production of those speeches.The evidence referred to refers to methods of persuasion, namely: ethos, pathos, and logos.

Ethos is evidence of ethics that depends on the speaker's credibility, knowledge of the subject, and goodwill toward the audience.The speaker's personality ethos is an important factor in rhetorical success.Whoever speaks determines the effectiveness of a conversation.A speaker with ethos is a speaker who has personal credibility.There are three qualities that build high credibility (ethos) in rhetoric, namely: perceived intelligence or intelligence of the speaker, virtuous character or perceived character, and goodwill.

The pathos or emotions are "all feelings that can change people's decisions, and sometimes they feel painful, sometimes they are pleasant."This suggests that a communicator must be able to influence the emotions of the audience.These feelings include anger and calm, friendship and hostility, fear and courage or selfconfidence, shame and pride, affection and annoyance, envy, and competition.Emotional evidence depends on appealing to the audience's emotions, such as friendship, joy, anger, and sadness.The opinions of Aristotle and George Kennedy, who claim that the analysis of pathos is the first systematic discussion of human psychology.

Logos or logical proof depends on enthymemes and syllogisms.Griffin, et al. (2015), explain that logos is logical evidence that the speaker uses; in their arguments, rationalizations, and discourse.Aristotle also said that: Focused on two forms of logos -the enthymeme and the example.Aristotle regarded the enthymeme as the strongest of the proofs.It is because enthymeme is considered as rhetorical demonstration and people are easily persuaded when they think that something has been demonstrated.Example has the nature of induction, which is the foundation of reasoning.An example is one of the effective methods to define an idea and it is also a favorite device of preachers, orators, and teachers to explain their thoughts so that the audience can easily grasp the Meaning (Nadhmy et al, 2021).

This research aims to determine the attractiveness of the rhetoric used in the speeches of the presidential candidates, namely Anies Baswedan, Prabowo Subianto, and Ganjar Pranowo.The researcher chose rhetoric in the speeches of presidential candidates because the researcher wanted to understand more about the use of rhetoric and wanted to answer his curiosity about what kind of rhetorical style they used in their speeches competing for ideas.Speech is defined as communication delivered to an audience and for various purposes.Depending on the purpose, a speaker may aim to motivate, entertain, or inform the audience.In this research, researchers will analyze rhetorical appeals that are intended to influence the audience to agree with the speaker.Someone needs a strategy to influence and persuade the person they are talking to.

Researchers were very interested in analyzing rhetoric and wanted to know more about the types of rhetoric used by presidential candidates in their speeches and what type of rhetoric each presidential candidate uses the most dominant in their speeches regarding the battle of ideas.

This topic is significant because it sheds light on the role of rhetoric in shaping political discourse and voter perceptions (Gonzalez-ramos, 2023;Husnussalam, 2024).By analyzing the rhetorical approaches of presidential candidates, the writer seeks to contribute to a broader understanding of political communication in Indonesia, offering insights into how leaders aim to connect with and mobilize their supporters (Amaireh, 2023;Amaireh, et al, 2022).

The reason why researchers use this speech is because the speech contains persuasion for the development of Indonesia to the audience, for example, the development of employment and natural resources.Through the speeches they deliver, presidential candidates try to persuade and influence the emotions of their interlocutors.Next, the researcher used Aristotle's theory which provides three types of rhetorical appeals to help researchers gain an understanding of the speeches of presidential candidates.

Therefore, this research aims to determine the type and process of applying rhetoric used by presidential candidates to the public.Based on all previous statements, below is presented conceptual framework.This part explains the scheme of this research.


METHOD

This research used a qualitative descriptive method because the research data is in the form of utterances and words, which are not analyzed statistically.Anggarwal (2008) states "Descriptive method is a research method devoted to conditions or situations for the purpose of description and interpretation, this method not only collects and tabulates facts but includes an appropriate analysis, including interpretation, comparison, identification trends and relationships".The writer analyzed by describing and explaining the data based on Aristotle's theory of rhetorical appeal.This research analyzed rhetorical appeals that focus on the speeches of the three presidential candidates, namely Probowo Subianto, Anies Baswedan, and Ganjar Pranowo.

The data for this research is a video from KOMPASTV YouTube entitled "Anies, Prabowo and Ganjar's Contest of Ideas at the Muhammadiyah Open Dialogue Event".The writer took the video transcript as a source of data taken from the speeches of the three presidential candidates on YouTube.

In this research, the writer used transcript data from a KOMPASTV YouTube video titled "Anies, Prabowo, and Ganjar's Contest of Ideas at the Muhammadiyah Open Dialogue Event."The process began with the writer watching the YouTube video featuring the three presidential candidates-Anies Baswedan, Prabowo Subianto, and Ganjar Pranowo-competing in a contest of ideas.Next, the writer downloaded the full video, specifically the speech, available at https://youtu.be/yntnXuXjwRU?si=ujrDAZeDUAUun68Z.The writer then transcribed the video, re-watching it to ensure the accuracy of the transcript.

After collecting all the data, the writer proceeded to analyze it by following a structured procedure.The first step in data analysis involved identifying the ethos of each presidential candidate according to Aristotle's theory, followed by identifying their pathos and logos.The rhetorical evidence in each candidate's speeches was then classified into a table.The writer also calculated the types of rhetorical devices used, which was followed by a discussion of the findings.Finally, the research concluded with drawing conclusions based on the analysis.


RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


Data Analyses Results

Data analysis is a speech by Anies Baswedan, Prabowo Subianto, Ganjar Pranowo about their ideas.This data is based on recordings of the Battle of Ideas speech and video recordings from YouTube entitled "Anies, Prabowo and Ganjar Battle of Ideas at the Muhammadiyah Public Dialogue Event" on November 25 th , 2023.(Masha Allah, Mr. Hedar has arrived.The atmosphere is enthusiastic but orderly, this is a characteristic of Muhammadiyah).


2.

Bukan kebetulan tapi gagasan dan tokoh-tokoh pendiri republik ini memiliki akumulasi pengalaman perjuangan, memiliki wawasan yang amat luas, pengetahuan keilmuan yang mendalam.

(It is not a coincidence but the ideas and figures of the founding fathers of this republic had accumulated experience of struggle, had very broad insight, in-depth scientific knowledge).


3.

Dalam arti yang sesungguhnya karena bukan sekedar kesepakatan tentang kata-kata tapi di balik itu ada pikiran mendalam ada penderitaan panjang Kolonialisme dan ada kehausan atas keadilan.

(In the true sense because it is not just an agreement on words but behind it there are deep thoughts about the long suffering of Colonialism and there is a thirst for justice).


4.

Saya, Gus Muhaimin berangkat dengan sebuah niat dan tujuan bahwa ikhtiar kita untuk melakukan perubahan bukan sekedar mengubah tapi kami ingin Indonesia yang lebih adil, Indonesia yang lebih setara, Indonesia yang memberikan kesempatan yang setara bagi semua.

(I, Gus Muhaimin set out with an intention and goal that our efforts to make changes are not just changes but we want Indonesia that is fairer, Indonesia that is more equal, Indonesia that provides equal opportunities for all).


5.

Bapak Ibu sekalian, kalau kita tidak menyepakati bahasa persatuan mungkin di kampus-kampus Muhammadiyah itu kalau kuliah mahasiswanya dari mana-mana harus pada belajar bahasa.

(Ladies and gentlemen, if we don't agree on a unified language, perhaps on Muhammadiyah campuses, students from everywhere will have to study the language).(Mr. Mahfud and I will of course have a discussion with the panelists who are quite fierce because they show this, it's true that they have a lot of experience, their intellectual capacity is high, this must be something like that).


3.

Eh, ada Pak tafsir, ini spesial Pak kalau Pak tafsir Sapak khusus ini, pak ini hampir 10 tahun saya ngaji sama beliau diajari banyak hal.

(Eh, sir, there is sir Tafsir, this is special, sir.Sir, I have been reciting the Quran with him for almost 10 years, I have been taught a lot of things.


4.

Kita sudah bulat, prinsip nilai-nilai itu ada dan tadi disampaikan bagaimana kita punya hikmah dalam kebijaksanaan untuk mengambil sebuah keputusan besar dalam demokrasi perwakilan kita.

(We are unanimous, the principles of values exist and we were told how we have the wisdom to take big decisions in our representative democracy).


5.

Bagaimana kita mendengarkan lebih banyak, mengumpulkan lebih banyak dan mengambil yang paling baik dengan risiko yang paling kecil, kira-kira begitu maka forum ini menjadi forum dialog caprescapres yang betul-betul berkemajuan, punya progresivitas dan punya nilai yang lebih baik.

(How can we listen more, collect more and take the best with the smallest risk, in that way this forum will become a dialogue forum for presidential candidates who are truly progressive, have progressivity and have better values).


2.

Karena itu saya kira tepat, banyak acara kebangsaan dilakukan di daerah Surabaya karena bangsa yang lupa sejarahnya adalah bangsa yang tidak kuat.Bangsa kuat adalah bangsa yang selalu ingat pahlawanpahlawannya dan sejarahnya sendiri.

(Therefore, I think it is appropriate that many national events are held in the Surabaya area because a nation that forgets its history is a nation that is not strong.A strong nation is a nation that always remembers its heroes and its own history).


3.

Saudara-saudara sekalian karena itu saya merasa besar hati hari ini diundang untuk suatu dialog tentang bagaimana masa depan bangsa kita.

(Ladies and gentlemen, that's why I feel honored today to be invited to a dialogue about what the future of our nation will be like).


4.

Luar biasa, luar biasa dulu kita dianggap lebih rendah dari anjing forboden for hondon and inlandader, ini terjemahnya dia kurang berani.Honden itu anjing jadi harusnya dilarang masuk anjing dan pribumi.

(Extraordinary, extraordinary, in the past we were considered lower than dogs for boden for hondon and inlandader, this translates as he lacked courage.

Honden is a dog so it should be banned from dogs and natives).


5.

Saya tidak mengajak dan mengajarkan kita untuk benci, tidak, jangan kita benci siapapun.Saya kira agama kita tidak mengajarkan kebencian, jangan benci, jangan dendam, tidak, tapi jangan lupa, jangan terlalu lugu sudah ratusan tahun dibohongi, kita merdeka.

(I am not inviting and teaching us to hate, no, let us not hate anyone.I don't think our religion teaches hatred, don't hate, don't hold grudges, no, but don't forget, don't be too naive, we have been lied to for hundreds of years when we are free).

This research aim to describe types of rhetorical devices of speech and the most dominant types of rhetorical devices used in the speech by Anies Baswedan, Ganjar Pranowo, and Prabowo Subianto about their ideas.There are three types of rhetorical devices ethos, pathos, and logos.After watching the video and look at the transcript, the researcher found many types of rhetorical devices in their speeches.


Data Analysis for Anies Baswedan's Speech

Data 1 :

"Masyaallah, sudah datang ini Pak hedar.Suasananya suasana yang antusias tapi tertib ini gambaran ciri Muhammadiyah".

(Masha Allah, Mr. Hedar has arrived.The atmosphere is enthusiastic but orderly, this is a characteristic of Muhammadiyah).

From the sentence above, Anies Baswedan greeted an audience member and then praised the enthusiastic atmosphere in the room.Anies Baswedan shows goodwill by made a positive assessment by giving praise and having a positive influence on the audience.


Data 2 :

"Bukan kebetulan tapi gagasan dan tokoh-tokoh pendiri republik ini memiliki akumulasi pengalaman perjuangan, memiliki wawasan yang amat luas, pengetahuan keilmuan yang mendalam".

(It is not a coincidence but the ideas and figures of the founding fathers of this republic had accumulated experience of struggle, had very broad insight, in-depth scientific knowledge).

From the sentence above, Anies shows his admiration for the founding figures of the Republic of Indonesia, namely their experience of struggle, broad insight and deep knowledge.


Data 3 :

"Dalam arti yang sesungguhnya karena bukan sekedar kesepakatan tentang kata-kata tapi di balik itu ada pikiran mendalam ada penderitaan panjang Kolonialisme dan ada kehausan atas keadilan".

(In the true sense because it is not just an agreement on words but behind it there are deep thoughts about the long suffering of Colonialism and there is a thirst for justice).

From the sentence above, it shows Anies' anger towards colonialism which resulted in long suffering for the people and the injustice felt by the people during colonialism.


Data 4 :

"Saya, Gus Muhaimin berangkat dengan sebuah niat dan tujuan bahwa ikhtiar kita untuk melakukan perubahan bukan sekedar mengubah tapi kami ingin Indonesia yang lebih adil, Indonesia yang lebih setara, Indonesia yang memberikan kesempatan yang setara bagi semua"

(I, Gus Muhaimin set out with an intention and goal that our efforts to make changes are not just changes but we want an Indonesia that is fairer, an Indonesia that is more equal, an Indonesia that provides equal opportunities for all).

In the sentence above, Anies and Gus Muhaimin as presidential and vice presidential candidates express their intentions and motives for changing Indonesia.This shows virtuous character by showing their goals and motives, they gain the audience's trust with their values and increase the audience's confidence in their good intentions.


Data 5 :

"Bapak Ibu sekalian, kalau kita tidak menyepakati bahasa persatuan mungkin di kampus-kampus Muhammadiyah itu kalau kuliah mahasiswanya dari mana-mana harus pada belajar bahasa"

(Ladies and gentlemen, if we don't agree on a unified language, perhaps on Muhammadiyah campuses, students from everywhere will have to study the language).


Data Analysis for Ganjar Pranowo's Speech

Data 1 :

"Prof Haidar yang sangat saya hormati, terima kasih sudah memberikan waktu, tempat kepada saya dan Pak Mahfud untuk bisa hadir di keluarga besar Muhammadiyah menyampaikan gagasan".

(Prof.Haidar, whom I really respect, thank you for giving me and Mr. Mahfud the time and space to be present in the Muhammadiyah family to convey ideas).

In the sentence above, Ganjar shows goodwill by greeting the audience, so he gives a positive picture of himself by paying respect to an audience member and saying thank you to someone by giving him the opportunity for convey his ideas.


Data 2 :

"Saya dan Pak Mahfud akan berdiskusi tentu dengan para panelis yang lumayan sangar karena menampikan ini, betul pengalamannya banyak, kapasitas intelektualitasnya tinggi, mesti sangar ini kira-kira gitu".

(Mr. Mahfud and I will of course have a discussion with the panelists who are quite fierce because they show this, it's true that they have a lot of experience, their intellectual capacity is high, this must be something like that).

In the sentence above, it shows an expression of admiration for how Ganjar described the panelists with the word "terrifying" in a good way.Sangar here means that a person has a lot of experience and high intellectual capacity.


Data 3 :

"Eh, ada Pak tafsir, ini spesial Pak kalau Pak tafsir Sapak khusus ini, pak ini hampir 10 tahun saya ngaji sama beliau diajari banyak hal" (Eh, sir, there is sir Tafsir, this is special, sir.Sir, I have been reciting the Quran with him for almost 10 years, I have been taught a lot of things).

In the sentence above, Ganjar has 10 years of experience learning the Koran, which shows his competence as a religious person and his experience in the world of religion.The competency he demonstrated was perceived intelligence by expressing his experience in the field of religion.


Data 4 :

"Kita sudah bulat, prinsip nilai-nilai itu ada dan tadi disampaikan bagaimana kita punya hikmah dalam kebijaksanaan untuk mengambil sebuah keputusan besar dalam demokrasi perwakilan kita".

(We are unanimous, the principles of values exist and we were told how we have the wisdom to take big decisions in our representative democracy).

In the sentence above, Ganjar shows his confidence by saying that he has the wisdom to make big decisions in democracy.Ganjar tries to influence the audience with his confidence.


Data 5 :

"Bagaimana kita mendengarkan lebih banyak, mengumpulkan lebih banyak dan mengambil yang paling baik dengan risiko yang paling kecil, kirakira begitu maka forum ini menjadi forum dialog capres-capres yang betul-betul berkemajuan, punya progresivitas dan punya nilai yang lebih baik".

(How can we listen more, collect more and take the best with the smallest risk, in that way this forum will become a dialogue forum for presidential candidates who are truly progressive, have progressivity and have better values).

In the sentence above, Ganjar uses three probable premises and one tentative conclusion.The first probable premise is how can we listen more, the second probable promises is collect more and the third probable premise take the best with the smallest risk.Those three premises lead to one conclusion which is this forum will become a dialogue forum for presidential candidates who are truly progressive, have progressivity and have better values (I come from a large TNI family and the first TNI Commander-in-Chief was a former Principal of Muhammadiyah High School in Purwokerto, namely the Commander-in-Chief).
1
In the sentence above, this shows the competence of Prabowo, who is a former TNI member from a large TNI family and shows his knowledge in this field.Prabowo uses perceived intelligence.


Data 2 :

"Karena itu saya kira tepat, banyak acara kebangsaan dilakukan di daerah Surabaya karena bangsa yang lupa sejarahnya adalah bangsa yang tidak kuat.Bangsa kuat adalah bangsa yang selalu ingat pahlawan-pahlawannya dan sejarahnya sendiri" .

(Therefore, I think it is appropriate that many national events are held in the Surabaya area because a nation that forgets its history is a nation that is not strong.A strong nation is a nation that always remembers its heroes and its own history).

In the sentence above, Prabowo shows a virtuous character where he says that a strong nation is a nation that always remembers its heroes and its history.Prabowo gives an image of himself as a good and honest person who defends and supports heroes and history.


Data 3 :

"Saudara-saudara sekalian karena itu saya merasa besar hati hari ini diundang untuk suatu dialog tentang bagaimana masa depan bangsa kita".

(Ladies and gentlemen, that's why I feel honored today to be invited to a dialogue about what the future of our nation will be like).

In the sentence above, Prabowo feels honored to be given the opportunity to convey his ideas regarding the future of the Indonesian nation.He gives a positive vibe to the audience.This defines goodwill.


Data 4 :

"Luar biasa, luar biasa dulu kita dianggap lebih rendah dari anjing forboden for hondon and inlandader, ini terjemahnya dia kurang berani.

Honden itu anjing jadi harusnya dilarang masuk anjing dan pribumi".

(Extraordinary, extraordinary, in the past we were considered lower than dogs for boden for hondon and inlandader, this translates as he lacked courage.

Honden is a dog so it should be banned from dogs and natives).

In the sentence above, Prabowo shows his anger at the humiliation by the colonialists who considered native humans to be lower than dogs.This means dirty, insulting, ridiculing, and hurtful.


Data 5 :

"Saya tidak mengajak dan mengajarkan kita untuk benci, tidak, jangan kita benci siapapun.Saya kira agama kita tidak mengajarkan kebencian, jangan benci, jangan dendam, tidak, tapi jangan lupa, jangan terlalu lugu sudah ratusan tahun dibohongi, kita merdeka".

(I am not inviting and teaching us to hate, no, let us not hate anyone.I don't think our religion teaches hatred, don't hate, don't hold grudges, no, but don't forget, don't be too naive, we have been lied to for hundreds of years when we are free).

In the sentence above, Prabowo shows calm here.He rejects violence, hatred, revenge.Anger is subdued to become calm and rejects violence.

1 st minor premise: we will eliminate stunting and we will help poor Indonesians.

2 nd minor premise: their children will be strong, brain strong, physically strong, bones yes, brain, muscles and bones will be strong Conclusion : will be great, great.We will be champions. Speaker shows goodwill toward the audience.


2.

It is not a coincidence but the ideas and figures of the founding fathers of this republic had accumulated experience of struggle, had very broad insight, indepth scientific knowledge.

 Speaker shows admiration toward someone.


3.

In the true sense because it is not just an agreement on words but behind it there are deep thoughts about the long suffering of Colonialism and there is a thirst for justice.




Speaker shows hatred toward colonialism.


I, Gus

Muhaimin set out with an intention and goal that our efforts to make changes are not just changes but  Speaker shows virtuous character,

we want an Indonesia that is fairer, an Indonesia that is more equal, an Indonesia that provides equal opportunities for all.honest and kindness.


5.

Ladies and gentlemen, if we don't agree on a unified language, perhaps on Muhammadiyah campuses, students from everywhere will have to study the language.

 Speaker tells about fear to the audience.
P V G A Ca Fr H Fe C o A d E En Ex 1.
Prof. Haidar, whom I really respect, thank you for giving me and Mr. Mahfud the time and space to be present in the Muhammadiyah family to convey ideas.




Speaker shows his goodwill toward the audience.


2.

Mr. Mahfud and I will of course have a discussion with the panelists who are quite fierce because they show this, it's true that they have a lot of experience, their intellectual capacity is high, this must be something like that.

 speaker shows admiration toward the panelist.


3.

Eh, sir, there is sir Tafsir, this is special, sir.Sir, I have been reciting the Quran with him for almost 10 years, I have been taught a lot of things.




Speaker uses his credibility to persuade the audience.


4.

We are unanimous, the principles of values exist and we were told how we have the wisdom to take big decisions in our representative democracy.




Speaker express his confidence.


5.

How can we listen more, collect more and take the best with the smallest risk, in that way this forum will become a dialogue forum for presidential candidates who are truly progressive, have progressivity and have better values.




Speaker explain about enthymeme.


2.

Therefore, I think it is appropriate that many national events are held in the Surabaya area because a nation that forgets its history is a nation that is not strong.A strong nation is a nation that always remembers its heroes and its own history.




Speaker shows his honest and kindness.


3.

Ladies and gentlemen, that's why I feel honored today to be invited to a dialogue about what the future of our nation will be like.





Recapitulation of Data Analysis

The data found amounted to 300 data.Each candidate, namely Anies Baswedan, Ganjar Pranowo, and Prabowo Subianto, has 100 data points for each speech.The data taken to be analyzed.

The percentage (%) was calculated based on the following formula:
N% = 𝐹𝐹 (𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝐹𝐹𝑒𝑒𝐹𝐹ℎ 𝑡𝑡𝐹𝐹𝑡𝑡𝐹𝐹𝑡𝑡) 𝑁𝑁 (𝑇𝑇𝑜𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑒𝑇𝑇 𝑜𝑜𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑒𝑒𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑡𝑡𝐹𝐹𝑡𝑡𝐹𝐹𝑡𝑡)
x 100 %

(1)


The Findings

After analyzing all the data that found in the speech delivered by Anies Baswedan, Ganjar Pranowo, and Prabowo Subianto during battle of ideas, the researcher can give some arguments as the finding of this study at follow:

1.There were 300 rhetorical devices data taken from prudential candidate Anies Baswedan, Ganjar Pranowo, Prabowo Subianto in Muhammadiyah Open Dialog : Battle of Ideas.

2. There are 100 rethoric devices data taken from Anies Baswedan.It consisted of 13% for ethos, 26% for pathos, 61% for logos.To to the most dominant rhetorical devices this speech was logos.

3. There are 100 rhetorical devices data taken from Ganjar Pranowo.It consisted of 22% for ethos, 42% for pathos, 36% for logos.To be the most dominant rethoric devices this speech was pathos.

4. There are 100 rhetorical devices data taken from Prabowo Subianto.It consisted of 39% for ethos, 37%

for pathos, 24% for logos.To be the most dominant rhetorical devices this speech was ethos.


Discussion

This research focuses on the use of rhetorical devices and strategies by the three presidential candidates Anies Baswedan, Ganjar Pranowo, Prabowo Subianto about their ideas in their speeches.There are three types of rhetorical devices found as they are: ethos, pathos, and logos.In Anies's speech, logos is the most dominant type used compared to the others.In this situation, the sentences that Anies conveyed in his speech about his ideas, tended to use the logos type.The dominance of logos in Anies Baswedan's speeches suggests a preference for logical reasoning and the use of data and facts to support his arguments.This aligns with the findings of earlier research, such as studies on political communication by (Benoit et al., 2003;Alo, 2012) which showed that candidates who focus on logos tend to be perceived as more rational and competent.

Of the 100 data analyzed for Ganjar, he uses more emotional appeals, or something related to human emotions, because when delivering speeches or problem topics, it is often related to the listener's feelings and sometimes causes a lot of empathy or even sympathy from the listener/audience.The speaker must be able to bring the listener's atmosphere into the topic of the problem he is telling if the expected response appears.So the speaker manages to have the Pathos aspect in him.The second dominant is logos and ethos where Ganjar uses ethos in his speech because Ganjar has credibility as the leader of the Indonesian state and has competence as a presidential candidate.Ganjar also uses logos in his speech so that the reasons or arguments he conveys in his speech are supported by strong evidence, are logical, and based on real facts rather than mere imagination.Ganjar Pranowo's emphasis on ethos aligns with the notion that credibility and trustworthiness are critical for gaining public confidence, as also discussed in studies by political theorists (Perloff, 2017).Pranowo's rhetoric strategy suggests that he prioritizes establishing his moral character and reliability as a leader.

Among the 100 data found on Prabowo, he uses ethos the most, where ethos shows a person's competence and credibility.Prabowo also uses ethos to show his extensive knowledge as future presidential candidates must demonstrate his ability to lead the country.Ethos is also a way to get closer to the audience, to maintain the audience's trust, and also influence the audience.Next, Prabowo uses pathos to touch more on the audience's emotions, by conveying pain and anger.Prabowo uses logos to provide logical evidence and to support his opinion.

This finding was supported by the study from (Renaldo, 2024) which said that strategy is often used in political speeches to mobilize and motivate the audience by appealing to their emotions, particularly in situations where the speaker aims to address issues that resonate deeply with the public's sentiments.The difference in the findings compared to previous research lies in the specific emphasis Prabowo places on ethos.

The difference in this study lied in the specific comparison between the three candidates and how each employs a different rhetorical focus: Anies with logos, Ganjar with ethos, and the implied rhetorical strategies used by Prabowo.This comparative approach provides a nuanced understanding of how each candidate tailors their communication strategy to their strengths and how they wish to be perceived by the public (Gilpin, 2010).


CONCLUSION

The researcher tries to present the result of the study which deals with the types of rhetorical devices.As a result, the researcher use Aritotle's theory to identify the type of rhetorical devices and to find out the most dominant of the rhetorical devices.

The analysis of rhetorical devices in the speeches of Anies Baswedan, Ganjar Pranowo, and Prabowo Subianto reveals distinct strategies each candidate employs to persuade their audience.The findings indicated that Anies Baswedan predominantly uses logos, focusing on logic and facts, while Ganjar Pranowo relies heavily on pathos, appealing to emotions, and Prabowo Subianto emphasizes ethos, drawing on his credibility and character.This suggests that each candidate tailors their rhetorical approach to align with their strengths and the expectations of their audience.

However, the study is limited by its focus on a single event, which may not capture the full range of rhetorical strategies these candidates use in different contexts.

Additionally, the analysis is based on Aristotle's classical framework, which may not fully account for the nuances of modern political discourse.Future research could expand the scope to include more speeches and events, apply different rhetorical theories, or explore how these rhetorical devices resonate with different segments of the electorate.This would provide a more comprehensive understanding of the effectiveness of these rhetorical strategies in contemporary political communication.

Figure 1 .
1
Figure 1.The Conceptual Framework of the Study


Table 1
1
Data from Anies Baswedan's


Speech No Data from Anies Baswedan's Speech

1.Masyaallah, sudah datang ini Pak hedar.Suasananya suasana yang antusias tapi tertib ini gambaran ciri Muhammadiyah.


Table 2 .
2
Data

from Ganjar Pranowo's Speech No Data from Ganjar Pranowo's Speech 1. Prof Haidar yang sangat saya hormati, terima kasih sudah memberikan waktu, tempat kepada saya dan Pak Mahfud untuk bisa hadir di keluarga besar Muhammadiyah menyampaikan gagasan.(Prof.Haidar, whom I really respect, thank you for giving me and Mr. Mahfud the time and space to be present in the Muhammadiyah family to convey ideas) 2. Saya dan Pak Mahfud akan berdiskusi tentu dengan para panelis yang lumayan sangar karena menampikan ini, betul pengalamannya banyak, kapasitas intelektualitasnya tinggi, mesti sangar ini kira-kira gitu.


Table 3 .
3
Data from Prabowo Subianto's Speech
NoData from Prabowo Subianto's Speech1.Saya dari keluarga besar TNI dan Panglima Besar TNIyang pertama adalah seorang mantan kepala sekolahSMA Muhammadiyah di Purwokerto yaitu Panglimabesar.
(I come from a large TNI family and the first TNI Commander-in-Chief was a former Principal of Muhammadiyah High School in Purwokerto, namely the Commander-in-Chief).


Table 4 .
4
Data Analysis from Anies Baswedan's Speech
P : Perceived IntelligenceFr : FriendshipE : Envy V : Virtuous CharacterH : HatredEn:EnthymemeG : GoodwillFe : FearEx : ExampA : AngerC : ConfidenceCa : CalmnessAd : AdmirationSentenceEthosPathosLogosExplanationNoP V G A CaFr H Fe CAE En Exod1.Masha Allah, Mr. Hedar has arrived.The atmosphere is enthusiastic butorderly, this is a characteristic ofMuhammadiyah.

Table 5 .
5
Data Analysis from Ganjar Pranowo's Speech
NoSentenceEthosPathosLogosExplanation

Table 6 .
6
Data Analysis from Prabowo Subianto's Speech
EthosPathosLogosNoSentenceP V G A Ca Fr H FeCAE EnExExplanationodI come from a large TNI family andSpeaker showsthe first TNI Commander-in-Chiefhis credibility1.was a former Principal of Muhammadiyah High School inand knowledge.hisPurwokerto, namely the Commander-in-Chief.

Table 7 .
7
The Percentage of Rethoric Devices
3.Prabowo Subianto393724Percentage39%37%24%Total100%NoPresidentialEthosPathosLogosElection1.Anies Baswedan132661Percentage13%26%61%Total100%NoPresidential ElectionEthosPathosLogos2.Ganjar Pranowo224236Percentage22%42%36%Total100%NoPresidential ElectionEthosPathosLogos



The dominant type of Ganjar Pranowo's rhetoric is ethos.Of the 100 pieces of data that Anies has, the most dominant one he uses is logos, which means that Anies likes to use data/facts in his speeches.Apart from that, he also likes to give examples and analogies to support his opinions.Next, Anies uses pathos to touch the audience's emotions by influencing them with feelings.Then he used his final ethos to show his credibility as a potential leader of a country.


A Rhetorical Analysis of Selected Political Speeches of Prominent African Leaders. M A Alo, British Journal of Arts and Social Sciences. 10I2012

Biden's Rhetoric: A Corpus-Based Study of the Political Speeches of the American President Joe Biden. Theory and Practice in Language Studies. H A Amaireh, 10.17507/tpls.1303.22202313

Rhetorical Discourse Analysis Of Biden ' s Address To The Nation On Afghanistan : Positive Us And Negative Them. H A Amaireh, L M Rababah, 20226

A Meta-Analysis of the Effects of Viewing U.S. Presidential Debates. W Benoit, G Hansen, R Verser, 10.1080/0363775032000179133Communication Monographs -COMMUN MONOGR. 702003

Organizational Image Construction in a Fragmented Online Media Environment. D Gilpin, M Juniardi, Y Wahyu, D , 10.1080/10627261003614393GoldianaJournal of Public Relations Research. 2232010. 2017Rhetorical Devices in Hillary Clinton Concession Speech. 02(02

LSU Scholarly Repository Times of Crisis : A Comparative Discourse Analysis of U . S . and Mexican Presidential Rhetoric TIMES OF CRISIS : A. K Gonzalez-Ramos, COMPARATIVE DISCOURSE ANALYSIS OF U . S . AND MEXICAN PRESIDENTIAL RHETORIC by2023

Rhetoric And Ideology : A Critical Discourse Analysis Of Anis Baswedan ' S Lecturing Speech At 2023 St . Lee Lecture -Can Democracy Deliver ? Reflections On The Indonesian Case. H Husnussalam, 20247

The Rhetorical Analysis of President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf's Inaugural Speech as the First Africa's Female President. M Katamba, 10.54132/akaf.1188791Akdeniz Havzası ve Afrika Medeniyetleri Dergisi. 20224

Discovering the role of rhetorical devices in the text of a political speech through back-translations to improve the translation process. D Kumlu, 10.29000/rumelide.1283694RumeliDE Dil ve Edebiyat Araştırmaları Dergisi. 33332023

Some Facts of the Usages of Rhetorical Devices (Zeugma) In Speech and Writing. L A Mustafayeva, 10.47191/ijsshr/v6-i1-90International Journal of Social Science And Human Research. 012023

Analisis Retorika Aristoteles Pada Kajian Ilmiah Media Sosial Dalam Mempersuasi Publik. R Nadhmy Dhia, J Alya Pramesthi, Irwansyah, 202142021

Rhetorical Analysis of Joe Biden's Inauguration Address. N Nurkhamidah, R Z Fahira, A R Ningtyas, 10.32505/jl3t.v7i2.3371JL3T (Journal of Linguistics, Literature and Language Teaching). 722021

Ukrainian President Zelensky ' s resistance discourse Cognitive rhetorical analysis of the address to the. R Perloff, 10.4324/9781315657714Potapenko,SThe Dynamics of Persuasion: Communication and Attitudes in the Twenty-First Century. UK Parliament Serhiy Potapenko DiscourseNet Collaborative Working Paper Series Special Issue : Discourses of War. 2017. 20238628The dynamics of persuasion: Communication and attitudes in the 21st century

Rhetorical Analysis of Joko Widodo and Prabowo Subianto at the 2019 Presidential Election Open Debate. Z A Renaldo, M Sutikna, N Widodo, B , 10.2991/icstcsd-19.2020.21Rhetorical Strategies and Speech Acts Analysis: A Linguistic Research on Indonesia's Minister Speech Advocating for Palestine. ELT-Lectura: Studies and Perspectives in English Language Teaching. 2024. 2020389Icstcsd

Political Rhetoric of President Joko Widodo Critical Discourse Analysis. Agus Sukristyanto, D Jupriono, A D , Juournal of Education and Practice. 9142018