A case of metastatic triple negative breast cancer patient with BRCA2 pathogenic variant who administered PARP inhibitor prior to immune-checkpoint inhibitor and chemotherapy


Haruko Takuwa 
Department of Breast Surgery
Mitsubishi Kyoto Hospital
1, Katsuragosyo-Machi, Nishikyo-Ku615-8087Kyoto-City, KyotoJapan

Shoko Sasaki 
Department of Genetics
Mitsubishi Kyoto Hospital
Kyoto-CityJapan

Naoki Goda 
Department of Diagnostic Pathology
Mitsubishi Kyoto Hospital
Kyoto-CityJapan

Department of Diagnostic Pathology
Kyoto University Hospital
Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine
Kyoto-CityJapan

Megumi Takeuchi 
Department of Breast Surgery
Mitsubishi Kyoto Hospital
1, Katsuragosyo-Machi, Nishikyo-Ku615-8087Kyoto-City, KyotoJapan

A case of metastatic triple negative breast cancer patient with BRCA2 pathogenic variant who administered PARP inhibitor prior to immune-checkpoint inhibitor and chemotherapy
C816854B63639BB62A8ABC5D9883E2B210.1007/s44337-024-00138-zReceived: 10 July 2024 / Accepted: 11 November 2024
With the introduction of new agents such as poly (adenosine diphosphate ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors, immunecheckpoint inhibitors (ICIs), and trastuzumab deruxtecan, the range of effective treatment options for patients with metastatic triple negative breast cancer (mTNBC) has considerably expanded.Generally, mTNBC is recognized as an aggressive disease with a poor prognosis, making the improvement of patient outcomes a critical issue.However, for patients harboring BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants and programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) positivity or having human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-low disease, the recommended treatment protocols for these agents remain unclear.In this report, we discuss the case of a patient with a BRCA2 pathogenic variant and PD-L1 positive mTNBC who received PARP inhibitors as a first-line therapy, followed by ICIs and chemotherapy as second-line regimen.Keywords BRCA • Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC) • Programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) • Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)

Introduction

Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for approximately 10-15% of all breast cancer cases.This subtype is characterized by low or absent levels of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PgR), and a lack of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) overexpression and/or gene amplification [1,2].Metastatic TNBC (mTNBC) remains an incurable condition with a poor prognosis.Notably, 10.6-41.9% of TNBC cases carry a germline mutation in the homologous recombination repair genes BRCA1/2 [3].In such cases, the poly (adenosine diphosphate ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors olaparib or talazoparib can be administered as first or subsequent lines of treatment [4][5][6].Additionally, patients with programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) positive mTNBC benefit from the addition of an anti-PD-L1 immune-checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) to upfront chemotherapy [7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14].The antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) trastuzumab deruxtecan (T-DXd) has also shown efficacy in pretreated mTNBC patients with low HER2 expression levels [15,16].

There is an urgent need to determine the most beneficial treatment sequence for patients, considering factors such as overall response rates, progression-free survival, overall survival, and drug toxicity.


Care report

A 49-year-old patient presented to our hospital with a palpable lump in her left breast.Magnetic resonance imaging revealed multiple solid tumors in the left breast (Fig. 1A).Core needle biopsy confirmed that the tumor was ER positive (20%), PgR negative, and HER2 negative invasive ductal carcinoma.The Ki-67 labeling index exceeded 15.8%, indicating a relatively low tumor proliferation rate (Fig. 2A).Despite the tumors being classified as luminal B-like disease, neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) was deemed of little benefit for this patient; thus surgery was selected as the initial treatment.The patient's family history included her father with a prostate cancer, a paternal cousin with breast cancer in her 30 s, and a paternal grandmother with breast cancer in her 40 s (Fig. 3).BRACAnalysis ® confirmed the presence of a BRCA2 pathogenic variant.A contralateral risk reducing mastectomy (CRRM) of the right breast and a left mastectomy with sentinel lymph node biopsy were performed (Fig. 4A).There were two reasons why the patient underwent surgery first.One was that we could have histopathologically confirmed diagnosis of the disease and, depending on the risk, we might have proposed de-escalation of adjuvant chemotherapy.The other was that, because the patient had been diagnosed with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC), she would like CRRM and not have wanted breast conserving surgery even if NAC was performed on the affected breast.

The pathological stage was determined to be T1c (invasive tumors of 1.4 cm and 0.8 cm in size) N0(0/2 lymph nodes involved) M0, Stage I, according to the International Union against Cancer; UICC criteria (Fig. 1A).Post-surgery, the patient underwent adjuvant chemotherapy with three cycles of doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide, followed by three cycles of docetaxel.Upon completing the chemotherapy, anastrozole was administered as endocrine therapy.Because the patient did not meet the eligibility criteria for hormone-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer with BRCA pathogenic variants, PARP inhibitors could not be administered as adjuvant therapy.Six months after breast surgery, she underwent risk reducing salpingo-oophorectomy.

Twenty-six months after breast surgery, during adjuvant endocrine therapy, the patient noticed an enlargement of her left axillary lymph nodes enlargement (Figs.1B and 4B).Core needle biopsy confirmed axillary lymph node metastasis of breast origin, showing ER negative (0%), PgR negative (0%), and HER2 negative status, and a Ki-67 of 20.4% (Fig. 2B).Imaging studies revealed recurrence in the left lymph node as well as multiple metastases in the lungs and liver (Fig. 1C).Despite the primary lesion being ER positive disease, a phenotypic change to TNBC was observed in the metastatic lymph node (Fig. 2B).PD-L1 expression was subsequently assessed, and detected using both the 22C3 and SP142 antibodies.Immunohistochemistry of HER2 (4B5 antibody) returned a score of 0, indicating negativity.

Olaparib was administered as the first-line therapy.While a partial response was temporally observed, particularly in the lung metastases, there was an enlargement of liver and lymph node metastases and appearance of new bone metastases, leading to progressive disease after 5 months of treatment (Figs. 1D and 4B).Pembrolizumab combined with gemcitabine, carboplatin, and denosumab was then administered as second-line therapy.Due to compression fracture in a metastatic bone, vertebroplasty and radiation therapy were performed 3 weeks after commencement of second-line therapy (Fig. 4B).Three months later, although there was partial growth in the liver metastasis, a therapeutic effect was observed in another metastatic site (Fig. 1E).

At this stage, the patient was eligible to participate in a Phase I clinical trial, which involved administering c-Met ADC (Fig. 4B).Concurrently, she had her metastatic axillary lymph node tissue analyzed for genetic mutations using the FoundationOne ® gene panel.Two months later, although a therapeutic effect from the c-Met ADC was observed, the trial was discontinued owing to severe drug-induced pneumonia (Fig. 1F).On the other hand, FoundationOne ® results identified actionable mutations in BRCA2, PD-L1/PD-L2, and ERBB2 amplification (equivocal).Since olaparib and pembrolizumab had already been administered to this patient, trastuzumab could be a therapeutic option for targeting the ERBB2 amplification.

Owing to the drug-induced pneumonia, high-dose steroids were prescribed, leading to the discontinuation of systemic therapy for approximately a month.During this period, the patient developed deep vein thrombosis while on prednisone, necessitating the initiation of anticoagulant therapy.Given the recent administration of pembrolizumab and the heightened risk of further drug-induced pneumonia, the decision was made to administer talazoparib as the fourth-line treatment.

Unfortunately, deep vein thrombosis that had been appeared before the administration of talazoparib worsened despite of anticoagulant therapy.The patient fell into a state of disseminated intravascular coagulation, making it difficult to continue systemic therapy.Palliative radiation therapy was performed on the left axillary lymph node


Discussion

For patients who have residual invasive carcinoma after NAC for HER2-negative breast cancer, the addition of adjuvant capecitabine therapy is an effective option in prolonging disease-free survival and overall survival [17].In this patient, Ki-67 was low at primary diagnosis, and NAC was thought not to be effective for the purpose of improving prognosis through pathological complete response.Even if NAC induced clinical response, it did not affect the choice of surgical procedure.Thus, surgery was performed prior to systemic therapy because the appropriate adjuvant regimen could be presented by predicting the risk of recurrence after histopathological evaluation of the tumor stage and vascular invasion.On the other hands, dose dense adjuvant chemotherapy leads to better overall survival and disease free survival, particularly in women with ER-negative early breast cancer [18].Because this patient diagnosed as ER-positive breast cancer at initial treatment, adjuvant chemotherapy was administered every three weeks.

The pathological examination revealed low tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in the primary breast tumor (Fig. 2A).In the patients with early-stage TNBC, higher levels of TILs in breast cancer tissue are associated with significantly better survival [19,20].Additionally, this patient did not meet the criteria for adjuvant pembrolizumab eligibility [21].When naive CD8 + T cells recognize antigens, such as tumor cell-derived peptides presented on MHC class I molecules of antigen-presenting cells, they are activated by receiving costimulatory signals from CD28, becoming CD8 + cytotoxic T cells (CTLs).CTLs express CTLA-4 and PD-1 molecules on their cell surface and are inactivated by receiving inhibitory signals.When these inhibitory signals are released by ICIs, they are activated to attack the target cancer cells [22].Lois et al. also suggested that TILs quantity can help clinicians identify patients with breast cancer who benefit most from PD-1/PD-L1 inhibition [20].

Histopathological characteristics suggested a low risk of recurrence.Nevertheless, she developed axillary recurrence after receiving adjuvant chemotherapy with an anthracycline and taxane regimen.Masuda et al. have shown the effectiveness of postoperative capecitabine in patients with non-pathological complete response both in ERpositive and -negative breast cancer [16].Thus it cannot be denied that recurrence could have been avoided if anthracycline and taxane regimen had been administered as NAC and postoperative capecitabine had been added https://doi.org/10.1007/s44337-024-00138-z in this patient.In the metastatic axillary lymph node, strongly pleomorphic components, including diversification and atypical mitosis, was observed (Fig. 2B).

As first-line metastatic breast cancer treatment for this patient, we considered three options: PARP inhibitors, ICIs plus chemotherapy, and paclitaxel with bevacizumab.Phase III studies showed that the median overall survival was 23.0 months in pembrolizumab group, and 25.0 months in atezolizumab group among patients with untreated PD-L1 positive mTNBC [9,10].Although direct comparisons are not possible due to differences in each study designs, median overall survival was 22.6 months in olaparib group among patients with BRCA pathogenic variants in first line therapy [5].A meta-analysis of systemic therapy for mTNBC with BRCA pathogenic variants indicated that PARP inhibitors are superior to chemotherapy [23].However, since the trials reviewed were primarily from 2017 to 2020, combinations of ICIs with chemotherapy as adjuvant therapy might have been scarcely included.Another meta-analysis suggested that ICI plus chemotherapy might be considered a first-line therapy for mTNBC patients from the perspective of progression free survival (PFS)/time to progression [24].However, the authors also noted that PARP inhibitors could represent an optimal first-line option in patients with germline BRCA pathogenic variants, as no combinations are strictly required in this regimen.Considering the economic impacts and side effects associated with multiple drug combinations, first-line monotherapy with PARP inhibitor appears to be an attractive option.When the patient was diagnosed with mTNBC, she was determined not to be in visceral crisis or tumor burden (Fig. 1C).Since there was little difference in overall survival when any of the regimens presented as options were used in the first line.As no regimen was found to be a significance in the meta-analysis, the less toxic agent PARP inhibitor might be effective for her.

Indeed, this patient experienced a longer response with olaparib than that with ICI plus chemotherapy, although the PFS was shorter than that reported in the OlympiAD trial results [4,5].Unfortunately, she developed hypothyroidism because of Pembrolizumab 2 months post-administration, necessitated the start of thyroid hormone replacement therapy.Interestingly, a phase II/III randomized clinical trial comparing pembrolizumab plus olaparib versus pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy following induction with pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy in mTNBC is currently ongoing [25].

As shown in ASCENT trial, Sacituzumab govitecan is an option for patients with mTNBC who had received ≥ 2 prior chemotherapies [26].For this patient, there would be great benefits to using treatments with target molecules such as PD-L1 and BRCA at an early line.Thus she underwent pembrolizumab combined with gemcitabine, carboplatin, and denosumab as second-line therapy, and subsequently enrolled in a third line c-Met ADC clinical trial.As is well reported, ICIs combined with chemotherapy significantly improved the prognosis of mTNBC, however, incidence of immune-related adverse event (irAE) is significantly higher in the ICIs group than in the chemotherapy group [27].A wide range of irAEs have been reported, including skin disorders, endocrine disorders, and pulmonary disorders [7][8][9][10]27].Sometimes irAE causes discontinuation of subsequent treatment and affect overall survival.In this patient, hypothyroidism was thought to be the only related adverse event during ICI administration, but drug-induced pneumonia that occurred during subsequent treatment could not be ruled out as being related to the patient's prior ICI therapy.On the other hand, side effects of PARP inhibitors are reported as relatively manageable, such as anemia, and hematologic toxicity.However, serious adverse events have been reported in some cases [4,5,28].

The fourth-line treatment options included talazoparib, paclitaxel plus Bevacizumab, and eribulin plus trastuzumab.Based on the gene panel results, actionable mutations in this point were BRCA2, PD-L1/PD-L2, and ERBB2 amplification (equivocal).Immunohistochemistry of HER2 (4B5 antibody) of metastatic lymph node was score of 0, indicating that T-DXd was out of the option.Since olaparib and pembrolizumab had already been administered, trastuzumab was considered.However, the experts recommendation of gene panel was that, given the equivocal nature of the ERBB2 amplification, it might not be an effective option.The patient had been taking more than 20 mg of prednisone daily for over month due to drug-induced pneumonia that occurred during the third-line therapy.Consequently, she requested a regimen that minimized the risk of interstitial pneumonia.Notably, molecular-targeted drugs are associated with a range of adverse drug reactions, including drug-induced pneumonia [29].Although evidence is limited regarding the rechallenge of PARP inhibitors, a report from the EMBRACA trial noted that some patients were readministered PARP inhibitors after talazoparib, showing that such rechallenges can lead to prolonged survival [30].We have also observed at our institution that patients treated with olaparib for ER +/HER2 − metastatic breast cancer, even when administered as a later lines of therapy, maintained a therapeutic effect for an extended period if disease control was well-managed at the time of administration [31].While it remains uncertain whether late-line use of olaparib would be similarly effective in TNBC cases, we believe that PARP inhibitors are highly effective treatment option, both in terms of therapeutic efficacy and in minimizing severe side effects.

We would discuss about platinum drugs and PARP inhibitors resistance in BRCA pathogenic variant carriers lastly.Genomic reversion secondary mutations with the capacity of restoring BRCA1/2 is the most commonly observed mechanism of resistance to platinum drugs and PARP inhibitors [32].Tobalina et al. suggest that pharmacological inhibition of DNA end-joining repair pathways could improve durability of drug treatments by preventing the acquisition of reversion mutations in BRCA genes [33].Treatment options of systemic therapy for metastatic breast cancer with BRCA pathogenic variant would be expected to be selected while keeping these resistance mechanisms in mind in the future.

In conclusion, using PARP inhibitor as a first-line therapy in patients with mTNBC who have concurrent PD-L1 expression or a germline BRCA pathogenic variant is a reasonable option, both in terms of therapeutic efficacy and the ability to avoid severe side effects.

Fig. 1
1
Fig.1Radiological images at diagnosis of (A) primary breast cancer, (B) right axillary lymph node recurrence, (C) lung/liver metastasis, (D) bone metastasis, (E) at the end of pembrolizumab + GEM + CBDCA therapy, (F) drug-induced pneumonia after 2 months of c-Met administration, and (G) at when predonisone tapered and restarted systemic therapy.A A main lesion was found on the axillary side and a daughter nodule on the nipple side.The red allow showed active lesions, and the blue showed areas where therapeutic effects obtained.GEM gemcitabine, CBDCA carboplatin


Fig. 2 2 Fig. 3
223
Fig. 2 Pathological findings from (A) primary breast cancer tissue, and (B) right axillary lymph node tissue.A In primary breast tumor, tumor infiltrating lymphocytes were low.On the other hands, B Strongly pleomorphic components such as diversification and atypical mitosis were observed in metastatic axillary lymph node.HE hematoxilin-eosin staining, ER estrogen receptor, HER2 human epidermal growth factor receptor 2


Fig. 4 A
4
Fig. 4 A Primary and B metastatic breast cancer treatment course image of the patient.The alphabets in this figure correspond to the alphabet numbers in Fig. 1.Adverse events associated with treatment are shown in purple boxes.lt left, Bt mastectomy, SLNB sentinel lymph node biopsy, rt right, RRM risk reducing mastectomy, AC doxorubicine + cyclophosphamide, DTX docetaxel, RRSO risk reducing salpingooophorectomy, ANA anastrozole, Pembro pembrolizumab, GEM gemcitabine, CBDCA carboplatin, RT radiation therapy, ADC antibody-drug conjugate, DILD drug-induced interstitial lung disease, DVT deep vein thrombosis, DIC disseminated intravascular coagulation

Acknowledgements Not applicable.Author contributions HT, SS, and MT participated in the treatment, data interpretation and manuscript preparation.All of them are the member of the cancer board, discussed about the strategy of each patient.HT wrote and edited the manuscript and NG prepared figure2. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.Data availabilityThe data supporting this study's findings are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.Image data were extracted from the clinical PACS stored in DICOM standard format.All clinical data were obtained from the Clinical Data Repository of Mitsubishi Kyoto Hospital.DeclarationsEthics approval and consent to participate All procedures performed in studies involving human participant was in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the Helsinki Declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards.The protocol of this study was approved by IRB in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations (approved number[23][24][25][26][27][28][29][30][31].Consent for publication Informed consent was obtained from the patient in this study.Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material.You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it.The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material.If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons.org/ licen ses/ by-nc-nd/4.0/.
Insights into molecular classifications of triple-negative breast cancer: improving patient selection for treatment. A C Garrido-Castro, N U Lin, K Polyak, Cancer Discov. 922019

The role of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 in the survival of women with estrogen and progesterone receptor-negative, invasive breast cancer: the California Cancer Registry. M Brown, A Tsodikov, K R Bauer, Cancer. 1121999-2004. 2008

Prevalence of BRCA mutations in an unselected population of triple-negative breast cancer. A R Hartman, R R Kaldate, L M Sailer, Cancer. 118112012

Olaparib for metastatic breast cancer in patients with a germline BRCA mutation. M Robson, S A Im, E Senkus, N Engl J Med. 37762017

OlympiAD extended follow-up for overall survival and safety: olaparib versus chemotherapy treatment of physician's choice in patients with a germline BRCA mutation and HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer. M E Robson, S A Im, E Senkus, Eur J Cancer. 1842023

Talazoparib in patients with advanced breast cancer and a germline BRCA mutation. J K Litton, H S Rugo, J Ettl, N Engl J Med. 37982018

PD-L1 expression as biomarker of efficacy of PD-1/PD-L1 checkpoint inhibitors in metastatic triple negative breast cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. M Khan, K Du, M Ai, Front Immunol. 1410603082023

Pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy versus placebo plus chemotherapy for previously untreated locally recurrent inoperable or metastatic triple-negative breast cancer (KEYNOTE-355): a randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind, phase 3 clinical trial. J Cortes, D W Cescon, H S Rugo, Lancet. 3962020. 10265

Pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy in advanced triple-negative breast cancer. J Cortes, H S Rugo, D W Cescon, N Engl J Med. 38732022

Atezolizumab and nab-paclitaxel in advanced triple-negative breast cancer. P Schmid, S Adams, H S Rugo, 10.1007/s44337-024-00138-zN Engl J Med. 379221192018. 2024

Assessment of PD-L1 expression and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) across molecular subtypes of triple-negative breast cancer. R Sood, S Kumar, I Laroiya, Breast J. 26122020

Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and prognosis: a pooled individual patient analysis of early-stage triplenegative breast cancers. S Loi, D Drubay, S Adams, J Clin Oncol. 3772019

Assessment of PD-L1 expression across breast cancer molecular subtypes, in relation to mutation rate, BRCA1-like status, tumor-infiltrating immune cells and survival. M Sobral-Leite, K Van De Vijver, M Michaut, Oncoimmunology. 712e15098202018

Tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes and prognosis in different subtypes of breast cancer: a pooled analysis of 3771 patients treated with neoadjuvant therapy. C Denkert, Von Minckwitz, G , Darb - Esfahani, S , Lancet Oncol. 1912018

Trastuzumab deruxtecan in previously treated HER2-low advanced breast cancer. S Modi, W Jacot, T Yamashita, N Engl J Med. 38712022

Trastuzumab deruxtecan for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-low advanced or metastatic breast cancer: recommendations from the Japanese Breast Cancer Society Clinical Practice Guidelines. M Hattori, N Honma, S Nagai, Breast Cancer. 3132024

Adjuvant capecitabine for breast cancer after preoperative chemotherapy. N Masuda, S J Lee, S Ohtani, N Engl J Med. 376222017

Adjuvant dose-dense chemotherapy in breast cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. F Petrelli, M Cabiddu, A Coinu, Breast Cancer Res Treat. 15122015

Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in triple-negative breast cancer. Leon-Ferre Ra Jonas, S F Salgado, R , JAMA. 331132024

The journey of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes as a biomarker in breast cancer: clinical utility in an era of checkpoint inhibition. S Loi, S Michiels, S Adams, Ann Oncol. 32102021

Pembrolizumab for early triple-negative breast cancer. P Schmid, J Cortes, L Pusztai, N Engl J Med. 38292020

The immune contexture in human tumours: impact on clinical outcome. W H Fridman, F Pagès, C Sautès-Fridman, Nat Rev Cancer. 1242012

Discontinuation rate and serious adverse events of chemoimmunotherapy as neoadjuvant treatment for triple-negative breast cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. A Rizzo, F M Schipilliti, Di Costanzo, F , 2023ESMO Open8102198

Multiple Bayesian network meta-analyses to establish therapeutic algorithms for metastatic triple negative breast cancer. F Schettini, S Venturini, M Giuliano, Cancer Treat Rev. 1111024682022

KEYLYNK-009: a phase II/III, open-label, randomized study of pembrolizumab (pembro) plus olaparib vs pembro plus chemotherapy after induction with first-line pembro plus chemotherapy in patients with locally recurrent inoperable or metastatic triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). H S Rugo, A Llombart-Cussac, F Andre, 10.1200/JCO.2020.38.15_suppl.TPS59J Clin Oncol. 2020

Sacituzumab govitecan in metastatic triple-negative breast cancer. A Bardia, S A Hurvitz, S M Tolaney, N Engl J Med. 384162021

PD-1/PD-L1 immune checkpoint inhibitors in metastatic triple-negative breast cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Y Yu, Jin X Zhu, X , Front Immunol. 1412066892023

Adverse event profiles of PARP inhibitors: analysis of spontaneous reports submitted to FAERS. X Tian, L Chen, D Gai, Front Pharmacol. 138512462022

Current status of DILD in molecular targeted therapies. Y Saito, Gemma A , Int J Clin Oncol. 1762012

Talazoparib versus chemotherapy in patients with germline BRCA1/2-mutated HER2-negative advanced breast cancer: final overall survival results from the EMBRACA trial. J K Litton, S A Hurvitz, L A Mina, Ann Oncol. 31112020

Does early olaparib administration improve prognosis in patients with HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer and BRCA 1 and/or BRCA2 pathogenic variants?-A case report. H Takuwa, S Sasaki, T Yamada, Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 50122023

Reversion and non-reversion mechanisms of resistance to PARP inhibitor or platinum chemotherapy in BRCA1/2-mutant metastatic breast cancer. A G Waks, O Cohen, B Kochupurakkal, Ann Oncol. 312020

A meta-analysis of reversion mutations in BRCA genes identifies signatures of DNA end-joining repair mechanisms driving therapy resistance. L Tobalina, J Armenia, E Irving, Ann Oncol. 3212021

Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.