arthrectomy. The practice of excising diseased joints was a splendid achievement in surgical art and the names of Syme, Liston, Feiigussost, and


arthrectomy. The practice of excising diseased joints was a splendid achievement in surgical art and the names of Syme, Liston, Feiigussost, and



limb and joint in much better plight. Various circumstances have contributed to this result.

The pathology of strumous joint disease has been more closely studied and is better understood ; the distinction between scrofulosis and tuberculosis has beeu abolished ; the local origin and character of these affections has been recognised, the constitutional factor occupying a secondary rather than a primary position ; Koch's discovery of the tubercle bacillus and the demonstration of its agency in setting up tubercular inflammations have revolutionised our ideas regarding the causation and pathology of so-called scrofulous inflammation; the tendency of the products of such inflammations to degenerative and necrotic changes has been fully established ; the coexistence of reparative changes in the immediate vicinity has also been demonstrated \ the discovery of antiseptic surgery has enabled surgeons to deal more freely and fearlessly with joint structures than of old ; the invention of the sharp spoon by Volkmann has placed in the hands of surgeons a novel weapon specially adapted for the removal of degenerated and dead material; and the evil influence of tension iu joiut cavities has been realized, and its relief by antiseptic incision and drainage proved by experience.

The leading principles of dealing with diseased joints evolved from the various sources of improved knowledge and practice thus indicated may be reduced to a few heads.

1st.?It is only necessary to remove material which has actually undergone pathological change, such as pulpy synovial membrane, gelatinous and carious bone, exfoliated cartilage, and the like.

These things may be scraped away by gouge or spoon or cut away by knife or scissors.

If follows as a corollary that all tissue, synovial, bony, cartilaginous or ligamentous, which has not undergone morbid change, should not be meddled with. Cavities in bones may be scooped out and ligaments scraped, but the bone and ligament need not be excised in mass.

2nd.?All such procedures should be conducted under the strictest antiseptic precautions. In open joints efforts should be made to establish an aseptic wound. The same rule applies to open sinuses in the neighbourhood of joints leading into carious cavities in the cancellous articular extremities.

2rd.?Care should be taken to avoid tension, and to that end, incisions, tenotomy, the use of tubes and careful drainage are advisable.

From these considerations it follows that early operation is likely to obviate the need of severe operation later on. Time should not, therefore, be lost by trusting too long to constitutional treatment and local applications. Constitutional treatment occupies the place of an adjuvant in this matter; but for the purpose of cure the vomica must be emptied, even if it is constituted by the joint cavity itself. Unfortunately 110 adjacent tube lends its services for the purposes of spontaneous evacuation; but, fortunately, the cavity is capable of being easily reached by operation, of beiug thus emptied,cleaned and kept clean. Many cases in more advanced stages will still require excision according to the old rules and methods, and for not a few others amputation will be found the best treatment.

The recent improvements in joint surgery contemplate the avoidance of both these procedures by the early recognition of tubercular foci iu and around the joint, and the early removal of these, leaving the joint in a more or less entire and serviceable condition.