An 84-Year-Old Man with a History of Myeloma and Biphosphonate-Related Osteonecrosis of the Jaw Treated with Preoperative Vascular Embolization Before Partial Maxillectomy


Abce 
Department of Dental and Oral Surgery
St. Mary's Hospital
Kurume, FukuokaJapan

Taketomi Takaharu 
Cdf 
Division of Oral Rehabilitation
Department of Periodontology
Faculty of Dental Science
Kyushu University
Fukuoka City, FukuokaJapan

Department of Radiology
Takagi Hospital
OkawaFukuokaJapan

Department of Radiology
Faculty of Medicine
Saga City, SagaJapan

Takao Fukuda Bc 
Department of Dental and Oral Surgery
Takagi Hospital
OkawaFukuokaJapan

Junichi Nojiri Df 
Terukazu Sanui 
Division of Oral Rehabilitation
Department of Periodontology
Faculty of Dental Science
Kyushu University
Fukuoka City, FukuokaJapan

Takaharu Taketomi taketomi@kurume-u.ac.jp 

Dental and Oral Medical Center
Kurume University School of Medicine
KurumeFukuokaJapan

An 84-Year-Old Man with a History of Myeloma and Biphosphonate-Related Osteonecrosis of the Jaw Treated with Preoperative Vascular Embolization Before Partial Maxillectomy
1941-5923CEBAD214188676CAE209C91A39495ECE10.12659/AJCR.943807Received: 2024.01.15 Accepted: 2024.06.11 Available online: 2024.06.20Computed Tomography AngiographyMultiple MyelomaEmbolization, TherapeuticOsteonecrosis Study Design A Data Collection B Statistical Analysis C Data Interpretation D Manuscript Preparation E Literature Search F Funds Collection G
Objective:Rare disease Background:Bisphosphonates and anti-receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B antibodies are used to treat bone diseases associated with increased osteoclast activity, including myeloma.However, they can cause osteonecrosis of the jaw, known as medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw.This report presents a case of a patient with a history of myeloma who required posterior maxilla resection for bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw, in which preoperative embolization prevented unexpected bleeding related to vascular injury and allowed for a safe procedure with minimal bleeding.Case Report:An 84-year-old man presented to our department with a 3-year history of purulent drainage and bone exposure in the right maxilla.Based on the clinical findings at the initial visit, the clinical diagnosis was bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw, and the patient underwent a partial right maxillary osteotomy.This surgery was associated with a risk of unexpected bleeding from a branch of the maxillary artery during the posterior maxilla resection.A catheter-based embolization of the maxillary artery was performed the day before performing a partial maxillectomy to avoid unexpected bleeding risk.Thus, no abnormal bleeding occurred during partial maxillectomy, and no postoperative complications occurred for 3 years.Conclusions:In the surgical treatment of medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw, preoperative vascular embolization of the peripheral maxillary artery beyond the middle meningeal artery bifurcation is a valuable technique for safe maxillectomy involving the posterior maxilla.

Introduction

Myeloma is a malignant hematologic plasma cell tumor that proliferates within the bone marrow and is complicated by severe bone destruction.Myeloma cells proliferate by destroying bone tissue to make room for growth, and they produce factors involved in osteoclast activation [1].Therefore, myeloma is treated using bisphosphonate preparations (BPs), which induce osteoclast apoptosis and inhibit bone resorption.Furthermore, BPs exert direct anticancer effects by inhibiting myeloma cell proliferation, enhancing apoptosis, or inhibiting angiogenesis [2].

BPs are used for treating myeloma and suppressing osteoporosis and bone metastasis of various cancers.Thus, the usefulness of BP therapy is increasing.However, osteonecrosis of the jaw may develop when patients who have been receiving BPs for an extended period undergo dental procedures such as tooth extraction [3].This jaw-specific necrosis occurs in patients receiving bone resorption inhibitors, such as anti-nuclear factor kappa B ligand antibodies and anti-sclerostin antibodies other than BPs, and also in patients receiving angiogenesis inhibitors, such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors and anti-vascular endothelial growth factor human monoclonal antibody.Osteonecrosis of the jaw associated with BPs (the most common of these drugs) was first reported in 2003 as bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (BRONJ).Initially, it was defined as an exposed bone in the craniofacial region in current or former BP users without a history of radiation therapy to the craniofacial region that did not heal within 8 weeks of confirmation by a medical professional [4].Currently, it is known that BPs, anti-receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B antibodies, and angiogenesis inhibitors can cause similar osteonecrosis of the jaw.The American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons (AAOMS) issued a position paper defining such osteonecrosis of the jaw as medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (MRONJ), defined as palpable bone exposure in the maxillofacial region through an intraoral or extraoral fistula lasting > 8 weeks in patients without radiation therapy or metastatic disease to the jaw and who have received antiresorptive therapy alone or in combination with immunomodulatory or angiogenic agents [5].

The incidence of MRONJ associated with BP therapy is 0.02-0.05% in patients with osteoporosis [6] and 1.6-18.0% in patients with cancer [7].

MRONJ onset should be prevented.However, if it develops, the primary treatment goals are pain control and prevention of necrosis expansion and pathological fractures.MRONJ treatment is either conservative or surgical.Conservative treatment involves administering antimicrobial agents and rinsing with chlorhexidine or antimicrobial agents to improve oral hygiene.

Surgery is performed when the disease is refractory to conservative treatment and when necrosis progresses.Preoperative measures include rinsing the mouth to control local infection, smoking cessation, and managing underlying diseases such as diabetes mellitus.Jawbone resection should be performed with removal of a necrotic bone margin, leaving the healthy bone intact and the wound completely closed to prevent bone exposure on the resection surface.Notably, posterior maxilla resection may result in bleeding from the artery or its branches located behind the pterygoid plate or within the pterygopalatine fossa.If an intraoperative arterial injury occurs, immediate hemostatic treatment is necessary.However, local hemostasis is often difficult.One option in such cases is emergency ligation of the external carotid artery on the central side.

Recent advances in diagnostic imaging techniques such as computed tomography (CT) and angiography (CTA) have enabled detailed visualization of vascular distribution, and therapeutic procedures are now performed using catheters and angiography [8].Emergency hemostasis for bleeding from the maxillary artery or its branches can be performed with catheter-based vascular embolization, even after bleeding.However, the preparation for such hemostasis takes time.Similar to emergency litigation of the external carotid artery, the external carotid artery must be clamped until the catheter is ready for hemostasis, which is an urgent procedure.Preoperative catheterbased vascular embolization prevents intraoperative bleeding and the need for emergency procedures in patients undergoing the surgical treatment of head and neck tumors, temporomandibular joint replacement surgery, and extraction of cystic lesions near the maxillary artery branches [9][10][11][12].This report describes the case of an 84-year-old man with a history of myeloma and BRONJ treated with preoperative vascular embolization before partial maxillectomy.


Case Report

An 84-year-old man presented to our department for evaluation of pain and bone exposure in his right maxilla.He had myeloma, atrial fibrillation, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and rheumatoid arthritis as comorbidities.Myeloma had been diagnosed 7 years previously, and the current stage of the disease corresponded to Stage I of the International Staging System.He had been taking BPs for 4 years.After extracting a right maxillary molar for periodontitis treatment 3 years earlier, he experienced continued poor healing at the extraction site, with pain in the right maxilla and purulent discharge from the exposed bone.

The initial intraoral examination at the first visit showed bone exposure on the gingival surface of the right maxilla, with occasional drainage of pus from the region around the exposed bone.The patient had no history of cigarette smoking.He was taking antihypertensive medications, steroids, and anticoagulants, but he had discontinued the BP therapy.Panoramic radiography and CT revealed bone resorption and decomposing bone-like hard tissue in the right maxilla (Figure 1A-1D).His condition was consistent with the definition of MRONJ given in the AAOMS' Position Paper, and right maxillary MRONJ was diagnosed; therefore, no biopsy was performed.We planned to treat the patient surgically, using partial right maxillectomy.

Preoperative CT images revealed necrotic bone in a portion of the posterior wall of the right maxillary sinus.This necrosis may have been caused by adhesion of surrounding inflammatory granulation tissue to the maxillary artery or its branches.In such cases, there is a risk of bleeding from the maxillary artery or its branches during surgical removal of the necrotic bone, and emergency hemostasis is extremely difficult to achieve.Therefore, we decided to perform embolization the day before surgery to prevent abnormal bleeding and ensure surgical safety.The embolization target was the peripheral maxillary The day after embolization, a right partial maxillectomy was performed under general anesthesia to completely remove the necrotic bone with a margin of approximately 0.5 cm on CT images.The upper portion was resected to the floor level of the maxillary sinus, and the posterior portion was resected beyond the maxillary tubercle to the base of the pterygoid process (Figure 3A).After partial maxillary resection, the bone wound surface was covered as much as possible with the surrounding oral mucosa.Areas that were difficult to cover with mucosa were covered with polyglycolic acid sheets and coated with fibrin glue for complete coverage of the bone surface.

In addition, gauze coated with bacitracin was loaded into the maxillary sinus opening.Finally, the buccal division, which had been performed to widen the operative field, was sutured closed with the patient in the supine position, and the surgery was terminated.The intraoperative blood loss volume was 155 mL.


Discussion

This case report shows that preoperative vascular embolization is a useful way to prevent surgical risks such as abnormal bleeding from the maxillary artery when treating MRONJ extending to the posterior maxilla using surgery.It shows the target site to be embolized.

Patients with osteoporosis or bone metastases from cancer are often administered BPs and bone resorption inhibitors (eg, anti-nuclear factor kappa B ligand and anti-sclerostin antibodies) and angiogenesis inhibitors (eg, tyrosine kinase inhibitors and anti-vascular endothelial growth factor human monoclonal antibodies).Reportedly, osteonecrosis of the jaw occurs in patients receiving BP for myeloma following tooth extraction, as in the present case.This case also showed the characteristic features of BRONJ on CT, such as septation and irregular bone destruction, and did not show bone rarefaction, a feature of myeloma [13], but did exhibit osteonecrotic lesions associated with BPs.Thus, MRONJ, including BRONJ, is a refractory disease that occurs in patients who have previously used these agents [14].Most cases are caused by invasive dental procedures such as tooth extractions.However, MRONJ can also be caused by severe periodontal disease or ill-fitting dentures in edentulous patients [15,16].Treatment can be conservative (eg, cleaning and antibiotics) or surgical (eg, jaw osteotomy), although early surgical treatment has recently been recommended [17][18][19].In the maxilla, resection may extend to the posterior wall of the maxillary sinus and the pterygoid plate behind the maxillary tubercle.In these cases, the maxillary artery and its branches are intermingled immediately posteriorly, and unexpected intraoperative arterial injury can make surgery difficult.In general, intraoperative bleeding is first treated by compression hemostasis, vessel ligation, and suturing.Of these interventions, ligation of the external carotid artery is sometimes applied because it is


A B C

considered effective when hemostasis is difficult [20,21], but it is invasive, with a high risk of subsequent nerve palsy and other sequelae.Furthermore, ligation of the external carotid artery is easily performed when the patient has cervical lymph node metastases from maxillary cancer, and cervical dissection is performed simultaneously.In cases such as ours, where basically no neck incision was planned, ligation of the external carotid artery is not a technique that any surgeon can quickly perform on an emergency basis.Moreover, even if accurate ligation is possible, the external carotid artery is relatively close to the central nervous system; thus, ligation-related injuries are likely to be severe.Notably, recent advances in interventional radiology (including elucidation of the vascular anatomy, development of diagnostic radiology equipment such as digital subtraction angiography, and the use of guidewires, catheters, and embolic material) have improved the safety and accuracy of endovascular embolization [8].Endovascular embolization is an effective hemostatic treatment for bleeding that is difficult to control locally in patients with cancer [22,23].In the present case, super-selective arterial embolization of the dominant artery at the resection site was performed preoperatively to reduce intraoperative bleeding after resection of necrotic bone that had extended posteriorly to the maxilla.We considered embolization of the posterior superior alveolar, infraorbital, and descending palatine arteries to prevent abnormal intraoperative bleeding.In such cases, the target artery should be embolized as peripherally as possible.However, a limitation of this technique is that the risk of vascular injury increases as the diameter of the popliteal artery branches decreases.Therefore, the middle meningeal artery branch, in which catheter insertion is relatively easy and less likely to cause serious complications, may be a useful embolization site.Nevertheless, the central part should be avoided as an embolization site because of severe vision loss, a complication due to retinal embolization of the ophthalmic artery, a branch of the middle meningeal artery [24,25].

In this case, no severe complications, such as ocular symptoms or facial paresthesias, occurred.Unlike emergency hemostatic surgery, embolization is an elective procedure performed under local anesthesia and is relatively safe.However, the vascular anatomy of the maxillofacial region is complex, and there is a risk of severe complications involving the cranial nerves.Therefore, it is essential to discuss the extent of resection, the actual vascular geometry, and the embolization site with the radiologist prior to surgery.


Conclusions

Preoperative embolization of the maxillary artery, which is more peripheral than the branch to the middle meningeal artery, minimizes the risk of abnormal bleeding during surgery when surgical resection of MRONJ with erosions in the posterior maxillary molar and posterior wall of the maxillary sinus is performed.


Statement

The patient was examined and managed at Takagi Hospital and was followed up at St. Mary's Hospital after surgery.

Figure 1 .
1
Figure 1.Panoramic radiograph and computed tomography images.(A) Panoramic radiograph showing bone resorption in the posterior portion of the right maxillary labrum.(B) Computed tomography (CT) image showing necrotic bone extending to the base of the pterygoid plate (arrowhead).(C) The necrotic bone extends to part of the posterior wall of the maxillary sinus and the pterygopalatine fossa on CT (arrowhead).(D) Three-dimensional CT image of eroded bone resorption and necrotic bone.


Figure 2 .C
2
Figure 2. Computed tomography angiography image of the maxillary artery and its branches and angiographic images.(A) Computed tomography angiography (CTA) showing a branch of the maxillary artery (ie, the posterior superior alveolar artery; arrowhead) located peripherally from the middle meningeal artery.(B) Preembolization angiography showing blood flow in the maxillary artery branches.(C) Post-embolization angiography showing that coil implantation (arrow) had cut off the arterial blood supply around the pterygoid plate.


Figure 3 .Figure 4 .
34
Figure 3. Surgical findings and postoperative panoramic radiography.(A) Intraoperative photograph of the partial maxillectomy.(B) Postoperative panoramic radiograph showing that the micro-coil had remained in place.


Figure 5 .
5
Figure 5. Post-healing oral cavity and maxillary jaw denture.(A) The surface of the resected bone fragment was epithelialized, and the open sinus into the maxillary sinus was held open.(B) Maxillary jaw denture that can close the open area.(C) Maxillary denture was placed.The open sinus was closed by the denture.

AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI (grant numbers JP23H03084 and JP20K10173).We thank Angela Morben, DVM, ELS, from Edanz (https://jp.edanz.com/ac)and Editage (www.editage.jp)for editing a draft of this manuscript.Declaration of Figures' AuthenticityAll figures submitted have been created by the authors who confirm that the images are original with no duplication and have not been previously published in whole or in part.This work was supported by the grant JSPS KAKENHI (grant numbers JP23H03084 and JP20K10173) Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 84-year-old Final Diagnosis: Medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (MRONJ) Symptoms: Jawbone exposure • pain Clinical Procedure: -Specialty: Dentistry Indexed in: [PMC] [PubMed] [Emerging Sources Citation Index (ESCI)] [Web of Science by Clarivate] This work is licensed under Creative Common Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) Taketomi T. et al: Pre-maxillectomy vascular embolization for MRONJ © Am J Case Rep, 2024; 25: e943807 e943807-4 Indexed in: [PMC] [PubMed] [Emerging Sources Citation Index (ESCI)] [Web of Science by Clarivate] This work is licensed under Creative Common Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0
Myeloma bone disease. O Sezer, Hematology. 102005Suppl. 1

Bisphosphonate anticancer activity in multiple myeloma. E Terpos, Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 1222012

Bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (BRONJ): Run dental management designs and issues in diagnosis. G Campisi, Di Fede, O Musciotto, A , Ann Oncol. 182007Suppl. 6

Bisphosphonate related jaw osteonecrosis. StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL) ineligible companies. Disclosure: Neha Gupta declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. M Gupta, N Gupta, 2024StatPearls Publishing. Copyright © 2024, StatPearls Publishing LLC

American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons position paper on medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw -2014 update. S L Ruggiero, T B Dodson, J Fantasia, J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 72102014

Romosozumab or alendronate for fracture prevention in women with osteoporosis. K G Saag, J Petersen, M L Brandi, N Engl J Med. 377152017

Long-term impact of bone-modifying agents for the treatment of bone metastases: A systematic review. T L Ng, M M Tu, Mfk Ibrahim, Support Care Cancer. 2922021

Downstream imaging utilization after MR angiography versus CT angiography for the initial evaluation of pulmonary embolism. M D Repplinger, R L Bracken, B W Patterson, J Am Coll Radiol. 15122018

Preoperative embolization of hypervascular head and neck tumours. A K Gupta, S Purkayastha, N K Bodhey, Australas Radiol. 5152007

Endovascular preoperative embolization for temporomandibular joint replacement surgery. A Santillan, Hee Sur, M Schwarz, J Easthausen, I , Interv Neuroradiol. 2612020

Management of internal maxillary artery hemorrhage from temporomandibular joint surgery via selective embolization. Peoples Jr 3 Rd, E G Herbosa, J Dion, J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 46111988

A case of a dentigerous cyst in the maxillary sinus treated preoperatively with vascular embolization to avoid intraoperative abnormal bleeding. T Taketomi, T Fukuda, G Takeshita, T Sanui, Cureus. 1512e502282023

Bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw in a multiple myeloma patient: A case report with characteristic radiographic features. B D Lee, M R Park, K H Kwon, Imaging Sci Dent. 4532015

Infection and medicationrelated osteonecrosis of the jaw. H Katsarelis, N P Shah, D K Dhariwal, M Pazianas, J Dent Res. 9442015

Association between periodontal disease, tooth extraction, and medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw in women receiving bisphosphonates: A national cohort-based study. M J Kwoen, J H Park, K S Kim, J Periodontol. 9412023

Medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaws caused lethal sepsis in an edentulous patient with multiple systemic factors. K Yamashiro, A Sato, F Okazaki, Clin Case Rep. 522017

Treatment perspectives for medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (MRONJ). O Ristow, S Otto, M Troeltzsch, B Hohlweg-Majert, C Pautke, J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 4322015

Can surgical management improve resolution of medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw at early stages? A prospective cohort study. A Giudice, S Barone, F Diodati, J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 78112020

Relationship between tooth extraction and development of medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw in cancer patients. S Soutome, M Otsuru, S Hayashida, Sci Rep. 111172262021

Case for ligation of the external carotid artery in composite operations for oral carcinoma. C Martis, Int J Oral Surg. 721978

External carotid artery ligation in squamous cell carcinomas of the oral cavity and oropharynx: An oncological emergency. T Kumar, V Yadav, K Ravi, Indian J Surg. 772015Suppl. 3

Hemostastic embolization in oncology. P Revel-Mouroz, F Z Mokrane, S Collot, Diagn Interv Imaging. 967-82015

Transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) of cancer-related bleeding. R Minici, G Guzzardi, M Venturini, Medicina (Kaunas). 59713232023

Retinal artery occlusion and multiple retinal deposits as a consequence of therapeutic arteriovenous fistula embolization. M S Tsipursky, L M Jampol, Retin Cases Brief Rep. 332009

Temporary uniocular blindness and ophthalmoplegia associated with a mandibular block injection. A case report. G J Wilkie, Aust Dent J. 4522000