The Agro-Industrial Sugarcane System in Mexico: Current Status, Challenges and Opportunities
March 15, 2014

Emmanuel Héctor 
Sentíes-Herrera 
Colegio de Postgraduados
Campus Montecillo, Carretera México-Texcoco km 36.5MontecilloEstado de MéxicoMexico

Fernando Carlos Gómez-Merino fernandg@colpos.mx 
Colegio de Postgraduados
Congregación Manuel León
Campus Córdoba, Carretera Córdoba-Veracruz km 348

Amatlán de los Reyes
VeracruzMexico

Apolonio Valdez-Balero 
Colegio de Postgraduados
Periférico Carlos A. Molina S/N
Campus Tabasco, Carretera Cárdenas-Huimanguillo km 3, H. CárdenasTabascoMexico

Victoria Silva-Rojas 
Colegio de Postgraduados
Campus Montecillo, Carretera México-Texcoco km 36.5MontecilloEstado de MéxicoMexico

& Libia 
Iris Trejo-Téllez 
Colegio de Postgraduados
Campus Montecillo, Carretera México-Texcoco km 36.5MontecilloEstado de MéxicoMexico


Colegio de Postgraduados
Congregación Manuel León
Campus Córdoba, Carretera Córdoba-Veracruz km 348


Amatlán de los Reyes
VeracruzMexico

The Agro-Industrial Sugarcane System in Mexico: Current Status, Challenges and Opportunities
1916-9752 E- 1916-9760March 15, 2014E411A9AFB1992565B51873625D24388210.5539/jas.v6n4p26Received: December 16, 2013 Accepted: January 28, 2014 OnlineSaccharummexican agro-industrysugar yieldinnovation
Sugarcane cultivation in Mexico occurs under a wide range of socioeconomic, environmental and agricultural conditions, with the last three harvests (2010/2011, 2011/2012 and 2012/2013)  providing yields ranging from 36-125 t ha -1 (variation > 347%), with an average yield of 70.2 t ha -1 , which is below the world average of 80 t ha -1 .The total area allocated to sugarcane production in Mexico is close to 800 thousand hectares, and could rise to nearly 5 million hectares given adequate conditions for its cultivation.This activity generates approximately 1 million direct jobs, 2.2 million indirect jobs, and more than 2.5 billion dollars (0.4% of GDP) per year.Climate change and the rapid market penetration of high fructose corn syrup are among the greatest threats to this agribusiness, including severe disintegration of production processes in the field, industry, commerce, and consumption of cane sugar.Technology lags, low investment, high processing costs and shortcomings in production sales are issues the industry must address by leveraging their resources and coordinating processing links to be more efficient and competitive.Political influence has imposed a suboptimal policy framework to achieve the projected potential.To overcome current lags in the field and refineries within the country, significant innovations across the value-chain are underway, including a robust breeding program, digitalization of sugarcane fields and novel investments in research and development.The sugarcane value-chain has great potential for Mexico, and exploiting this potential is possible if technological, organizational and commercial management innovations currently in progress in fields and factories are applied.

Introduction

Sugarcane (Saccharum spp.) is the most productive crop in the world due to its higher efficiency in photosynthetic capacity, and its ability to store sucrose in its stem.Sugarcane contributes 75% of the total sugar produced in the world with the remaining 25% produced from sugar-beets (Beta vulgaris L.).Its high biomass production and ease of growth make sugarcane one of the most interesting agricultural commodities globally, useful not only in food and feed, but also in the generation of inputs for bioenergy and chemical industries.Its cultivation covers an area over 25.4 million hectares in more than 130 countries and territories, with production of more than 1800 million tons, thus establishing sugarcane as the crop having the most acreage in the world (FAOSTAT, 2013).Average global production is approximately 80 t ha -1 (Waclawovsky, Sato, Lembke, Moore, & Souza, 2010), although theoretical yields are estimated near 470 t ha -1 dry matter or 805 t ha -1 of fresh cane per year (Yadav, Jain, & Rai, 2010;Dal-Bianco et al., 2012), which supports the hypothesis that increased future yields are possible.Diversification of products (transition from simple sugarcane mills to sugarcane biorefineries) utilizing the entire crop for a variety of environmentally friendly outcomes apart from sucrose, is the key factor in today's highly integrated sugar milling operations, generating a wide range of other products such as energy, human food, animal feed, manures, biofuels, ethyl alcohol and its derivatives.In fact, it is possible to derive more than 10 000 new products from sucrose (Aguilar-Rivera, Rodríguez-Lagunes, & Castillo-Morán, 2010).For small peasant farms, a profitable alternative is natural brown sugar, for which production in Mexico fluctuates between 100 000 and 500 000 t year -1 (Méndez, Elorza, Maruri, Elorza, & Martínez, 2013).This enormous performance capability for a sugarcane multipurpose culture is highly important for its continued use, including its bio-factory potential for the synthesis of high-value sugars, biopolymers and pharmacological proteins (Gómez-Merino, Trejo-Téllez, & Sentíes-Herrera, 2014).

In Mexico, sugarcane agribusiness generates more than 930 000 direct jobs and 2.2 million indirect jobs, in 15 states and 227 municipalities (9.2% of all municipalities in Mexico) (Secretaría de Economía, 2012) that are grouped into six production areas (Northwest, Pacific, Center, Northeast, Gulf and South) (Aguilar- Rivera, Rodríguez, Enríquez, Castillo, & Herrera, 2012).In this value-chain, enormous strengths are related to soil quality and suitable climate where it is grown, and where the primary producer organizations and industry are well-structured, although complex.However, there are major challenges that need to be addressed to ensure a successful future for this value-chain.Recently, Aguilar-Rivera, Espinosa-López, Herrera, Castillo, and Lagunes (2013) performed an analysis of competitiveness of the Mexican sugarcane industry, taking into account Porter´s diamond model (Porter, 2008).Within this analysis, actor conditions; demand conditions; firm strategy, structure and rivalry; related and supporting industries; as well as role of the government and changes in the Mexican sugarcane value-chain are depicted.Herein, we further analyze more in-depth the state of the art for the sugarcane production system in Mexico, and describe its strengths and current and future challenges to ensure its consolidation through innovative strategies that may increase productivity and profitability.


History and Current Economic Importance of Sugarcane in Mexico

Since its introduction in Mexico nearly 500 years ago, sugarcane has become an integral part of the national economy.Although its development has gone through serious critical stages since its inception, it is now established as one of the most traditional agribusiness activities of significance in the country's economic development (Aguilar-Rivera, 2013), which now faces significant consolidation challenges to remain as an innovative and globally competitive value-chain.

The Mexican sugar industry has a historical-structural model depicting the operation of a traditional and rooted socioeconomic system after the triumph of the Mexican Revolution.This model is characterized by a supply of goods with low added value and low technology, coupled with a demand for high-technology goods and commercial value.This generates a trade deficit and an unfavorable environment for future sustainability.

The generation of Mexican varieties of sugarcane began in 1930, peaked in the 1970s, and in 1990 began to decline (Flores, 2001).Efforts coordinated by the National Chamber for the Sugar and Alcohol Industries (Cámara Nacional de las Industrias Azucarera y Alcoholera, CNIAA), the Center for Research and Development of Sugarcane (Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo de la Caña de Azúcar, CIDCA), the Secretariat for Agriculture, Livestock, Rural Development, Fisheries and Food (Secretaría de Agricultura, Ganadería, Desarrollo Rural, Pesca y Alimentación, SAGARPA), the National Committee for the Sustainable Development of Sugarcane (Comité Nacional para el Desarrollo Sustentable de la Caña de Azúcar, CONADESUCA) and the sugarcane organizations National Confederation of Rural Holders (Confederación Nacional de Propietarios Rurales, CNPR) and the National Confederation of Farmers (Confederación Nacional Campesina, CNC), have maintained the agribusiness and are fundamental players for the increases observed to date.

Mexico is currently the sixth largest producer of sugar and sugarcane (FAOSTAT, 2013;ZAFRANET, 2013) which is not purely for export and the activity is based on domestic consumption (Aguilar-Rivera, 2012).The 2012/2013 harvest was conducted over an area of approximately 780 000 ha with 55 refineries in operation, and a production of 61.5 million tons of cane and a total of 6.7 million tons of sugar (CNPR, 2013;CONADESUCA, 2013).Apparent domestic consumption is more than 5 million tons of sugar per year with an annual per capita consumption of 47 kg (Aguilar-Rivera, 2012).Today, this agribusiness has an economic impact of approximately 2 591 million dollars, economically and socially impacting over 3 million Mexicans (Secretaría de Economía, 2012).In 2011, Mexico contributed 3% of the global sugarcane production (FAOSTAT, 2013).

In Mexico, the cultivation of sugarcane is concentrated in six regions (Figure 1): Northwest (state of Sinaloa), Pacific (states of Nayarit, Jalisco, Michoacán and Colima), Center (states of Puebla and Morelos), Northeast (states of Tamaulipas and San Luis Potosí), Gulf (states of Veracruz, Oaxaca and Tabasco) and South (states of Chiapas, Campeche and Quintana Roo) (CONADESUCA, 2013).The average yield of sugarcane was 66.10 t ha -1 for the 2010/2011 harvest, 65.87 t ha -1 for the 2011/2012 harvest and 78.74 t ha -1 for the 2012/2013 harvest,  Municipalities without sugarcane production are smaller than those producing sugarcane, with 80% of their populations living in towns with fewer than 5000 inhabitants, 60.7% of the inhabitants receiving less than two minimum wages and 23.8% without basic education (Secretaría de Economía, 2012), which puts them at a disadvantage.The more than 220 municipalities where sugarcane is produced are home to more than 12 million people, and their average contribution to national added value is 7.1% (INEGI, 2012;CONAPO, 2010a).

The diversification of the sugarcane agribusiness has been suggested as a strategy to increase profitability.However, according to Aguilar-Rivera (2012), such diversification could affect the supply of sugar and its market price due to competition for raw material (sugarcane) through simple fluctuation in supply and demand.Due to conflicts of interest, lack of strategic planning, dialogue, and consultation between the groups involved, diversification of this agribusiness has been only in political discourse.As such, alcohol production, for example, has fallen by roughly 80%, from 67 thousand liters of ethanol to only 14 thousand in the last decade, with only three refineries operating distilleries since 2010 (Secretaría de Economía, 2012).

Rather than relying on efficient and sustainable use of resources for production, sugarcane field dynamics respond to increases in harvested area, with a slight tendency for increases in yields.This behavior is a consequence of an unfavorable ratio between primary producers and the industry, as well as excessive government regulation that discourages competitiveness in the fields and factories.In addition, imports of high fructose corn syrup (HFCS) and other non-caloric sweeteners produced by high technology compete and displace domestic sugar production (Aguilar- Rivera et al., 2012;Secretaría de Economía, 2012).Indeed, in 2013, Mexico imported nearly 1300 thousand tons of HFCS from the USA (USDA, 2014), and the domestic market for this sweetener increases annually.In a recent study, Goran, Ulijaszek, and Ventura (2013) reported that countries with higher availability of HFCS have higher prevalence of type 2 diabetes.As in Mexico, there is a high prevalence of diabetes (14%), which is the leading cause of death in women and second in men (Sosa-Rubí, Galárraga, & López-Ridaura, 2009); HFCS poses a serious public health problem that must be properly managed.

Another socioeconomic factor determining the behavior of the system is land tenure.Of the total acreage devoted to this crop, 76.3% occurs in areas of 5 ha or less in suburbs and rural communities, while 18.8% is distributed in areas between 5.1 and 10 ha, and only 4.9% occurs in areas larger than 10 ha (Secretaría de Economía, 2012;INEGI, 2012).According to Pérez-Zamorano (2007) and Singelmann (2003), sugarcane small-holders and common lands, locally known as ejidos, and other socio-political phenomena in the field act as brakes on the sugar industry, separating land and capital, the two most important factors in terms of production agriculture and social welfare.Strategies such as digitizing sugarcane fields to improve agricultural precision have been undertaken by SAGARPA under the National Program for the Sugarcane Agroindustry (Programa Nacional de la Agroindustria de la Caña de Azúcar, PRONAC) and have provided important technological tools, but a joint effort to comprehensively address the multifaceted problems affecting this value-chain is still required, particularly in terms of land tenure and small-holders.


Environmental Factors

In Mexico, sugarcane production systems are located along the coasts of the Pacific Ocean and the Gulf of Mexico, in valleys of the Altiplano (high plateau), to southern Quintana Roo, where climates are varied.Historical records show 90% of the minimum monthly temperatures in sugarcane areas range from 10°C to 20°C from November to March.In contrast, the average monthly maximum temperature lies between 20°C and 30°C from December to February, increasing to more than 30°C between April and September (COLPOS, 2008;CONADESUDA, 2012).

Regarding irrigation, production is distributed with 62% in rainfed areas and the remaining 38% in irrigated areas (CONADESUCA, 2011a), with the average water consumption varying from 5.48 to 6.84 mm per day, which equates to 2000-2500 mm of rainfall per year.According to Moyer (2010), Mexico is the second-most vulnerable country to the effects of global climate change, with agricultural production possibly decreasing by more than 25% by 2080 if the country does not develop efficient strategies to adapt to this phenomenon.Growth in irrigation infrastructure is therefore critical to the success of this activity, as sugarcane cultivation is one of the most demanding for water and fertilizer.Advances in biotechnology, nanotechnology and precision agriculture are also required and Mexican institutions are making good progress in this regard.

Land for sugarcane production in Mexico has physical and chemical characteristics generally suitable for cultivation (COLPOS, 2008).Soils in cultivated areas are mainly classified as eutric fluvisol, vertisol eutric, cambisol endogleyic, eutric and chromic rendzic, and luvisol leptosol gleyic (Palma-López, 2009).The variation of some physical and chemical soil indicators are shown in Appendix A Table S1, which have direct or indirect relationships with the water catchment areas (rain and water storage capacity of the soil) (COLPOS, 2008).

Approximately 70% of the soils in sugarcane cultivation areas have nitrogen concentrations between 10 and 20 kg ha -1 , thus requiring the application of nitrogen fertilizers, 27.2% have phosphorous concentrations above 30 kg ha -1 , and 74% show potassium content higher than 160 kg ha -1 .Most of the soils dedicated to sugarcane cultivation (68.3%) show calcium levels between 2500 and 10 000 kg ha -1 , whereas magnesium ranges from 500 to over 1000 kg ha -1 on 65% of sugarcane land (detailed information in Appendix A Table S2) (COLPOS, 2008).Concentrations of the micro-nutrients Fe and Mn are high in most cases, even in areas with alkaline and calcareous conditions.Copper concentrations are mostly between 0.5 and 3 mg kg -1 of soil, while zinc is most often found in concentrations below 1 mg kg -1 of soil (COLPOS, 2008) (detailed information in Appendix A Table S3).

The general climate and soil characteristics in sugarcane producing areas indicate that conditions are favorable for crop development, and permit the identification of advantages and limitations (see Appendix A Table S4 for details).These data are crucial for making predictions about development, adaptability and crop production, as well as looking for new farmland.A projection for the areas with the greatest potential for expansion of sugarcane cultivation in Mexico shows that the current area devoted to this crop could grow to 5 million ha (with approximately 500 thousand ha showing high potential and 4.5 million ha with average potential) (SAGARPA, 2009).


Agronomic Factors

The National Program for High Sugarcane Profitability (Programa Nacional para la Alta Rentabilidad de la Caña de Azúcar, PRONAR, 2009) estimates that the low average productivity obtained over the last decade is due to a scarce use of emerging technology for water and soil analysis, as well as an inefficient soil management program, the lack of an effective national program for the generation and use of new varieties (efforts are made independently by each refinery), the absence of certified seed production systems, no national program coordinating the management and control of diseases, pests and weeds, and harvest management without quality controls.In addition, sugarcane in Mexico is grown in seven-year cycles, and the area planted is composed of 13% new plantings (1.5 years in age), 15% ratoons called soca (second crop from the same planting at 2.5 years old) and 72% of the ratoons known as resoca (third crop from the first planting, > 2.5 years of age) (Aguilar- Rivera et al., 2012), implying lower productivity for older plantations.Faced with this problem, the objective of PRONAR ( 2009) is to increase the profitability and competitiveness of Mexican sugarcane fields using the following ten steps: 1. Empowerment of farmers and smallholders; 2. Diagnoses limiting factors (water and soil); 3. Systematize tillage and soil preparation; 4. Schedule date and densities for seeding; 5. Select adequate seeds and varieties; 6. Apply balanced fertilization; 7. Manage water and wastewater properly; 8. Integrated management of pests and weeds; 9. Prepare systems for harvesting; and 10.Increase the capacity for mechanized harvesting.Although much to date has yet to be improved, PRONAR has facilitated the growth of production and productivity of sugarcane from its inception, as reflected in field and refinery yields.


Pest Management

The most important pests of sugarcane in Mexico are grass spittlebugs (various genera), stem-borers (various genera) and cane rats (various genera), which are distributed in all sugarcane cultivation areas (Flores, 2007).Spittlebugs cause losses ranging between 5 and 20 t ha -1 (CNPR, 2004).Methods of control include biological with the application of the fungus Metarhizium anisopliae, preparatory soil tillage, and chemical control (Toriello et al., 2008).

Regarding stem-borers, it is estimated that for every 1% increase in pest intensity, sugar losses are 5.8 kg ha -1 and with a decrease of 2 to 50% in yield (Aday, Barroso, & Izquierdo, 2003;Arredondo-Bernal & Rodríguez del Bosque, 2008), which also increases the incidence of fungal infections and contamination of juice (Hernández-Velázquez, Lina-García, Obregón-Barboza, Trejo-Loyo, & Peña-Chora, 2012).Integrated control of this pest consists of eliminating hosts in cultivation fields, preparatory soil tillage, and reducing insecticide use (Sánchez, 2005).Biological control includes the use of parasitoids and predators as natural enemies, such as: Trichogramma atopovirilia, Chelonus sonorensis, Apanteles diatrea, Cotesia flavipes and Billaea claripalpis (formerly Paratheresia claripalpis).As well, applications of the fungi Metarhizium anisopliae and Beauveria bassiana have been successful in managing pest populations (Arredondo-Bernal & Rodríguez del Bosque, 2008).

Cane rats are the most destructive pests of sugarcane plantations in the country, attacking approximately 30% of the cultivated area (Flores, 2007;CONADESUCA, 2013;Vásquez-López, Lorenzo-Monterrubio, & Bolaños-Citalan, 2013).It has been estimated that for every 1% of affected stems there is a reduction of 500 kg ha -1 of cane sugar.Additionally, there is an estimated loss of 2.2 kg per metric ton of sugar in the refineries for every 1% increase in damage intensity (Márquez, 2002;Flores, 2007).Methods of rodent control include cultural (based on modifying cane rat habitat using simple practices of weed control plots, dikes and irrigation canals) and biological, using birds of prey such as Accipiter spp., Buteo spp., Aquila chrysaetos, and snakes such as Boa constrictor, Conopsis spp., and Crotalus spp., achieving a 50% reduction in damage (Cervantes & Ballesteros-Barrera, 2012;Vásquez-López et al., 2013).

The primary pests, parasitoids and predators of insects in Mexican sugarcane cultivation are listed in Appendix A Table S5, while plant protection products authorized for control appear in Appendix A Table S8.


Disease Management

In Mexico, 55 plant diseases have been reported, 22 from parasites and 33 from non-parasites (Chinea-Martín & Milanés-Ramos, 2006).Among the most important diseases are rust, smut, mosaic and scald (CONADESUCA, 2011b).In addition to the genetic resistance provided by sugarcane varieties, use of pathogen-free seed has been implemented to prevent the spread of diseases.Heat treatments and tissue culture are disinfection methods that ensure plant health and seed cane.Although disease control in commercial sugarcane fields in Mexico is not a common practice, with the recent detection of orange rust [Puccinia kuehnii (W.Krüger) E. J. Butler] in the country, the National Service of Health, Food Safety and Quality (Servicio Nacional de Sanidad, Inocuidad y Calidad Agroalimentaria, SENASICA) has registered various fungal control products (SENASICA, 2011) (Rebollar-Alviter, Sánchez-Pale, & Silva-Rojas, 2012).The major diseases of sugarcane in Mexico are listed in Appendix A Table S6.


Weed Management

Control of unwanted vegetation or weeds is an essential practice in the early stages of sugarcane development, because if not controlled in a timely fashion, they can cause losses in crop productivity between 10 and 84% (Cruz, 2009).The most harmful weed species belong to the families Poaceae and Cyperaceae (order Poales), but species of the genus Ipomoea spp.(order Solanales; family Convolvulaceae) also interfere with sugarcane plant development (CONABIO, 2012).The use of herbicides (chemical control) is the most common form of weed control in most cultivation areas around the world.In Mexico, the most widely used herbicides are ametrine and diuron, which are recommended for postemergence application and have a residuality of one to two months, depending on moisture and soil type (Esqueda, 1999).A list of major weeds found in sugarcane cultivation areas in Mexico appears in Appendix A Table S7, whereas authorized control products that are registered with SENASICA (SENASICA, 2011) and permitted for use in the cultivation of sugarcane in Mexico are listed in Appendix A Table S8.The use of different organisms and natural active substances for the management and control of sugarcane pests are also being investigated (Arredondo-Bernal & Rodríguez del Bosque, 2008;CONABIO, 2012;Salgado-García et al., 2013).


Structure of the Mexican Sugar Agribusiness System

The Mexican sugarcane production system is a mosaic of cultural, social, political, economic, technical and educational factors that limit and slow rural development and industrial sugarcane production.To solve this problem, it is necessary to begin with the primary sector, the field, which is characterized by low income and yield per unit of production; poor agronomic practices; small cultivation areas (3 ha per producer on average); resistance to technological change because of cultural values and beliefs; complex social relationships; lack of enforcement of regulations and phytosanitary protocols; and organizational structures that maintain the damaging cycle of low production -low income -poverty -social, economic, environmental and political marginalization (Aguilar- Rivera, 2013).A recent analysis, however, shows that there are three determinants of sugarcane productivity: field performance and agribusiness, credit and irrigation, which contrast with the prioritization of needs for research-development-innovation that producers have been proposing: generation of new varieties, pest and disease control (CONADESUCA, 2013).

Currently there is a certain dynamic of transformation and modernization, not only to make this activity more productive, but also to address the challenges of climate change and globalization, including the use of new technologies, machinery and modern equipment, and considering environmental, employment and social sustainability indicators as well.However, these initiatives are erratic and inconsistent over time, restricting the consolidation of global competitiveness of the agribusiness system, which in terms of creating value is the second largest in the country, just after the maize value-chain (Aguilar- Rivera et al., 2012).

In terms of operational structure, the 55 sugar refineries currently operating in Mexico belong to 14 industrial groups, while six refineries are independent (for details see Appendix A Table S9) (MAM, 2013).Of the total, 76% of the sugar is in the hands of private business, while the remaining 24% is under federal control.Sugar productivity is highly variable and generally uncompetitive.For example, in the last harvest (2012/2013) the average supply ranged from 53.8 t ha -1 in Aszuremex Tenosique (Tabasco) to 125.8 t ha -1 in Tamazula (Jalisco), yielding a national average of 78.7 t ha -1 .In the previous harvest (2011/2012), the lowest yield was 35.9 t ha -1 from the refinery in Alianza Popular (San Luis Potosí) and the highest was 121.4 t ha -1 from Atencingo (Puebla), yielding a national average of 65.8 t ha -1 (CONADESICA, 2012, 2013) (a detailed analysis of the past 30 years is discussed later).This dichotomy between low and high productivity is due to differences in the size and capacity of the refineries, refinery age and level of technology, with a predominance of medium and small refineries, having an average age of 77 years, with obsolete and inefficient technologies, which increase production costs and decrease productivity.In addition, this value-chain is facing serious problems from environmental impact and is being severely criticized because it occupies large tracts of fertile land that could be used for the production of basic grains, accelerates deforestation and land degradation, forms implicit monocultures, contaminates or pollutes soils, surface and groundwater and air through the indiscriminate use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, molasses, other waste products and the burning of cane fields prior to harvest (Aguilar- Rivera et al., 2012).Also common in this system are low seasonal wages, excessive working hours under deplorable conditions, and the employment of children and women in risky work.In fact, in Mexico there is no systematized project that has had sufficient time to develop human capacity at any stage of the value-chain.On average, 71% of the rural producers have only a basic education (six years of primary school) and 18% cannot read or write (Aguilar- Rivera et al., 2011), which further hinders constructive change.


Legislation and Organizations in the Mexican Sugar Industry

The legal framework supporting and regulating the sugar industry in Mexico is complex and extensive, and consists of the following contracts, laws and agreements: Ley de Desarrollo Rural Sustentable, Ley de Desarrollo Sustentable de la Caña de Azúcar, Programa Nacional de la Agroindustria Cañera 2007-2012, Ley de Promoción y Desarrollo de los Bioenergéticos, Ley para el Aprovechamiento de Energías Renovables y el Financiamiento de la Transición Energética, Contrato Ley de la Agroindustria Azucarera y Alcoholera, Ley del Seguro Social, Ley Federal del Trabajo and international free commerce (Blackaller, 2011).Derivatives of the Ley de Desarrollo Sustentable de la Caña de Azúcar (LDSCA, 2005), the National Program for the Sugarcane Agroindustry (PRONAC, 2007) and the Acuerdo para la Modernización de la Agroindustria de la Caña de Azúcar are intended to provide greater certainty for this national industry for the buying and selling, planting, cultivating, harvesting, delivering and receiving of sugarcane (Blackaller, 2011;CONADESUCA, 2013).

Sugar industry organizations perform specific functions that benefit this value-chain, and include: CONADESUCA, CNIAA, the National Association of Sugar Companies (Asociación Nacional de Empresas Azucareras, A.C., ANEA), the Mexican Association of Sugar Technicians (Asociación de Técnicos Azucareros de México, A.C., ATAM), the Mexican Union of Sugarcane Workers (Sindicato de Trabajadores de la Industria Azucarera y Similares de la República Mexicana, STIASRM), CNPR, the National Union of Sugarcane Growers (Unión Nacional de Cañeros, UNC), the National Union of Sugarcane Producers (Unión Nacional de Productores de Caña de Azúcar, UNPCA), and the Mexican Regional Workers Confederation (Confederación Regional Obrera Mexicana, CROM).


Agricultural Insurance for Sugarcane in Mexico

As a consequence of climate change, drought in Mexico causes 80% of the agricultural losses, while severe weather (e.g.storms, cyclones and hurricanes) contribute 18% of the damage (AGROASEMEX, 2006).In 2012, nearly 12 million hectares of national agriculture (54% of the cultivated area in the country) benefited from some form of insurance (SIAP, 2013).In Mexico, 80% of the insurance is concentrated on only four crops: corn, sorghum, wheat and sugarcane, and of this amount, 76.4% are operated by government insurance funds and 23.6% by private insurers.

Insurance for sugarcane represents 14% of the total agricultural area secured in Mexico, and 91.2% of the insurance is provided by private companies (AGROASEMEX, 2013).The 14 thousand hectares of sugarcane affected each year represent losses of 15.1 million dollars annually (Rivera, 2012).Currently, of the more than 780 000 ha planted with sugarcane in Mexico, 321 000 ha are insured, which represents 41% of the total area planted with sugarcane (AGROASEMEX, 2013).


Historical Productivity of Sugarcane and Sugar in Mexico

The Mexican sugar industry has had irregular development over the last thirty years, and the number of refineries has declined from 67 in 1980 to 55 at the close of 2013.In contrast, during this same period , the area planted increased by 39%, productivity of supply areas grew by 17%, factory efficiency improved by 19%, and sugar production grew by 62% (Figures 3, 4).The relative gains were due to factors related with government subsidies (8% of the total national agricultural subsidies), and some recent efforts to increase productivity through     2013) described the constraints on factor conditions including the high rainfed sugarcane producing areas (more than 60% of the total), migration and low-qualified labor market, an extraordinarily low R+D+I investment percentage compared with other countries, pre-harvest burning and air pollution, stagnating low sugarcane and sucrose yields, high production costs, byproduct production is not included in the final value of the industry as a whole, and the value-chain is concentrated only on three main products: sucrose, molasses and bagasse.Demand conditions limiting elements encompass a primary domestic market of sugar (75% of the sugar produced inland is consumed domestically), byproducts are not industrialized, a dramatic reduction of ethanol production (78.4%), while HFCS imports are significantly increasing.Concerning related and supporting industries, fewer refineries have certified processes, sugar production relies upon a few varieties, byproducts are not efficiently commercialized, ethanol and energy cogeneration are limited, and networks for R+D+I are lacking.As for the strategy, structure and rivalry, the private sector operates 76% of the refineries and the remaining 24% is operated by the government via the Fund of Expropriated Companies from the Sugar Sector (Fideicomiso para la Expropiación de Empresas del sector Azucarero, FEESA), the market is more focused on the offer instead of demand, product differentiation is scarce, and there is a general weakness of the system because of the lack of international competitiveness (the economic health of the system depends on domestic consumption and prices).The government controls the system by regulating prices of raw material and sugar, but has not created a good environment to make the sector competitive and an efficient infrastructure is lacking.Furthermore, the international crisis has not served as a catalyzer for the industry, whereas the country has no diversification programs and new niche markets are not well-designed.

One of the first guidelines for improving the competitiveness of the sugarcane value-chain is to increase human capacity through the development of knowledge and skills for all actors involved, but mainly for primary producers and field technicians.The latter should be continual and consolidate the management training program for information and communication technologies (ICT) for which SAGARPA began in 2008, but has not continued.

While Mexico has the capacity to increase up to seven times the area for sugarcane harvesting (from the current 800 000 to 5 million ha), this growth must be accompanied by good planning for the raw material (food, bioenergy, chemical industry), because refineries have not been modernized and the number of distilleries for ethanol has decreased significantly.The greatest potential for such growth is in the states of Chiapas, Jalisco, Morelos and Puebla, while refineries in the states of Campeche, Tabasco and San Luis Potosí would have to redesign their operations due to their lower productivity associated with agronomic-technical, environmental and socioeconomic limitations.

Analyses of the last production cycles (2000 to date) show that field performance has been irregular and, with the exception of the last harvest (2012/2013), the indicator has been declining.Points to address in this respect are associated with the limiting factors already described for the field, but also the possibility of increasing industry competitiveness using different strategies that involve increased performance in the field and refineries for access to credit and surface irrigation.Providing basic products, co-products, byproducts and derivatives for industries as varied as food, health, agriculture, chemistry, energy, transportation, housing and construction, are alternatives that have yet to be analyzed by decision-makers, producers, industries, scientists and academics, in order to take advantage of opportunities involving economic liberalization and industrial growth of the country.

Because internal situations cause lags in the field and refineries and low investment in R+D+I, it is necessary to rethink policies and strategies to improve the current system and successfully develop skills and potentials.Generation of domestic technologies, sustainable development of production processes and social responsibility, implementation of communication and information technologies, nanoscience and biotechnology and studies of domestic and global markets, are some of the suggested guidelines for achieving these tasks.Currently, Mexico has the capacity to develop projects for genome and metagenome sequencing, which opens up great possibilities for promoting development of this value-chain.

Thus, the new sugarcane production system in Mexico should be approached using holistic, inter-and transdisciplinary methods.The development of teams with complementary skills and knowledge (producers, industry, policy-makers, scientists and academics from different disciplines) will be critical for the success of these strategies.In work schedules, it will be necessary to develop educational programs, increase human development and knowledge management in the first hierarchical level, primarily for the less-educated producers so that it acts as a trigger for change in the management process.From there, and in accordance with PRONAR, it will be necessary to continue with technical aspects such as the diagnoses of soil conditions and limiting climatic factors; tillage and conservation of soil and water; dates and densities of planting; generation and selection of varieties and the production of adequate seed; proper management of crop nutrition (fertilization); integrated management of diseases, pests and weeds; as well as mechanized and green harvesting.A similar work schedule could be applied in the refineries, so that process management innovations are completed, including technological, organizational and commercial forms.


Conclusions

Sugarcane is a crop with great potential for growth in Mexico because of its potential to achieve more than 800 t ha -1 of fresh matter, compared to a current average value of 70 t ha -1 .Projections for land use predict that sugarcane cultivation in the country could expand to 5 million hectares.

Mexico has important scientific infrastructure, but it is not sufficient to meet the demands of many branches of the industry, so it will be necessary to increase public and private investments which are currently scarce and irregular.Among the priority issues to address is capacity-building for all actors involved in the value-chain, but primarily for producers with lower educational levels, and to continue to work on strengthening programs that generate new varieties (broadening the genetic base) capable of producing even under adverse conditions from climate change, improving agronomic practices for water management and crop nutrition (balanced fertilization based on studies of plant needs), expanding the system of recruitment and use of water and irrigation, continuing the search for sustainable strategies for the integrated management of disease-causing pathogens, pests and weeds, increasing mechanized and green harvesting, improving distribution from the supply areas to make more efficient use of transportation and fuel and of advances in information and communication, including, if possible, improvements in process automation.The diversification of the value-chain is an alternative that could increase the profitability of this activity, but it must be implemented using efficient planning and negotiation with the actors involved.To increase yields in fields and refineries, increased access to credit and irrigation infrastructure are critical.Concerning factor conditions, generation of new varieties, increases in productivity (both in cane and sucrose), diminishing production costs, sustainable and efficient use of water, green harvest, recycle of agricultural residues, digitizing sugarcane fields to improve agricultural precision, and converting conventional sugarcane mills into biorefineries to produce many value-added products such as glycerol, bioethanol, inositol, carbon dioxide, and succinic acid, would be among the actions to be implemented in order to improve the national sugarcane value-chain competitiveness.As for demand conditions, self-sufficiency for both sucrose and ethanol, diversification of white and brown sugars, using bagasse to fuel and cogenerate steam and electricity, carbon sequestration and carbon credits for clean development mechanisms, animal feed and supplements, high-value niche markets with a variety of novel products, and organic soil amendments need also to be approached.Furthermore, inputs, machinery, technology and services, energy and other sales of byproducts, inter-industry cooperation at national and international scales, as well as logistic operations must be taken into consideration in relation to similar and supporting industries.Finally, regarding firm strategy, structure and rivalry, the Mexican sugarcane production system must consider human resources to further education and technical training, technical assistance, process certification, wastewater treatment, integration and company management, farmer organization and prospective analyses, which are the primary actions to be carried out in order to reach competitiveness expectations.As well, by recognizing the importance of development of adequate infrastructure for sustaining growth and to ensure inclusiveness of the growth process, the government will continue to play a lead role in infrastructure development, as well as in legislation, establishment of new biorefineries, free trade agreements, competitive environments, R+D+I, regional clusters and access to information.Last, the Mexican sugarcane agro-industrial system has opportunities related to geographical location, emergence of new markets, bioenergy needs and a growing trend of cooperative relationships between private companies and universities.

The sugarcane value-chain is the second largest in the country, and is strategic in the generation of jobs, alternative energy, and substrates for other industries such as pharmaceutical, sucrochemistry and new approaches such as novel bio-factories.In order to make the Mexican sugarcane system a globally competitive one, the current crisis in this value-chain demands considerable effort from all stakeholders, including education and human development, while considering current and future technological advances.

Figure

Figure 1.M tons, while for the la wher




Figure 3.


Figure

Figure 4. S


Figure

Figure




4. S
net.org/jas www.ccsen net.org/jas net.org/jas www.ccsenJournal of A Agricultural Sci ience Journal of A Agricultural Sci ience Journal of A ienceVol. 6, No. 4; Vol. 6, No. 4;2014 2014 2014r training, digi itization and sy ystematizationof processes, a and moderniza ation of the pro oduction equip mentt 40% of the re efineries and th heir supply are eas.Figure 5 5. Government t funds destined for sugarcan ne research in M Mexico during g 2003-2013 (S Sources: CIDC CA,2013;SNITT, 2013) )In Mexico o, less than 1% % of the sugarc cane cultivation area is dedic cated to scient tific experimen ntation and the ere isonly one b breeding progr ram with very y uncertain eco onomic resour rces (Quintero o-Núñez, 2012 2). This progra am isTotal sugarca ane production by governme ent and produ ucers through and surface ar M rea planted dur ring the last th hree decades in n Mexico (Sou CONADESEC CA, which em mphasizes the main prioritie es of rce: n and technolog supported innovation gy transfer as: generation of new varieties, management and control of f pests and dise eases, AM, 2013) and agricu ultural compo onents of tech hnology in irr rigation and f fertilization ac ccording to th he demand o f theCommittee e for Sugarc ane Productio on and Quality (Comitésde Producción y Calidad d Cañera, CP PCC)(CONADE ESUCA, 2011b b). This priorit tization, howe ever, does not a attend to impo ortant issues su uch as adaptati on toclimate ch hange and effi ficient water u use, topics ofprimary impo ortance to Mexico due to th he vulnerabili ty ofagricultura al regions (Mo oyer, 2010).Importantl ly, in 2013, the e federal govern rnment, through h SAGARPA,approved an e emergency program in the am mountof $115 m million dollarsfor sugarcane e production, w whose objectiv ve is to enhan nce sugarcaneproductivity in n thecountry (B Blackaller, 2013).9. Genetic c Improvemen nt of Sugarcan ne in Mexico Figure 6. C Coordination o of the breeding g and selection n program for s sugarcane varie eties in Mexico. CIDCA con ntainsThe sugarc cane genetic im mprovement pr rogram represe ents a coordina ated effort amo ong eleven Reg gional Experim mental many Regi ional Experim mental Centers ( (Centros Exper rimentales Reg gionales, CER Rs) and each CE ER serves a nu mberStations (C Campos Exper rimentales Reg gionales, CERs s), as well as q quarantine and of su ugar refinerieshybridizationstations (Figur re 6).The Hybri idization Statio on is located in n Tapachula, C Chiapas (housed within CIDC CA), whose geographical loc ationprovides e excellent natur ral conditions t to obtain Fuzz z (seeds) of hig gh quality and d viability. The ere is a germp plasmbank hous sing 2768 varie eties, of which h 250 are class sified by sex a and can be fou und in the Plan nt Breeding C enter The select tion process co onsists of the f following phas ses: seedling, row, stump, p lot, Multiplica ation I, adaptab bilitySugarcane prod duction in the Nacional C Cuarentenaria de la Caña de fields and fact tories during th e Azúcar, ENC CCA) is locate ed in Tizimín, 1983; Flor res, 2001). 2013) he last three de ecades in Mexi Yucatán, whe ere genetic ma terial ico (Source: M (Banco de e Cruzamientos s), crosses whi ich are conduc cted every yea ar for different t agroecologica al zones in Me exico test, Multi iplication II, agroindustrial evaluation, M Multiplication III, semi-com mmercial and seed testing. This MAM, and for in nternational c ommitments ( (CIDCA, 201 3). The Natio onal Sugarcan ne Quarantine Station (Esta ación process ma akes available e one to four v arieties every 14-16 years (f for details see Appendix A T Table S10) (IM MPA,Despite th modest. Fo 2011/2012 Peru, yield largely on 8. Govern his upward tren or example, wh 2 and 2012/201 ds exceeded 10 government su nment Suppor nd in absolute hile in Mexico 13) was 70.2 t 00 t ha -1 (Secre ubsidies and in rt for Sugarca e terms, and a o the average f t ha -1 , in other etaría de Econo ncreased plant accounting for field harvest du Latin America omía, 2012). A tings, rather th r figures, impr uring the last t an countries su As for Mexico an in process e roved producti three harvest p uch as Guatem , these increas ivity indicator periods (2010/2 mala, Colombia es have been b received fr rom other coun ntries is evalua ated for 18 mon nths to confirm m that it is not c contaminated. This clean ma terial 9.1 Curren nt Developmen nts in Genetic I Improvement o of Sugarcane i in Mexico rs are 2011, is sent to d that presen different CERs nt outstanding s in the country characteristics y and to CIDCA s as parent stoc A. The CIDCA ck to continue A Germplasm B the hybridizat Bank enters on tion program ( nly those genot types Since 1952 2, the work per rformed in the Hybridization Station in CID DCA has allow wed for the relea ase of 150 Mex xican Flores, 2012). varieties, w which occupy 55% of the sow wn area in the e country; the r remaining 45% % is planted wi ith foreign vari ieties a and from the N National Progr ram for Excha ange and Impo ort of Sugarca ane Varieties m maintained by y CNIAA (CID DCA, based 2013). The e best perform ming Mexican v varieties are: M Mex 69-290, M Mex 79-431, I TV 92-1424, M Mex 68-P-23, Mex efficiency. 57-473, AT TEMEX 96-40 0, Mex 69-749 , Mex 68-1345 5, Mex 55-32, M Mex 73-1240 and Mex 80-14 410, while the most ane Research important foreign varieti ies are: CP 72-2086, RD 75-1 11, My 55-14, NCo 310, SP 7 70-1284, Co 99 97, L 60-14 an nd CPThe techno ology used in t the fields and r refineries is mo ostly provided d by other coun ntries, and inve estment in scien ntific 44-101 (M MAM, 2013). T Thanks to the genetic impro vement progra am, sugarcane production an nd productivity y hasresearch, t technological d development a and innovation n (R+D+I) is s sparse and erra atic because M Mexico spends been incre easing and it i s estimated th hat yields have e grown annua ally by 0.4%. However, com mpared to theonly yield0.49% of increases i in Brazil, whic its GDP on R+D+I, with h only $200 m million dollar rs invested an nnually on ag gricultural rese earch ch have reach hed 1.5% per a annum (Wacla awovsky et al. , 2010), the g ains in Mexic o are(CONACy yT, 2012; OEC CD, 2013). Pri ivate resources s for scientific c research in th his value-chain n are limited, w while modest. M Moreover, in 19 980, nine varie eties occupied d 70% of the c cultivated area a, while in 201 13 this number r wasthe govern nment only in t the last three y years (2011-20 013) had a spik ke of $14.4 mi illion dollars, a and a total of $ $20.8 reduced to o three varieties s (Mex 69-290 0, Mex 79-431 and CP 72-20 086) that occup py the same per rcentage of acr reagemillion do ollars allocated d between 2003 3 and 2013 (Fi gure 5). (Figure 7). . This indicate s that the impr rovement prog ram in the cou untry needs to e expand its gen netic base, give en thetendency t toward greaterhomogeneity o of the material ls that make the system vulne erable to abioti ic and biotic fa actors(Alejandre e-Rosas, Galin ndo-Tovar, &Lee-Espinoza a, 2010; Gonz zález-Jiménez,Valdez-Baler ro, Gómez-Me erino,Silva-Roja as, Pérez-Flore es, & Ortiz-Ga arcía, 2011).34 35

Table S4 .
S4
Primary climate and soil characteristics of the six sugarcane production regions in Mexico
Liomys pictus ThomasRodentia: HeteromyidaeRat (Rata cañera)Region Orthogeomys hispidus Le Conte StatePredominant Climate Rodentia: GeomyidaeMean Annual Temperature Pocket gopher (Tuza)Predominant SoilsO. grandis ThomasRodentia: Geomyidaeand Precipitation Pocket gopher (Tuza)Northwest Sinaloa Crathogeomys merriami merriami Hot sub-humid: 48% Dry and semi-arid: 40% Very arid: 10% Temperate sub-humid: 2% Rodentia: Geomyidae Mean: 25 °C Pocket gopher (Tuza) Thomas Maximum: 36 °C Predators Minimum: 10.5 °C Coleomegilla maculata De Geer Coleoptera: Coccinellidae Ladybird beetles (Catarina) Cambisol Calcic kastanozem Phaeozem Regosol Precipitation: 790 mm Vertisol Castolus plagiaticollis Stol Hemiptera: Reduviidae Predatory bugs (Chinches predadoras)ParasitoidsHumic acrisolLixophaga diatraeae TownsendDiptera: TachinidaeHortic acrisol Cuban fly (Mosca cubana)Metagonistylum minenseDiptera: TachinidaeHumic andosol Amazon fly (Mosca amazónica)Nayarit Paratheresia claripalpis Van der Hot sub-humid: 91.5% Temperate sub-humid: 6% Dry and semi-arid: 2% Hot humid: 0.5 Townsend Diptera: Tachinidae Wulp Palpozenillia palpalis Aldrich Diptera: Tachinidae Trichogramma pretiosum Riley Hymenoptera:Dystric cambisol Mexican fly (Mosca mexicana) Mean: 25 °C Maximum: 35 °C Minimum: 12 °C Eutric cambisol Humic cambisol Tachinid parasite of sugarcane (Mosca de Haplic phaeozem Tepic) Precipitation: 1100 mm Vertic gleysol Egg parasitoid (Parásitos de los huevecillos)TrichogrammatidaeChromic luvisolT. minutum RileyHymenoptera:Hortic luvisol Egg parasitoid (Parásitos de los huevecillos)TrichogrammatidaeEutric regosolTelenomus alecto CrawfordHymenoptera: ScelionidaeHumic andosol Egg parasitoid (Parásitos de los huevecillos)Iridomyrmex humilis MayrHymenoptera: FormicidaeEutric cambisol Argentine ant (Hormiga argentina)Colima Atta fervens Drury Sources: Flores (2007); Vásquez-López et al., 2013. Hot sub-humid: 86% Arid and semi-arid: 12.5% Temperate sub-humid: 1.5% Hymenoptera: Formicidae Mean: 25 °C Leafcutter ant (Hormiga defoliadora) Ferric cambisol Chromic regosol Precipitation: 900 mm Haplic luvisol Minimum: 18 °C Lithosol Maximum: 30 °C Haplic phaeozemEutric regosolPacificPellic vertisol Humic andosolChromic cambisolFerric cambisolEutric cambisolCalcaric phaeozemHaplic phaeozemFluvisolJaliscoHot sub-humid: 68% Temperate sub-humid: 18% Arid and semi-arid: 14%Mean: 20.5 °C Maximum: 23 °C Minimum: 7 °C Precipitation: 1000 mmLithosol Haplic luvisol Chromic luvisol Eutric planosol Luvic planosolChromic regosolEutric regosolCalcaric regosolDystric regosolEutric regosolChromic vertisolPellic vertisolMichoacánHot sub-humid: 54.5%Mean: 20 °CChernozem

Table S6 .
S6
Most common diseases for sugarcane cultivation in Mexico
SpeciesTypeDisease name in English (in Spanish)Cercospora longipes E. J. ButlerFungalBrow spot (Peca o mancha café)Leptosphaeria sacchari B. de HannFungalRing spot (Mancha de anillo)Bipolaris sacchari (E. J. Butler) ShoemakerFungalEye spot (Mancha de ojo)Capnodium sp.FungalSooty mould (Fumagina de la hoja)Anamorph: Fusarium moniliforme J. Sheld.Gibberella subglutinans (E. T. Edwards) P. E.FungalPokkah-boeng (Cogollo retorcido)Nelson, Toussoun & MarasasPythium spp.FungalPythium root rot (Pudrición del sistema radicular)Ceratocystis paradoxa (Dade) C. MoreauFungalPineapple disease (Enfermedad de la piña)Phaeocytostroma sacchari (Ellis & Everh.) B. SuttonFungalRind disease (Enfermedad de la corteza )Marasmius sacchari Wakker M. stenospilus MontagneFungalMarasmius basal stem, root and sheath rot (Pudrición de la base del tallo, de la raíz y de la vaina)Cephalosporium sacchari E. J. Butler = Fusarium sacchari (E. J. Butler) W. GamsFungalWilt (Marchitez)Cytospora sacchari E. J. ButlerFungalSheath rot (Pudrición de la vaina)Glomerella tucumanensis (Speg.) Arx & E. Müller = Physalospora tucumanensis Speg.FungalRed rot (Pudrición roja del tallo)Sporisorium scitamineum (Syd.) M.Piepenbr., M. Stoll & OberwFungalSmut (Carbón)Puccinia melanocephala Syd. & P. Syd.FungalRust (Roya café)P. kuehnii (W. Krüger) E.J. ButlerFungalOrange rust (Roya naranja)Acidovoraz avanea Starr & BurkholderBacterial Red stripe (Raya roja)
Vol. 6, No. 4;   
AcknowledgmentsThe authors are very much grateful to the Priority Research Line 5 "Microbial, plant and animal biotechnology" from the Colegio de Postgraduados for facilities and financial support, and to the Mexican National Council for Science and Technology (CONACYT) for the fellowship given to HESH.www.ccsenet.org/jasJournal of Agricultural Science Vol. 6, No. 4; 2014APPENDIX A Supplementary Material* Percentage values indicate the surface area having the given characteristic with regard to the total area devoted to sugarcane production in Mexico.TableS3.Concentrations of Fe, Cu, Zn and Mn from supply area soils for sugar refineries in MexicoIronCopper Zinc Manganese mg kg -1 %* mg kg -1 %* mg kg -1 %* mg kg -1 %* * Percentage values are for the surface area having the given characteristic with regard to the total area devoted to sugarcane production in Mexico.<0
Estimación de pérdidas causadas por Diatrea saccharalis (Fab.) en la provincia de Villa Clara. D O C Aday, M F Barroso, R L N Izquierdo, Cuba. Centro Agrícola. 302003

La experiencia mexicana en el desarrollo y operación de seguros paramétricos orientados a la agricultura. Agroasemex, 2006. 2013. 2013Programa del subsidio a la prima del seguro agropecuario. Informe de avance al tercer trimestre de

Paradigma de la diversificación de la agroindustria azucarera de México. N Aguilar-Rivera, 2012Convergencia Revista de Ciencias Sociales59

Análisis de productividad de etanol de caña de azúcar en ingenios azucareros de México. N Aguilar-Rivera, Ciencia Ergo Sum. 202013

N Aguilar-Rivera, L A Espinosa-López, S Herrera, A Castillo, M , A Rodríguez, L , D A , Diamante de competitividad de la agroindustria azucarera en México. 201326

N Aguilar-Rivera, G Galindo-Mendoza, J Fortanelli-Martínez, C Contreras-Servín, Factores de competitividad de la agroindustria de la caña de azúcar en México. Región y Sociedad201113

The Mexican sugarcane industry: overview, constraints, current status and long-term trends. N Aguilar-Rivera, L D A Rodríguez, R V Enríquez, M A Castillo, S A Herrera, 10.1007/s12355-012-0151-3Sugar Technology. 142012

Sugar, coproducts and byproducts on sugarcane agribusiness diversification. N Aguilar-Rivera, D A Rodríguez-Lagunes, A Castillo-Morán, 2010VirtualPro106

Variabilidad genética en 22 variedades hibridas de caña de azúcar (Saccharum spp. Híbrido). J A Alejandre-Rosas, M E Galindo-Tovar, H E Lee-Espinoza, Phyton. 792010

Asociación de universidades e instituciones de educación superior. 2012México, D. FANUIES [Asociación Nacional de Universidades e Instituciones de Educación SuperiorAnuario estadístico digital 2012

. H C Arredondo-Bernal, L A Rodríguez Del Bosque, Casos de Control Biológico en México. MundiPrensa-INIFAP. 2008

Aprueba gobierno federal mil 500 millones de pesos para paquete tecnológico de la caña de azúcar: CBA. A C Blackaller, La agroindustria mexicana de la caña de azúcar en México. 2011. 2013Unión Nacional de Cañeros, A.C

Enfermedades de la caña de azúcar en México. F A Cervantes, C Ballesteros-Barrera, A Chinea-Martín, N Milanés-Ramos, Estudios sobre la biología de roedores silvestres mexicanos. Instituto Biología-UNAM & Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana. P Ordoñez-Barahona, V Enríquez-Ruvalcaba, A Herrera-Solano, & , H Ortiz-Romero, In A. Castillo-Morán, A. Rodríguez-Lagunes, N. Milanés-Ramos, N. Aguilar-Rivera; Veracruz, México2012. 2006Universidad VeracruzanaDirección General Editorial

Resumen de producción de la agroindustria azucarera mexicana zafras. México, D. F2013. 2013. 1959. 1960-2012/2013CIDCA [Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo de la Caña de Azúcar ; Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo de la Caña de Azúcar (CIDCACámara Nacional de las Industrias Alcoholera y Azucarera

Estadísticas de la agroindustria de la caña de azúcar 2003-2012. Confederación Nacional de Productores Rurales. Unión Nacional de Cañeros. Manejo sustentable de la fertilidad del suelo y de la nutrición de la caña de azúcar. Colegio de Postgraduados. México, D. FComisión Nacional para el Conocimiento y Uso de la Biodiversidad2004. 2013. 2008. 2012Malezas de México. Comisión Nacional para el Conocimiento y Uso de la Biodiversidad

Proyecto nacional para el control de plagas y enfermedades de la caña de azúcar. Informe general del estado de la ciencia, la tecnología y la innovación. Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología. México, D. F2012. 2011a. 2011b. 2013. 2010a. 2010bCONACyT [Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología ; Comité Nacional para el Desarrollo Sustentable de la Caña de Azúcar ; Comité Nacional para el Desarrollo Sustentable de la Caña de AzúcarÍndice de marginación por localidad 2010

El manual del productor de caña de azúcar. G E Cruz, Atider, D F México, M Dal-Bianco, M Sampaio-Carneiro, C Takeshi-Hotta, L Giacomini-Chapola, H P Hoffmann, A A Franco-Garcia, G Mendes-Souza, 10.1016/j.copbio.2011.09.002Current Opinion in Biotechnology. 232009. 2012Sugarcane improvement: how far can we go?

Control de malezas en caña de azúcar con clomazone y ametrina. V A Esqueda, Agronomía Mesoamericana. 101999

Food and agricultural commodities production. Faostat, 2013

Las variedades de caña de azúcar en México. C S Flores, Editorial ATAM. 2001

Proyectos caña de azúcar: Avances y resultados 2012. C S Flores, Editorial ATAM. 2007. 2012Las plagas de la caña de azúcar en México

El contexto del sector agroalimentario en México. Cion Pdf Gómez-Merino, F C Hernández-Anguiano, A M , Líneas prioritarias de investigación. A M Hernández-A, F C Gómez, M , L M Pérez, H , J A Villanueva, J , MéxicoMontecillo2013. 2009-2011

Sugarcane as a novel biofactory: potentialities and challenges. F C Gómez-Merino, L I Trejo-Téllez, H E Sentíes-Herrera, 10.1007/978-3-319-03880-3_5Biosystems engineering: Biofactories for food production in Century XXI. R Guevara-González, I Torres-Pacheco, Cham, SwitzerlandSpringer2014

Molecular characterization of sugarcane varieties cultivated in Tabasco state. V González-Jiménez, A Valdez-Balero, F C Gómez-Merino, H V Silva-Rojas, J Pérez-Flores, C F Ortiz-García, Mexico. Biotecnología Vegetal. 112011

High fructose corn syrup and diabetes prevalence: a global perspective. M I Goran, S J Ulijaszek, E E Ventura, 10.1080/17441692.2012.736257Global Public Health. 82013

Pathogens associated with sugarcane borers, Diatraea spp. (Lepidoptera: Crambidae): a review. V M Hernández-Velázquez, L P Lina-García, V Obregón-Barboza, A G Trejo-Loyo, G Peña-Chora, 10.1155/2012/303589International Journal of Zoology. 2012. 2012

Programa de variedades. Objetivos, importancia y metodología experimental. Instituto para el Mejoramiento de la Producción Azucarera-Cámara Nacional de la Industria Azucarera y Alcoholera. México, D. F1983Instituto para el Mejoramiento de la Producción Azucarera

Atlas agropecuario de México. 2012. 2005. 2013México, D. FLey de Desarrollo Sustentable de la Caña de Azúcar. Diario Oficial de la FederaciónCensos agropecuarios. Ley de Desarrollo Sustentable de la Caña de Azúcar. Manual Azucarero Mexicano. Manual azucarero Mexicano Edición 2013. Grupos industriales y producción 2011/2012. Compañía Editora del Manual Azucarero

J M Márquez, Metodología del muestreo de daño y pérdidas ocasionadas por rata en caña de azúcar. 2002

Plan de exportación de piloncillo de la zona norte de Veracruz hacia los mercados de California y Texas. C Méndez, V Elorza, M , P Maruri, G , J M Elorza, M , O Martínez, S , C E , Revista Científica Biológico Agropecuaria Tuxpan. 12013

How much is left? A graphical accounting of the limits to what one planet can provide. M Moyer, Scientific American -Environment. 2010. September, 2010

La caña de azúcar y el clima. D J Palma-López, 10.1787/sti_scoreboard-2013-enOECD science, technology and industry scoreboard 2013. Innovation for growth. A Valdez, B , A Guerrero, P , E García, L , J J Obrador, O , Paris, France; MéxicoOECD [Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development2013. 2009Colegio de Postgraduados

The five competitive forces that shape stategy. A ; F Pérez-Zamorano, M E Porter, Tenencia de la tierra y agroindustria azucarera. Editorial Porrua. México, D2007. 200886

Programa Nacional de la Agroindustria de la Caña de Azúcar (PRONAC) 2007-2012. Cámara Nacional de las Industrias Azucarera y Alcoholera. 2007. 2009PRONAC [Programa Nacional de la Agroindustria de la Caña de AzúcarProyecto Nacional de Alta Rentabilidad para el Reordenamiento y Transformación del Campo Cañero Mexicano

Proyecto de mejoramiento genético de caña de azúcar (PMGCA). Grupo PIASA. S Quintero-Núñez, 2012

Manejo integrado de Fusarium spp. en variedades cultivadas y prometedoras de caña de azúcar. A Rebollar-Alviter, J R Sánchez-Pale, H V Silva-Rojas, CANIEM. 2012

C Rivera, Sistema Nacional de Información de la Agroindustria Azucarera. Secretaría de Agricultura, Ganadería, Desarrollo Rural, Pesca y Alimentación. Aguascalientes, México2012. 2009Secretaría de Agricultura, Ganadería, Desarrollo Rural, Pesca y Alimentación

S Salgado-García, L C Lagunes-Espinoza, R Núñez-Escobar, C F Ortiz-García, L Bucio-Alanis, E Aranda-Ibañez, Caña de azúcar. Producción sustentable. MundiPrensa-Colegio de Postgraduados. México, D. F2013

G C Sánchez, Manejo integrado de plagas de la caña de azúcar. Mosca pinta y Barrenadores2005

Cierre de la producción agrícola por cultivo 2012. Análisis de la situación económica, tecnológica y de política comercial del sector edulcorantes en México. 2012. 2011. 2012Listado de plaguicidas de uso agrícola. Última actualización enero 2011. Servicio de Información Agroailmentaria y Pesquera

Una mirada al panorama agroalimentario de México y el mundo. SIAP. 2013Servicio de Información Agroailmentaria y Pesquera

La transformación política de México y los gremios cañeros del PRI. P Singelmann, 10.2307/3541517Revista Mexicana de Sociología. 652003

Proyectos en proceso y concluidos. Sistema Nacional de Investigación y Transferencia Tecnológica para el Desarrollo Rural Sustentable. 2013SNITT [Sistema Nacional de Investigación y Transferencia de Tecnología para el Desarrollo Rural

Diabetes treatment and control: the effect of public health insurance for the poor in Mexico. S G Sosa-Rubí, O Galárraga, R López-Ridaura, Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 872009

Virulence and thermotolerance of monospore cultures of Metarhizium anisopliae var. anisopliae isolated from spittlebugs (Hemiptera: Cercopidae). C Toriello, E Montoya-Sansón, M Zavala-Ramírez, H Navarro-Barranco, D Basilio-Hernández, V Hernández-Velázquez, T Mier, Revista Mexicana de Micología. 282008

United States Department of Agriculture. Economic Reseach Service. Usda, 2014Sugar and sweeteners yearbook tables

Roedores habitantes de los agroecosistemas cañeros. I Vásquez-López, C Lorenzo-Monterrubio, J Bolaños-Citalan, Guía de campo. PROSGRAF. 2013

Sugarcane for bioenergy production: an assessment of yield and regulation of sucrose content. A J Waclawovsky, P M Sato, C G Lembke, P H Moore, G M Souza, 10.1111/j.1467-7652.2009.00491.xPlant Biotechnology Journal. 82010

Impact of heavy metals on sugarcane. D V Yadav, R Jain, R K Rai, Soil Heavy Metals-Soil Biology. I Sherameti, A Varma, Heidelberg, GermanySpringer201019

Nuestro país, sexto productor mundial de azúcar y quinto en exportaciones del dulce. Zafranet, 2013Avances en la producción de azúcar (Zafra)