A Feasibility Review for an Uneven Baseline Basis Minimal Ballast Ship
February, 2020

Hee Jin Kang 
Principal Researcher
Advanced Ship Research Division
Korea Research Institute of Ships and Ocean Engineering (KRISO)
DaejeonKorea

Kwang-Soo Kim 
Principal Researcher
Advanced Ship Research Division
Korea Research Institute of Ships and Ocean Engineering (KRISO)
DaejeonKorea

Senior Director
Advanced Ship Research Division
Korea Research Institute of Ships and Ocean Engineering (KRISO)
DaejeonKorea

Jin Choi 
Senior Researcher
Autonomous Ship Research Department
Korea Research Institute of Ships and Ocean Engineering (KRISO)
DaejeonKorea

Yeong-Yeon Lee 
Principal Researcher
Advanced Ship Research Division
Korea Research Institute of Ships and Ocean Engineering (KRISO)
DaejeonKorea

Haeseong Ahn 
Principal Researcher
Advanced Ship Research Division
Korea Research Institute of Ships and Ocean Engineering (KRISO)
DaejeonKorea

Geun-Tae Yim 
Senior Researcher
Autonomous Ship Research Department
Korea Research Institute of Ships and Ocean Engineering (KRISO)
DaejeonKorea

A Feasibility Review for an Uneven Baseline Basis Minimal Ballast Ship

Journal of Ocean Engineering and Technology
341February, 202010.26748/KSOE.2019.111Received 16 December 2019, revised 13 February 2020, accepted 14 February 2020Abbreviations Original Research Article
KEY WORDS: Uneven baseline, Ballast water management (BWM), Minimal ballast water ship (MIBS), Non ballast water ship (NOBS), ballast water treatment system (BWTS), Ship resistance performance ABSTRACT: Although there are many kinds of advanced ballast water management systems, pioneering studies for ballast-water free ship and minimal ballast water ship concepts are in progress. In this study, the existing alternatives of ballast water are reviewed and a new design concept is studied on the basis of the existing bulk carrier hull form. To develop a new design alternative which has minimal ballast for ballast water discharge free operation, the new concept should have technical feasibilities that are related to the role of the ballast water, berth access, loading constraints, etc. For this purpose, a simplified systems engineering basis design approach is adopted using a business model as the system analysis and control tool. To check the performance feasibility of the new concept, ship resistance performance is reviewed based on a model scale ship resistance performance analysis.

Introduction

Because the measures from the Ballast water management (BWM) convention are being enacted in order to reduce the environmental damage caused by the global movement of marine life in the ballast water of ships (Albert et al., 2013), the negative effect of treated ballast water on the marine environment is another urgent issue (Werschkun et al., 2014). Notably, research on non/minimal ballast water vessels is actively underway in response to the D-1 or D-2 discharge standards of the convention. When considering the role of ballast water, as shown in Table 1, the ballast water contributes to the ship's stability via proper maintenance of the draft and the center of gravity of a ship during voyage. Another aim of the ballast water is to maintain the appropriate immersion depth of the propeller for propulsion efficiency. Table 1 Roles of the ballast water in a ship (Isbester, 2010) Maintain the stability of the ship Trim and heel control Secure immersion depth of the propeller Reduction of slamming Reduction of the bending moment of the ship Relieve the shear force of the ship Ballast water is also used to adjust the trim and heel of a ship. The bending moment and shear force can also be adjusted by the ballast water.

Depending on the ship types and routes, generally, 30% to 40% of the deadweight tonnage (DWT) is used as ballast water (Kerr, 1994).

Many pioneering studies have been conducted to meet the D-1 or D-2 discharge standards of the BWM convention without needing to discharge the environmentally harmful ballast water. Table 2 shows alternatives for the BWM methods (GEF, U. and IMO, G.P., 2011).

Among the various alternatives, in the case of 'no or minimal discharge' alternatives, the minimal ballast water ship (MIBS) and

non-ballast water ship (NOBS) (Shingo, 2014) 


Feasibility Study

To design a new minimal ballast vessel, a ship must be designed that has the functions of ballast water without or with the minimum use of ballast. The perspectives of performance, ship stability, resistance, trim and heel controllability, berth access and loading constraints should be considered. Technical complexity and cost related matters are also considered to ensure technical and economic feasibility.

To compensate for the existing BWM alternatives' penalties, an appropriate approach and design process are required. In a systems engineering process, it is essential to identify, validate, and verify the various constraints of shipbuilding and operation in the design phase for the development of minimal ballast water vessel. Generally, the systems engineering basis design process involves a "system analysis and control tool", which allows for the effective management of various design entities from various viewpoints, including technical and economic feasibility (Leonard, 1999;Kang et al., 2016). In this study, the business model was used as a system analysis and control tool, which was suggested by Kang et al. (2016). The business model consists of six elements: the design of a new concept for a minimal ballast vessel (Task); the required value of the enhanced berth access and loading capability compared to the existing 'MIBS' (Value); the expected revenue of the designed concept, such as a decrease in the ecosystem disturbance (meeting D-2) and the reasonable hull build cost (Revenue); the available and considered infrastructure, such as port facilities, ships in operation, rules and regulations, ship yards (Infra); the channels to enable the design concepts, such as technical and economic feasibilities (Channel); and the stakeholders of the task, including ship owners, ship builders, port authorities, classification societies, and fishing industries (Stakeholder). The factors considered in this study are shown in Table 3.

By adopting a business model for the systems analysis and a control tool for the design process, the ISO/IEC 15288-based 'Vee' design process was adopted and modified, as shown in Fig 


Requirement analysis

To achieve this goal, eight requirements were derived, as shown in 


Functional analysis and allocation

Each requirement should be functionalized for the new minimal ballast ship design. To functionalize the requirements R1-R5 in Table   4, technologies pertaining to fluid performance are required. R6 and R7 are the requirements related to the structural strength, and R8

requires the ship be able to be adapted to existing harbor facilities. The functions to accommodate each requirement are listed in Table 6, including all the identified requirements.


Synthesis

In the synthesis process, the design alternatives shall be generated to implement the functions in Table 6 Table 6, a fixed type uneven baseline hull form (modified) has been generated on the basis of an existing 176K bulk carrier hull form (original). Fig. 3 shows the body plan of an uneven baseline minimal ballast bulk carrier.  For F4, in the hull form modification process the applicability of the hull form to the existing rules and regulations is considered.

The provisional specifications of the designed ship are described in    a hull model is generated, as described in Table 9.

Regarding the ship's stability performance, the designed uneven baseline hull form has a larger righting arm compared to the original hull form, as shown in Fig. 4.  Table 10, understanding the simulation of the flow around the ship helps in generating an accurate grid arrangement. The grid includes the free surface area with a total of 3.6M grid points for the half domain, which is equivalent to the medium size grid in a previous study (Kim et al., 2011). Starting from the initial graphics exchange specification (IGES) description of the 'original' and 'modified' hull forms, the commercial program GRIDGEN (Pointwise, Inc.) was used to generate the H-O type multiblock structured grid systems. In the CFD simulation in this study, the free surface was captured using the level-set method, while for the turbulence closure, the Explicit algebraic reynolds stress model (EARSM) was used with Launder and Spalding's wall function. The details of the numerical methods used can be found in Kim et al. (2011), Kim et al. (2014).

From the numerical resistance test, as shown in Table 11, the effective horsepower (EHP) was predicted to increase from 1.5 to 2.0%, depending on the speed of the bulk carrier, compared to the existing 176K bulk carrier. From the information on the differences between the predicted EHP and the actual instrumented delivery horsepower (DHP) of the existing 176K bulk carrier, the DHP of the  ship basin test has adopted. Fig. 5 shows model ships and Table 12 shows basin test results at same draft (17.7 m) conditions. From the test, EHP increased 5.25% and BHP (Breake horse power) increased 6.55% on average from 12 kt (6.173 m/s) to 15 kt (     To compensate loses in ship resistance performance of 'modified' hull form, flow stress intensive parts of hull geometry as shown in Fig.   8 shall be improved. Moreover, enlarged beam width can be considered to increase cargo loading capacity of 'modified' hull form.

Regarding the sea keeping ability, the characteristics of the ship motion in sea waves are important. As shown in Fig. 9 


Conclusion

To design a new minimal ballast ship which operate certain amount of permanent ballast for ballast-water free operation, the existing alternatives for ballast water were reviewed. To overcome the lack of berth access and loading constraints of the MIBS / NOBS 'storm ballast', the conceptually an uneven baseline basis 'no or minimal discharge' alternative so called 'modified' hull form suggested. To generate the 'modified' concept, a simplified systems engineeringbased design approach was adopted. By examining the roles of the ballast water and existing alternatives, seven general requirements for a new minimal ballast ship and one specific requirement for overcoming the penalties of a 'storm ballast' were identified. Then, five functional requirements were generated for the uneven baseline minimal ballast vessel. As suggested, the concept has wide and parallel sides compared to the existing V-hull design of a 'storm ballast', so the lack of berth access capability can be compensated theoretically. 

. 1 .
1In the early phase of the design process, the measure of effectiveness (MOE), key performance parameters (KPPs), measure of performance (MOP) and technical performance measures (TPMs) should be identified in order to validate and verify the feasibility of the design results in the early phase of the design process. During the design process, all the design aspects should be analyzed and determined within the boundaries of Task Minimal ballast operation of a ship Value Enhanced berth access and loading capability compare to existing 'MIBS' Revenue Decrease in ecosystem disturbance (meeting D-2), a reasonable hull build cost Infra Port facilities, ships in operation, rules and regulations, shipyards Channel Technical and economic feasibility Stakeholder Ship owners, ship builders, port authorities, classification societies, fishing industries

Fig. 1
1Design process for a new minimal ballast ship design [derived and edited from(Kang et al., 2016)] 

Fig. 3
3Body plan, modified (left side) and original (right side) hull form a reasonable design alternative for the functions in

From the Fig. 3 ,Fig. 2
32the suggested 'modified' hull form has uneven baselines of the bow, stern, and cargo holds. These differences should be addressed because an uneven baseline can affect the ship's resistance performance. In addition, an uneven baseline interferes with the fluid flow and affects the seakeeping ability for F1. Furthermore, measures should be taken to secure the longitudinal strength under repetitive hogging and sagging conditions. To reduce the adverse effects of the shear force and bending moment on the structural strength of the hull, the heel trim must be carefully weighed and controlled during the cargo loading process. For F1 and F4, a center-line bottom keel-based structural reinforcement can be used.While a fin-stabilizer for F1 has no effect on the normal concept of the static stability of a ship, it has a positive effect on the dynamic stability. Since the fin is usually not considered for a large ship, the cost effectiveness and possible capacity of the fin should be considered before implementation. To obtain the proper immersion depth of the propeller of the designed ship, a reduction of the propeller diameter can be considered by changing from a single-screw to twin-screw propulsion with an uneven baseline. In addition, for non-ballast exchange operation in certain loading conditions, a permanent ballast system will be required for F2 and F5. In this case, the operation of the permanent ballast should take the water depth and loading condition control ability of the port into account. The design should also consider the amount of required permanent ballasts for securing the appropriate immersion depth and a safe return voyage with empty cargo holds. By increasing the baseline of the cargo holds, An initial concept of the adjustable bow, stern and cargo hold baselines for non/minimal (Draught ballast TA) 17.70 m (7.70 m) 17.70 m (6.

Fig. 4
4GZ curves of the original and the modified hull form, (a) Laden condition (b) Ballast condition

For
the model scale CFD simulations, the Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equation-based Wave and viscous flow (WAVIS) software which KRISO (Korea Research Institute of Ships and Ocean Engineering) developed and widely used in Korean ship yards was used. As shown in

Fig. 5
5Model ships, (a) original and (b) modified hull form

Fig. 6
6BHP and RPM, (a) original and (b) modified hull form increases more than 12.5% as shown in Fig. 6. Fig. 7 shows model ship basin test pictures, conditions and nominal velocity contour at propeller plane at same displacement condition and Fig. 6 shows RPM and BHP of 'Modified' and 'Original' hull forms.

Fig. 8
8Comparison of the pressure distribution between the original (above) and the modified (below) hull formFig. 9 Sample of the designed ship's motion analysis results in waves under fully loaded conditions (wave height: 2 m, beam sea condition)


Parsons and Kotinis, 2011b). In this study, a new design concept for 'no or minimal discharge' alternatives is studied while considering the ship's size and operational conditions.of a 'storm ballast' are 

considered to be practically applicable alternatives. Though there are 

some constraints for berthing and loading, in 2018, a NOBS concept 

basis ballast water-free '7,500 cubic meter liquefied natural gas (LNG) 

bunkering vessel' was launched for commercial purposes (https:// 

pulsenews.co.kr). For the 'continuous flow' type alternatives, 'The 

Variable Buoyancy Ship Concept' of 'longitudinal trunks' is 

remarkable. For the trim and heel control, the concept has been shown 

to adequately control the trim and draft (Parsons and Kotinis, 2011a; 

Alternative methods 
Features 
Benefits 
Penalties 
Suitable Ship type/s 
No ballast water 
· Zero ballast 
(a) Novel hull design 
(b) Use of 'solid ballast 
TEUs' 

Avoids all cost associated 
BWM 

Higher hull build/ operating 
cost 

(a) Ro-ro pax, car, 
container, high volume 
cargo ships 
(b) Existing box ships 
No or minimal discharge 
· Storm ballast 
(must meet D-2) 

Wide beam V-hull design Avoids cost of large 
BWTS 

Higher building cost, berth 
access or loading constraints 
due to wider beam 

New dry bulk carriers 

· Internal ballast 
(must meet D-2) 

Fresh water shifted from 
tank to tank 

Avoids all cost of BWTS Reduces cargo capacity, 
air-draught, tank survey/ 
inspection 

Existing and new container 
ships, ro-ro pax, liners, 
livestock carriers 
· Portable water 
(must meet D-2) 

Only drinking water is 
added to clean tank/s 

Avoids costs and loss 
of space for BWTS 

Cost of potable water 
production/purchase 

Super yachts, cruise liners, 
some livestock carriers, 
pax and military vessels 
Continuous flow 
· Longitudinal trunks 
(meets D-1 and may 
equivalent to D-2) 

Replaces ballast tanks with 
buoyancy trunks 

Avoids costs of large 
BWTS and propeller 
efficiency gain/s 

Higher build costs, 
risk of biota/sediment 
accumulation prevent 

New Seaway-size and 
other large bulk carriers 

· Ship buoyancy control 
(meets D-1 and may 
equivalent to D-2) 

Multiple valves convert 
each BW tank into a free 
flooding buoyancy 
compartment 

Avoids costs of BWE 
pumping and very large 
BWTS 

Costs of multiple valves 
and control systems, valve 
servicing, coating and 
cleaning, slight increase to 
hull drag 

Existing and new cargo 
ships 

· AUBAFLOW 
(exceeds D-1) 

Existing and new VLCCs + 
ULCCs 
· Loop ballast exchange 
(above D-1 and may 
approach D-2) 
· Dyna ballast 
(exceeds D-1) 

Enhanced bluewater BWE 
pumping 

Avoids costs of BWTS 
Any sediment/biota 
accumulating in a low-flow 
zone 

Most types of existing and 
new cargo ships 



Table 2
2Alternatives for the BWM methods [derived and edited from GEF, U. and IMO, G. P. 2011]

Table 3
3Business model for a new non / minimal ballast ship design the defined business model.

Table 4 .
4R1 to R7 are the general requirements for a non/minimal cargo. R3 stipulates the immersion depth required for securing the self-propulsion capability of a ship. R4 is a requirement related to the operation cost of the ship. R5 states the condition for bow slamming reduction, which should be considered together with R3 to ensure the proper immersion depth of the bow. R6 and R7 are requirements for managing the load applied to the ship according to the cargo weight distribution and the arrangement of the ballast of the ship. R8 requires that the designed concept should be able to utilize the existing port facilities. From the results of the analysis of the requirements, the TPMs are generated and shown inTable 5. The TPM is generated from each essential requirement for a minimal ballast ship, and the MOP is measured after all TPMs are satisfied. Then, the MOE / KPP can be evaluated as a considerable design result.ballast water ship. The new design should meet the requirements at the 

same level as the previous alternatives. R8 is the requirements to 

overcome the existing difficulties of a 'storm ballast' of the 'no or 

minimal discharge' alternatives. 

R1 is a requirement related to the stability of a ship. When changing 

the existing hull form, such as the MIBS, it is difficult to achieve the 

same stability as that of the existing ship. In such cases, the placement 

of the keel or stabilizer should be reviewed in terms of the dynamic 

behavior, propulsion power of the ship, and cost. R2 is a requirement 

for the trim and heel control, considering the weight distribution of 




within the boundaries of the business model. To implement F1 and F4, any requirements for new rules and regulations should be minimized. In addition, the existing rules and regulations for ship stability and structural strength must be satisfied. For F2, a minimum level of the propeller immersion depth and bow draft must be achieved. For F3, any type of external attachment should be avoided to ensure the appropriate ship resistance performance. For F4 and F5, changes in the draft, beam, and bilge radius of the existing ship should be limited to ensure the berth access and usability of cargo loading facilities. The adjustment of the baselines of the bow and stern of a ship can be used to meet the functional requirements. However, when considering the required couplings and machinery systems among the bow, stern, and cargo hold parts of the ship for adjusting the baseline, the design concept shown inFig. 2does not meet the 'revenue' of the business model.Since it is practically impossible for an adjustable hull form to meet 

the requirements of Table 4 and the business model of Table 3, to build 

R1 
Maintain the stability of the ship 
R5 
Reduction of slamming 

R2 
Trim and heel control 
R6 
Reduction of the bending moment of the ship 

R3 
Secure immersion depth of the propeller 
R7 
Relief of the sheer force of the ship 

R4 
Ensure the ship resistance performance 
R8 
Harbor operability (berth access / loading constraints) 



Table 5
5Criteria, thresholds and indicators for TPMsType 
Criterion 
Threshold 

TPM 

TPM1 
Ship stability 
Meet the rules and regulations 

TPM2 
Trim and heel control 
Same as original hull form 

TPM3 
Resistance performance 
Minimum increase in EHP 

TPM4 
Structural strength 
Meet the related CSR-H ** 

TPM5 
Harbor operability 
Berth access/loading constraints 

** CSR-H: Harmonized Common Structural Rules 



Table 6
6Function list for new non/minimal ballast ship designF1 
Function to maintain ship stability 
TPM1 
R1 

F2 
Trim and heel control function 
TPM2 
R2, R3, R5 

F3 
Function to maintain resistance performance 
TPM3 
R4 

F4 
Function to sustain the structural strength of the ship 
TPM4 
R6, R7 

F5 
Function for berth access and usability for loading facilities 
TPM5 
R8 



Table 4
4Redefined requirements for the new non/minimal ballast ship design

Table 7
7Initial dimensions of the designed ship the wetted surface area is decreased slightly, which can contribute to the ship's resistance performance. However, since the uneven baseline may have a negative effect on the ship resistance performance, the feasibility of design alternatives for F3 should be carefully examined.

Table 7 .
7From the hull form modification of the existing 176K bulkThe synthesis results of reviewing the technical alternatives for the required functions are summarized inTable 8. The conceptually designed ship was reconfigured from the existing 176K bulk carrier.The tanks for the ballast are minimized and the auxiliaries and superstructure have been relocated for the initial trim and heel conditions. For S1, the uneven baseline of the cargo holds, minimized to consider the controllability of the loading weight distribution. Finally, for S3 the bottom keel should be properly configured to prevent it from detaching from the baseline of the bow and stern.The ship resistance performance affects the operating cost, and especially the fuel oil consumption. For this reason, the ship resistance performance should be determined in the early design phase. Although the model ship basin test is recommended, for a fast and effective evaluation in this study, a computational fluid dynamics (CFD)-based evaluation was adopted with the model ship basin test results and the sea trial data of an existing 176K bulk carrier. Thus, when the evaluation results have economic feasibility, the model ship-based test will be adopted in the next study. For the model scale CFD simulation,carrier, the wetted surface is reduced by approximately 4.4% 

compared to those of the original hull form under full loaded 

conditions. Under ballasting conditions, the required fixed ballast was 

estimated at approximately 42,000 t for a 7.5 m TA. 

consideration should be given to the influence of these differences on 

the ship's resistance performance, structural safety, and workability at 

shipyards. For S2, the amount of permanent ballast should be 

3. Ship Resistance Performance basis 

Feasibility Evaluation 



Table 9
9Geometry and principal particulars of the model ship for CFDOriginal 

Modified 

Condition 
Original 
Modified 
Original 
Modified 

Tm (m) 
17.7 
17.7 
0.5429 
0.5429 

S (m 2 ) 
19,981 
19,113 
18.8015 
17.9843 

Design speed 
15 kt (7.717 m/s) 
1.3515 (m/s) 

※ Tm (Draft of the ship), S (Area of wetted surface) 



Table 8
8List of developments for a new non/minimal ballast ship design(a) 


Table 10
10Grid information and distribution 


Table 11 Numerical
11resistance test results 



Table 12
12Model ship basin resistance test results at same draft conditionVs 
PE 
(kW) 

PB 
(kW) 

RPM 
(1/s) 

BHP 
increase 

RPM 
increase 

EHP 
increase 
kt 
m/s 

Original 

12 
6.173 
4391.0 
6430.0 
69.49 
-
-
-

13 
6.688 
5528.0 
8074.0 
75.15 
-
-
-

14 
7.202 
6871.0 
10019.0 
80.88 
-
-
-

15 
7.717 
8538.0 
12462.0 
86.97 
-
-
-

Modified 

12 
6.173 
4601.8 
6832.0 
70.62 
6.3% 
1.6% 
4.8% 

13 
6.688 
5819.8 
8609.0 
76.43 
6.6% 
1.7% 
5.3% 

14 
7.202 
7261.8 
10716.0 
82.32 
7.0% 
1.8% 
5.7% 

15 
7.717 
8981.0 
13248.0 
88.36 
6.3% 
1.6% 
5.2% 



, compared to the original hull form, although the modified hull form shows lack of sea keeping performance in heave and roll motion, the pitch motion characteristics of the 'modified' hull form do not significantly differ from those of the original hull form. To analyze ship behavior characteristics, SMTP (Ship motion total package), which is the KRISO's in-house simulation tool (new version of SURVSHIP (Survivability of ship)) has used(Lee, 2015). In the simulation, 0.02 second time step has applied.Figure 6shows ship behavior characteristics in the regular wave with beam-sea (entrance angle of 90 degree) condition. Due to uneven baseline, suggested hull form showsFig. 7 Model ship basin tests (above) and nominal velocity contour at propeller plane (below), (a) original and (b) modified hull form at same displacement condition lack of seakeeping ability especially in heave and roll motions. In case of Heave motion, it is estimated that waves between bow and stern uneven baseline enlarges ship motion compare to 'original' hull form.For roll motion, it is estimated that shorten immersion depth of 'modified' hull form enlarges initial roll motion.To compensate for the losses in the ship motion under waves, relationship between the geometry of mid-ship section and roll damping will be considered(Park et al., 2019). If the propeller diameter is decreased to accommodate for the adjusted ship speed and the engine performance, then the elevating height of the baseline of the cargo holds can be decreased to secure the proper cargo capacity, ship resistance, and seakeeping performance. When considering only the mid-ship section of the suggested uneven baseline minimal ballast bulk carrier, a decrease in the depth of the cargo holds will lead to a decrease in the ultimate bending moment capacity. To compensate for the decreased ultimate bending moment capacity, the weight of the ship's structure can be increased. For this reason, in order to convince the technical feasibility of the suggested uneven baseline minimal ballast bulk carrier, the structural design evaluation under different sea states should be adopted in the next study.(a) 
(b) 

TF (m) 
TA (m) 
Tm (m) 
KB (m) Lcb (%) DISV (m 3 ) TF (m) 
TA (m) 
Tm (m) 
KB (m) Lcb (%) DISV (m 3 ) 
17.612 
17.788 
17.700 
10.181 
2.81 
169,593 
15.890 
15.890 
15.890 
8.244 
3.56 
169,593 




As for loading constraints, the smaller beam size of the suggested concept compare to exiting MIBS / NOBS concept can be helpful in compensating for the load constraints. However, during the model ship basin test, under the same draft conditions, the EHP of 'modified' increased 5.25% and BHP increased 6.55% on average compare to 'original' hull form. Given the loss in cargo loading capacity, the suggested 'modified' hull form's economic feasibility is assessed at an awkward level. So, resistance performance at same displacement condition has also tested via model ship basin test. From the basin test, more than 12.5 loss in BHP has convinced. From this review result, losses in the cargo capacity and ship resistance performance shall be consider concurrently in the design phase to have technical and economic feasibility. By optimizing the geometry and dimension of the 'modified' hull form, a certain amount of loss in resistance performance and cargo capacity shall be compensated in the next study. Although the suggested uneven baseline basis 'modified' hull form has many rooms for commercializing, the suggested design, evaluation process and methodologies can be adapted to generate various attempts at developing non/minimal ballast ships to keep the healthy ocean environment from organisms of different ecosystems or a large amount of sterile sea water.
AcknowledgementsThe initial concept of an 'uneven baseline minimal ballast water bulk carrier' was introduced as a proceeding at the 17th InternationalCongress on Maritime Transportation and Harvesting of SeaResources (IMAM)(Kang et al., 2017)and concretized in this study. This research was supported by a grant from the National R&D Project of KRISO research project PES3000.Author ORCIDs and Contributions
Ballast Water Regulations and the Move Toward Concentration Based Numeric Discharge Limits. R J Albert, J M Lishman, J R Saxena, 10.1890/12-0669.1Ecological Applications. 232Albert, R.J., Lishman, J.M., & Saxena, J.R. (2013). Ballast Water Regulations and the Move Toward Concentration Based Numeric Discharge Limits. Ecological Applications. 23(2), 289-300. https://doi.org/10.1890/12-0669.1

GESAMP. Establishing Equivalency in the Performance Testing and Compliance Monitoring of Emerging Alternative Ballast Water Management Systems (EABWMS), A Technical Review. U Gef, G P Imo, GEF, U., & IMO, G.P. (2011). GESAMP. Establishing Equivalency in the Performance Testing and Compliance Monitoring of Emerging Alternative Ballast Water Management Systems (EABWMS), A Technical Review.

Bulk Carrier Practice. Nautical Institute. J Isbester, Isbester, J. (2010). Bulk Carrier Practice. Nautical Institute.

A Concept Study for Cost Effective NGH Mid-stream Supply Chain Establishing Strategies. H J Kang, Y.-S Yang, M S Ki, M S Shin, J Choi, J H Cha, D Lee, 10.1016/j.oceaneng.2015.12.052Ocean Engineering. 113Kang, H.J., Yang, Y.-S., Ki, M.S., Shin, M.S., Choi, J., Cha, J.H., & Lee, D. (2016). A Concept Study for Cost Effective NGH Mid-stream Supply Chain Establishing Strategies. Ocean Engineering, 113, 162-173. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng. 2015.12.052

Systems Engineering-basis Feasibility Study for Development of Ballast Water-Free Vessel. H J Kang, J Choi, H.-S Ahn, K.-S Kim, Proceedings of IMAM 2017, Maritime Transportation and Harvesting of Sea Resources. IMAM 2017, Maritime Transportation and Harvesting of Sea ResourcesLisbon, PortugalKang, H.J., Choi, J., Ahn, H.-S., & Kim, K.-S. (2017). Systems Engineering-basis Feasibility Study for Development of Ballast Water-Free Vessel. Proceedings of IMAM 2017, Maritime Transportation and Harvesting of Sea Resources. Lisbon, Portugal.

Ballast Water Ports and Shipping Study. S Kerr, AGPSKerr, S. (1994). Ballast Water Ports and Shipping Study (No. 5). AGPS.

Development of Numerical Method for the Evaluation of Ship Resistance and Self-Propulsion Performances. J Kim, I R Park, K S Kim, S H Van, Y C Kim, Journal of the Society of Naval Architects of Korea. 482Kim, J., Park, I.R., Kim, K.S., Van, S.H., & Kim, Y.C. (2011). Development of Numerical Method for the Evaluation of Ship Resistance and Self-Propulsion Performances. Journal of the Society of Naval Architects of Korea. 48(2), 147-157.

. 10.3744/SNAK.2011.48.2.147https://doi.org/10.3744/SNAK.2011.48.2.147

Numerical Prediction of Ship Hydrodynamic Performances using Explicit Algebraic Reynolds Stress Turbulence Model. Y C Kim, K S Kim, J Kim, 10.3744/SNAK.2014.51.1.67Journal of the Society of Naval Architects of Korea. 511Kim, Y.C., Kim, K.S., & Kim, J. (2014). Numerical Prediction of Ship Hydrodynamic Performances using Explicit Algebraic Reynolds Stress Turbulence Model. Journal of the Society of Naval Architects of Korea. 51(1), 67-77. https://doi.org/ 10.3744/SNAK.2014.51.1.67

Dynamic Orifice Flow Model and Compartment Models for Flooding Simulation of a Damaged Ship. G J Lee, 10.1016/j.oceaneng.2015.09.051Ocean Engineering Journal. 109Lee, G.J. (2015). Dynamic Orifice Flow Model and Compartment Models for Flooding Simulation of a Damaged Ship. Ocean Engineering Journal, 109, 635-653. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.oceaneng.2015.09.051

Systems Engineering Fundamentals. Defense Ssystems Management Coll Fort Belvoir VA. J Leonard, Leonard, J. (1999). Systems Engineering Fundamentals. Defense Ssystems Management Coll Fort Belvoir VA.

Refinement of the Ballast-Free Ship Concept. M G Parsons, M Kotinis, Department of Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering. University of MichiganParsons, M.G., & Kotinis, M. (2011a). Refinement of the Ballast- Free Ship Concept, Department of Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering. University of Michigan.

Trim and Draft Control Capability of the Variable Buoyancy Ship. M G Parsons, M Kotinis, Journal of Ship Production and Design. 273Parsons, M.G., & Kotinis, M. (2011b). Trim and Draft Control Capability of the Variable Buoyancy Ship. Journal of Ship Production and Design. 27(3), 118-126.

Experimental Study on Estimation of Roll Damping for Various Mid-ship Sections. B Park, D W Jung, J Jung, I Park, S K Cho, H G Sung, 10.26748/KSOE.2019.004Journal of Ocean Engineering Technology. 334Park, B., Jung, D.W., Jung, J., Park, I., Cho, S.K., & Sung, H.G. (2019). Experimental Study on Estimation of Roll Damping for Various Mid-ship Sections. Journal of Ocean Engineering Technology. 33(4), 322-329. https://doi.org/10.26748/KSOE. 2019.004

Preliminary Hull Form Planning for Non-Ballast Water Ship and Minimal Ballast Water Ship. S Shingo, 1ˢᵗ ReportShingo, S. (2014). Preliminary Hull Form Planning for Non-Ballast Water Ship and Minimal Ballast Water Ship (1ˢᵗ Report)-

Simplified Estimation Method of Propulsive Performance. 10.2534/jjasnaoe.20.21Journal of the Japan Society of Naval Architects and Ocean Engineers. 20Simplified Estimation Method of Propulsive Performance. Journal of the Japan Society of Naval Architects and Ocean Engineers. 20, 21-26. https://doi.org/10.2534/jjasnaoe.20.21

Emerging Risks from Ballast Water Treatment: The Run-up to the International Ballast Water Management Convention. B Werschkun, S Banerji, O C Basurko, M David, F Fuhr, S Gollasch, . . Kehrer, A , 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.03.135Chemosphere. 112Werschkun, B., Banerji, S., Basurko, O.C., David, M., Fuhr, F., Gollasch, S., ... Kehrer, A. (2014). Emerging Risks from Ballast Water Treatment: The Run-up to the International Ballast Water Management Convention. Chemosphere. 112, 256-266. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.03.135