Yoga therapy for developing emotional intelligence in mid-life managers
Jan-Jun 2011

Sham Tikhe 
Department of Yoga and Management
Swami Vivekananda Yoga Anusandhana Samsthana (S-VYASA) University (Prashanti Kutiram)
BangaloreIndia

H R Ganpat 
Department of Yoga and Management
Swami Vivekananda Yoga Anusandhana Samsthana (S-VYASA) University (Prashanti Kutiram)
BangaloreIndia

Nagendra 
Department of Yoga and Management
Swami Vivekananda Yoga Anusandhana Samsthana (S-VYASA) University (Prashanti Kutiram)
BangaloreIndia

Yoga therapy for developing emotional intelligence in mid-life managers

Journal of Mid-life Health
1Jan-Jun 201110.4103/0976-7800.8326728
Background: Business executives' lives have become a never-ending race against time, technology, and targets. This race creates tension, which leads to dissatisfaction and frustration and eventually manifests itself as psychological and physiological stress with mental and emotional drain. This modern lifestyle intensifies the stress leading to "excessive tension" and consequent deterioration in "executive efficiency." Objective: To assess emotional intelligent quotient (EQ) in managers undergoing yoga-based Self Management of Excessive Tension (SMET) program. Materials and Methods: 72 managers participated in this study which is of "single group pre-post design." The EQ test developed by Prof N. K. Chadha from University of Delhi was administered as pre and post the 5 days of SMET program. Statistical Analysis: Means, standard deviations, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, and Wilcoxon signed rank test were used to analyze the data. Results: The data analysis showed 72.02% significant increase (P<0.001) in EQ.Conclusion:The results suggest that participation in a SMET program was associated with improvement in EQ and may have implications for "executive efficiency."

INTRODUCTION

Business executives' lives have become a never-ending race against time, technology, and targets. This race creates tension, which leads to dissatisfaction and frustration and eventually manifests itself as psychological and physiological stress with mental and emotional drain. This modern lifestyle intensifies the stress leading to "excessive tension" and consequent deterioration in "executive efficiency." Yoga does have the potential to provide physical, mental, and emotional health benefits to those who practice it with proper guidance. [1] A holistic and integrated stress management program called Self-Management of Excessive Tension (SMET) also called cyclic meditation has been investigated extensively to combat this modern lifestyle problem and thereby one can lead a holistic way of living in health, harmony, and happiness. [2] Previous work on stress management educational program reported significant improvement in the subjective well being inventory (SUBI) scores of the 77 subjects within a period of 10 days as compared to controls. These observations suggest that a short lifestyle modification and stress management educational program can make an appreciable contribution to primary prevention as well as management of lifestyle diseases. [3] Previous study on SMET reported a decrease in occupational stress levels and baseline autonomic arousal in managers, suggesting significant reduction in sympathetic activity [4] and better emotional well-being in them. [5] No previous investigation has systematically evaluated the effect of SMET program (in a residential set-up program) on emotional intelligence quotient (EQ) in managers. Hence, we have designed the present study to assess the efficacy of 5 days SMET program on managers using EQ test.


Objectives

To assess EQ in managers undergoing 5 days yoga-based SMET program.


MATERIALS AND METHODS


Subjects

The subjects for the study were 72 managers (63 males and 9 females) with 48.75±3.86 years of mean age. They were selected from the groups of managers of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited based on the following criteria.


Inclusion criteria

Age between 45 and 60 years (males and females), physically and mentally fit, normal health as declared by the physician.


Exclusion criteria

Taking medication, using any other wellness strategy.

Routine clinical examinations showed that all of them were in normal health; none were using any other wellness strategy. All of them had high-fiber low-fat vegetarian diet and no caffeinated drinks, alcohol, or tobacco in any form during the 5 days residential SMET program. We got the participants' signed consent after explaining to them the variables we would record and the design of the study. The Institutional Review Board had also approved the project.


Design

A single group pre-post study.


Assessments

In this study we have used the EQ questionnaire test developed by Prof N. K. Chadha. [6] The test has 15 real-life situations based on 5-point scale rating and then finally obtained scores that was converted into percentile score [ Table 1].

This test is useful to measure emotional dimensions like emotional competency, emotional maturity, and emotional sensitivity. This test has been standardized for Indian population (professional managers, businessmen, bureaucrats, artists, and graduate students) and used widely in research and elsewhere. It has a reliability of 0.94 and validity of 0.92.


Intervention

All the subjects participated in the SMET program for 5 days [Tables 2 and 3].

SMET combines "stimulating" and "calming" practices. It is based on an ancient yogic text, Mandukya Upanishad Karika, which suggests that this combination is the essence of all yoga practices, and would be helpful to release stress, achieve mental equilibrium and emotional balance. [2] The set of practices known as cyclic meditation (CM) is an integral component of SMET, consisting of cycles of yoga postures for providing stimulation at the grossest level followed by periods of supine rest-based relaxation. [7] Tikhe and Nagendra: Yoga for mid-life managers  


Data collection

The EQ data was collected before (pre) and after (post) the 5 days SMET program.


Analysis

Statistical analysis was done with the help of Statistical Package for Social Sciences [SPSS]-16. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test showed that the data were not normally distributed. We used the Wilcoxon signed rank test to compare means of the data collected before (pre) and after (post) the SMET program [ Table 4].


RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The data analysis showed 72.02% significant increase (P<0.001) in EQ. Persons with high EQ may strike a balance between emotion and reason, are aware of their own feelings, show empathy and compassion for others, and have high self-esteem which may be instrumental in many situations in the workplace and can help achieve organizational effectiveness. [8] Recent research has shown a positive relationship between EQ and workplace success. [9] Previous study on yoga reported enhanced EQ as a result of the practice of yoga way of life. The results indicate the importance of yoga as an integral element in improving managerial performance in organizations. [10] The present study is consistent with these findings, indicating that a systematic adoption of the SMET program can result in better EQ among managers for "executive efficiency," thus paving the way for their better performance as managers.


CONCLUSION

The results from this study suggest that participation in the SMET program was associated with improvement in EQ and may have implications for "executive efficiency." Because before and after designs limit inferences about intervention effects, further research is warranted to explore the effects of SMET program for stress management using a larger, randomized controlled trial.  

Table 1 :
1Interpretation of scoresScore 
Percentile 
Interpretations 

285 and above 
250-274 
200-249 
150-199 
149 and below 

P-90 
P-75 
P-50 
P-40 
P-15 

Extremely high E.Q. 
High E.Q. 
Moderate E.Q. 
Low E.Q. 
Try some other day 



Table 2 :
2The schedule of the self-management of excessive tension programTime 
Activity 
Time 
Activity 

05.00 AM 
Ablution 
03.00 PM 
SMET lecture session 2 
05.30 AM 
Prayer (Prathasmaran) 
04.00 PM 
SMET practice (Cyclic meditation) 
06.00 AM 
Asana / Special yoga technique 
05.00 PM 
Tuning to nature 
07.15 AM 
Friendship meet (Maitri milan)-
Gita sloka chanting and discourse (Satsang) 

06.00 PM 
Devotional session (Bhajan) 

08.00 AM 
Breakfast 
06.45 PM 
MSRT (Mind sound resonance technique) 
09.30 AM 
SMET lecture session 1 
07.30 PM 
Dinner 
10.30 AM 
SMET practice (Cyclic meditation) 
08.30 PM 
Happy assembly (yoga game session)/cultural program 
11.30 AM 
Milk or ayurvedic tea (Malt) 
09.15 PM 
Group discussion/self practice 
12.05 PM 
Special yoga techniques 
10.00 PM 
Lights off 
01.00 PM 
Lunch and rest 


Table 3 :
3Lecture session during self-management of excessive tension programDay Session 1 
Session 2 

1 

2 

3 

4 
5 

Concept of stress 

Stimulation-Relaxations 

Stress levels and its release 

Executive growth 
Group awareness 

Stress-induced problems and 
management 
Stress and its management 
according to yoga 
Recognition of stress is half the 
solution 
Depth of perception and awareness 
Progress in tune with nature 



Table 4 :
4Data analysis How to cite this article: Ganpat TS, Nagendra HR. Yoga therapy for developing emotional intelligence in mid-life managers. J Mid-life Health 2011;2:28-30. of Support: Nil, Conflict of Interest: None declared.Variable 
Mean ± Standard deviation 
Percentage 
change 

P 

Before SMET (Pre) After SMET (Pre) 

EQ 
137.78±36.24 
237.01±34.12 
72.02 
0.0001* 

*Significant at 0.001 level 



Yoga and menopausal transition. N Vaze, S Joshi, J Mid-life Health. 1Vaze N, Joshi S. Yoga and menopausal transition. J Mid-life Health 2010;1:56-8.

New perspectives in stress management. H R Nagendra, R Nagarathna, Swami Vivekananda Yoga PublicationsBangalore, IndiaNagendra HR, Nagarathna R. New perspectives in stress management. Bangalore, India: Swami Vivekananda Yoga Publications; 2007.

Effect of yoga based lifestyle intervention on subjective well-being. R Sharma, N Gupta, R L Bijlani, Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 52Sharma R, Gupta N, Bijlani RL. Effect of yoga based lifestyle intervention on subjective well-being. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2008;52:123-31.

Baseline occupational stress levels and physiological responses to a two day stress management program. R P Vempati, S Telles, J Indian Psychol. 18Vempati RP, Telles S. Baseline occupational stress levels and physiological responses to a two day stress management program. J Indian Psychol 2000;18:33-7.

Effectiveness of SMET program with respect to emotional well-being among managers-an empirical study. K Sony, Ncb Nath, H R Nagendra, XIMB Journal of Management (Vilakshan). 4Sony K, Nath NCB, Nagendra HR. Effectiveness of SMET program with respect to emotional well-being among managers-an empirical study. XIMB Journal of Management (Vilakshan) 2007;4:165-73.

Human Resource Management Issues: Case Studies and Experimental Exercises. Delhi, India: Shri Sai Printographers. N K Chadha, Chadha NK. Human Resource Management Issues: Case Studies and Experimental Exercises. Delhi, India: Shri Sai Printographers; 2005.

A review of the scientific studies on cyclic meditation. P Subramanya, S Telles, Int J Yoga. 2Subramanya P, Telles S. A review of the scientific studies on cyclic meditation. Int J Yoga 2009;2:46-8.

Emotional Intelligence at Work: A professional Guide. D Singh, Sage PublicationsNew Delhi, IndiaSingh D. Emotional Intelligence at Work: A professional Guide. New Delhi, India: Sage Publications; 2003.

Linking emotional intelligence, spirituality and workplace performance: Definitions, models and ideas for research. L Tischler, J Biberman, R Mckeage, J Manage Psychol. 17Tischler L, Biberman J, McKeage R. Linking emotional intelligence, spirituality and workplace performance: Definitions, models and ideas for research. J Manage Psychol 2002;17:203-18.

Impact of adoption of yoga way of life on the emotional intelligence of managers. H Adhia, H R Nagendra, B Mahadevan, IIMB Manage Rev. 22Adhia H, Nagendra HR, Mahadevan B. Impact of adoption of yoga way of life on the emotional intelligence of managers. IIMB Manage Rev 2010;22:32-41.