Western diet aggravates neuronal insult in post-traumatic brain injury: Proposed pathways for interplay A R T I C L E I N F O-NC-ND license. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Available online xxx

Abdullah Shaito 
Department of Biological and Chemical Sciences
Faculty of Health Sciences
Lebanese International University
BeirutLebanon

University of Balamand
BeirutLebanon

Hiba Hasan 
Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology
Justus-Liebig-University Giessen
35392GiessenGermany

Karl John Habashy 
Faculty of Medicine
American University of Beirut
BeirutLebanon

Walaa Fakih 
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology
Faculty of Medicine
American University of Beirut
BeirutLebanon

Samar Abdelhady 
Faculty of Medicine
Alexandria University
AlexandriaEgypt

Fatimah Ahmad 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics
Faculty of Medicine
American University of Beirut
BeirutLebanon

Kazem Zibara 
Biology Department
Faculty of Sciences-I
Lebanese University
BeirutLebanon

Ali H Eid 
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology
Faculty of Medicine
American University of Beirut
BeirutLebanon

Department of Biomedical Sciences
College of Health Sciences
DohaQatar

Ahmed F El-Yazbi 
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology
Faculty of Medicine
American University of Beirut
BeirutLebanon

Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology
Faculty of Pharmacy
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology
Faculty of Medicine
Alexandria University
Egypt

American University of Beirut
BeirutLebanon

Firas H Kobeissy 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics
Faculty of Medicine
American University of Beirut
BeirutLebanon

Western diet aggravates neuronal insult in post-traumatic brain injury: Proposed pathways for interplay A R T I C L E I N F O-NC-ND license. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Available online xxx10.1016/j.ebiom.2020.102829Article History: Received 16 January 2020 Revised 26 May 2020 Accepted 27 May 2020Review * Corresponding author at: ** Corresponding author. E-mail addresses: ae88@aub.edu.lb (A.F. El-Yazbi), fk02@aub.edu.lb (F.H. Kobeissy). 1 These authors contributed equally. Contents lists available at ScienceDirectTBI Western diet Oxidative stress Mitochondrial dysfunction Microbiota Neuroinflammation
A B S T R A C T Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a global health burden and a major cause of disability and mortality. An early cascade of physical and structural damaging events starts immediately post-TBI. This primary injury event initiates a series of neuropathological molecular and biochemical secondary injury sequelae, that last much longer and involve disruption of cerebral metabolism, mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, neuroinflammation, and can lead to neuronal damage and death. Coupled to these events, recent studies have shown that lifestyle factors, including diet, constitute additional risk affecting TBI consequences and neuropathophysiological outcomes. There exists molecular cross-talk among the pathways involved in neuronal survival, neuroinflammation, and behavioral outcomes, that are shared among western diet (WD) intake and TBI pathophysiology. As such, poor dietary intake would be expected to exacerbate the secondary damage in TBI. Hence, the aim of this review is to discuss the pathophysiological consequences of WD that can lead to the exacerbation of TBI outcomes. We dissect the role of mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, neuroinflammation, and neuronal injury in this context. We show that currently available data conclude that intake of a diet saturated in fats, pre-or post-TBI, aggravates TBI, precludes recovery from brain trauma, and reduces the response to treatment.

A healthy metabolic state is required for normal brain function


Brain metabolism: a unique metabolic profile

The brain is an energy-intensive organ that can utilize glucose or ketone bodies as energy sources according to metabolite availability. Therefore, regulation of metabolic rates is especially vital in the central nervous system (CNS). Consequently, a rapid distortion of cerebral function could result from any metabolic imbalance compromising the availability of glucose without a compensatory ketogenic response as in the case of hyperinsulinemia or insulin resistance, for instance [1]. Interestingly, metabolic dysfunction is a direct risk factor for behavioral, cognitive and mood disorders [2]. As well, obesity has been linked to a higher risk of neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease [3]. Notably, these metabolic disorders and neuronal changes have been linked to common pathways involving inflammation, mitochondrial dysfunction and insulin resistance as will be discussed below.


Mitochondria: impact on brain function and cognition

Mitochondria are unique cytoplasmic energy production organelles with a separate genome, the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) [4]. Due to its proximity to increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels, its lack of histones, and its limited DNA proofreading and repair capacities, mtDNA is more susceptible to damage than nuclear DNA [5]. mtDNA damage can be caused by metabolic insults such as redox homeostasis imbalance resulting from overconsumption of diets rich in fats, for instance. Interestingly, mitochondrial dysfunction may lead to the development of insulin resistance, which will be discussed in the next section [6]. The brain is vulnerable to mitochondrial defects given its dependence on mitochondrial function for neurogenesis, neurotransmitter synthesis, calcium homeostasis, and neuronal survival, plasticity, and excitability [7]. In fact, literature shows that mitochondrial dysfunction underlies the etiology of several neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease [8].


Insulin regulates metabolism and affects cognition

Insulin is the main hormone regulating blood-glucose levels and tissue glucose uptake . An abnormal blood insulin level, is a major marker of the metabolic syndrome [9]. Due to its ability to cross the blood brain barrier (BBB), insulin acts as a neuropeptide and activates neuronal insulin receptor signaling, which is critical for neuronal growth, survival, and differentiation [10]. Additionally, neuronal insulin signaling enhances neurogenesis, increases neuronal survival and reduces neuroinflammation [11]. Mounting evidence correlates insulin resistance in the brain to neurological diseases [12] and cognitive deficits [13]. In fact, insulin-mediated signaling pathways play important roles in the regulation of brain functions under normal and disease states [9]. For instance, insulin treatment in individuals with Alzheimer's disease improved memory performance [14]. These observations led to the notion that enhancing insulin signaling can be an attractive therapeutic target following brain injury.


Western diet (WD) alters brain metabolism

2.1. The western diet can lead to obesity, inflammation, and mitochondrial dysfunction

The shift towards WD (i.e. a diet rich in saturated fats and refined sugars) is correlated with an increased incidence of metabolic disorders including obesity and type 2 diabetes [15]. Of specific interest, WD has been shown to impair cognitive performance and synaptic plasticity, as well as increase the risk of dementia [16]. A large body of evidence correlates obesity with cognitive decline [17]. This is further compounded by the finding that obesity negatively impacts the outcome of a frontal head collision where obese patients had a higher likelihood of increased injury severity or death [18]. Remarkably, obesity can compromise and delay patient recovery post brain injury and can pose a burden to rehabilitation [19].

Mechanistically, WD intake and obesity have been shown to be accompanied by systemic inflammatory responses, which can cause cognitive decline and worsen brain injury outcomes [17,20]. Adipocytes secrete pro-inflammatory mediators, which can promote metabolic dysregulation and insulin resistance [21]. Interestingly, WD-induced hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance are thought to reciprocally drive this process via the trophic effect of insulin on adipocytes as the ensuing hypertrophy, in response to excess caloric intake, leads to hypoxia and inflammatory cell infiltration [22]. Proinflammatory cytokines usually induced by WD such as IL-1b and IL-6 can disrupt neural circuits involved in cognition and memory [23]. Moreover, evidence shows that WD consumption leads to inflammatory changes leading to brain insulin resistance [20]. Alongside, WD-induced neuronal pathologies are exacerbated by mitochondrial dysfunction including reduced activities of citrate synthase and complexes I and III [24] and increased mitochondrial ROS production [25].


High-fat diets are not created equal

Although the present review focuses on the effects of WD, it is prudent to differentiate its detrimental effects from the protective effects of another type of high-fat diet, the ketogenic diet (KD). KD is a fat-rich diet low in proteins and carbohydrates. Unlike WD, KD has low obesogenic and addictive potentials, and is neuroprotective [26,27]. Reduced carbohydrate content, in the KD, mimics the beneficial effects of caloric restriction or fasting [28]. Under such conditions, sugar stores of the body are exhausted and the rate of gluconeogenesis is insufficient to provide glucose fast enough to meet brain energy needs. Metabolism is shifted towards the use of fats as the primary fuel source and liver catabolism of fatty acids is increased leading to subsequent rises in ketone bodies levels, which serve as an alternative energy supply for the brain [29]. Contrary to WD, the KD can reduce neuronal inflammation [30], decrease behavioral patterns of depression in animal models [31], ameliorate cognitive defects [32], and mitigate neuronal injury [33].


Low-fat traditional diets promote brain health

A large body of evidence supports the efficacy of low-fat dietary patterns in ameliorating age-related cognitive dysfunction and reducing risk of Alzheimer's dementia [34]. A recent longitudinal investigation of the effect of one such diet, the Mediterranean diet (MD), on cognitive health indicated that MD consumption was associated with reduced risk of dementia and better memory and language performance [35]. Smaller clinical trials had supported the conclusions regarding the cognitive impact of MD [36,37].

Animal studies indicated that antioxidants and flavonoids from fruits and vegetables in these diets suppress neuro-inflammation by reducing oxidative stress and apoptosis via inhibiting NF-K B-dependent inflammatory signaling [34]. In direct contrast to WD, the MD was shown to reduce systemic insulin resistance in humans, not necessarily as a consequence of body weight modulation [38]. Other low fat dietary patterns have also been associated with an insulin sensitizing effect [39]. However, there is a paucity of studies investigating the direct impact of these dietary patterns on brain cognitive functions. 3. Traumatic brain injury: classification, secondary injury, and disruption of brain metabolism


Abbreviations


TBI severity and secondary injury

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a life-threatening progressive brain insult, following a mechanical impact, leading to neurobehavioral dysfunction. Yearly, it is estimated that » 50 million TBIs occur worldwide with an overall cost reaching USD 400 billion [40]. TBI can be classified into focal injury due to blunt or penetrating impact or diffuse non-penetrating injury due to blast waves or inertial loading. Clinically, TBI severity is classified using the Glasgow Coma Scale coupled with neuroimaging techniques [40]. Typically, severe and moderate TBIs exhibit overt gross structural damage and "focal" abnormalities including subarachnoid hemorrhage, hematomas, and bleeding detected using neuroimaging. However, mild TBI (mTBI) or concussion injury shows negative neuroimaging results; nevertheless, this does not preclude future neurological defects [40].

The pathophysiological events in TBI occur as primary and secondary brain injuries. Primary injury represents the immediate direct mechanical damage at the site of injury including tissue damage, impaired regulation of cerebral blood flow (CBF), subarachnoid hemorrhage, epidural hematoma, subdural hematoma, and contusion. The secondary injury (non-mechanical damage) involves a cascade of downstream interacting cellular, and molecular events initiated by the primary insult [41]. The secondary brain injury involves diffuse axonal injury, inflammation, ischemia, excitotoxicity, and energy failure. Both, primary and secondary injuries interact to produce a complex pattern of evolving damage [42].

In the focal, open head injury, the primary and secondary brain injury phases are quite discernible. This penetrating brain trauma is associated with blood-brain barrier (BBB) disruption, recruitment of blood borne immune cells, and thus, a rapid inflammatory response at the injured neuronal site [43]. Contrarily, mTBI injury phases are more obscure with no spatial separation when compared to open head injury. This is commonly observed in sports injury where rotational and linear acceleration forces are applied to the brain with no penetrating injury [44,45]. As a result, around 10À40% of mTBIs evolve into post-concussion syndrome and long-term cognitive and behavioral deficits associated with white matter injury without apparent neural cell degeneration [46].


TBI induces metabolic and oxidative stress: implications for mitochondrial dysfunction

An energy crisis emerges post-TBI as the increased energetic demand cannot be met due to mitochondrial dysfunction contributing to the progression of secondary injury [47]. Moreover, following TBI, glucose metabolism is altered, in part due to oxygen deprivation [48]. An elevation in the Lactate/Pyruvate ratio is observed post-TBI indicating a shift towards anaerobic metabolism in animal models [49,50] and human subjects [51]. As such, shortly following TBI, the brain experiences a period of hyperglycolysis, during which glucose utilization is increased so as to meet the metabolic demands compounded by mitochondrial dysfunction [52]. The latter could result from the reduced activity of several mitochondrial enzymes post-TBI. Indeed, mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex activity is decreased post-TBI [53], as well as the enzymatic activities of mitochondrial complexes I and IV, which compromises oxidative metabolism and leads to a decreased ATP/ADP ratio [53].

Mitochondrial dysfunction post-TBI may also result from its Ca 2+ buffering function. Under normal physiological conditions, neuronal Ca 2+ homeostasis is maintained by mitochondria [7]. Following TBI, aberrant release of neurotransmitters takes place, including the excitatory glutamate, leading to excitotoxicity [54]. Excitotoxicity is mainly mediated by the pathophysiological activation of voltage-gated calcium channels and the subsequent Ca 2+ build up within neural cells. Consequently, excessive uptake of Ca 2+ by mitochondria occurs, causing Ca 2+ toxicity. This can lead to increased mitochondrial membrane permeability, dysfunctional mitochondrial enzymes and mitochondrial DNA damage [55]. Moreover, following TBI aberrant translocation of the mitochondrial-encoded protein dynamin-related protein 1 (DRP 1) to the outer mitochondrial membrane leads to excessive mitochondrial fission. This effectively decreases mitochondrial count possibly leading to neurodegeneration [56].


Individual differences in response to TBI

Differences in response to TBI have been noted among patients, where some may suffer from severe and persistent outcomes while others do not [57]. Several physiological and psychological factors can predispose individuals to the likelihood of these symptoms. These include: pre-existing psychological problems, gender, being older, and having previous head injuries [58À60].

A prospective cohort study conducted among patients with mTBI concluded that patients with negative mTBI perceptions, stress, anxiety and depression had worse outcomes [57]. Several studies were conducted in regards to age as a risk factor for poor prognosis post-TBI. In one study, adults aged > 60 had the highest rates of TBI-related hospitalization and death [59,60].

Many studies reported a sex difference in the outcomes of TBI. Considering that the incidence of TBI is higher in males, most of the animal and clinical studies focus on the male population [61]. In fact, many studies have reported that females exhibit better outcomes post-TBI. This observation was related to female hormones and their ability to act as neuroprotective agents [62,63]. Nevertheless, other studies reported worse outcomes of TBI in females following a concussion, with more symptoms and more persistent sequelae [59,60].

4. WD, but not KD, worsens brain functional and metabolic outcomes post-TBI


WD exacerbates TBI-induced injury

Most studies evaluating the impact of altered dietary composition on TBI focused on its neuropathological and behavioral outcomes independent of the brain injury modes or severity context, i.e. whether it is mTBI or more pronounced penetrating head injury, or even on the level and timing of intervention, which represent key elements in defining a specific TBI model [64À66]. The lack of these correlational studies depicts major caveats in the field of nutritional supplementation/needs in TBI. In one study, the outcomes of secondary injury outcomes from a closed head injury with single hit (mTBI) were evaluated in WD-fed obese C57 BL/6 mice as compared to lean mice. At a chronic time point (30 days), the obese mice showed marked microglial activation along with a chronic inflammatory state, attributed to perturbation of the hypothalamic-pituitary adrenal axis [67]. Another study assessed the effect of chronic fructose consumption on hippocampal molecular changes and mitochondrial bioenergetics following diffuse brain injury. The authors did not notice differences one week after injury, whereas a more chronic time point (»one month) showed the secondary injury characteristic in this mTBI model [65]. Along the same lines, a high-fat/sucrose diet induced behavioral changes post-open head injury, where outcomes were assessed at 21 days post-injury. Brain-injured rats on the high fat/sucrose diet had more severe somatosensory dysfunction compared to rats in the sham group. Furthermore, the experimental group exhibited working memory impairment in addition to having significantly higher loss of cortical tissue post-injury. Nevertheless, the neurobehavioral outcomes were correlated primarily to the dietary intake rather than the open head TBI pathophysiology [64]. Similarly, four weeks of high-fat/sucrose feeding followed by experimental mild diffused brain injury led to exacerbation of the TBI-induced impairment of spatial learning capacity. This decline in learning ability was confirmed by decreases in the levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in the CA3 and dentate gyrus of the hippocampus. Also, pronounced decreases were observed in the levels of active phosphorylated synapsin I protein, a major pre-synaptic protein, and cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB), a downstream transcription factor that modulates synaptic transmission. Yet again, these changes were assessed only one week post-injury overlooking the secondary pathophysiological injury that needs to be checked at chronic time points relevant to the model used [66]. Similar results were obtained in other studies [68,69]. Nevertheless, these results still suggest that WD can affect the molecular machinery responsible for maintaining neuronal function and homeostasis following brain injury.

It is noteworthy that all WD combinations associated with detrimental outcomes post-TBI (Table 1) have a non-ketogenic composition [27]; high in refined sugar and carbohydrate content, an essential factor contributing to the induction of hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance. Significantly, obese mice subjected to repeated TBI showed prolonged reduction in PKB/ Akt activation, a downstream effector pathway of insulin signaling [70]. In this context, the question of gender differences arises. For a given BMI, females are more insulin sensitive than males [71]. Moreover, studies showed that females are less prone to develop insulin resistance following WD feeding [72]. As well, WD induced less inflammatory changes in females compared to males [73]. This could partly explain gender bias in TBI outcomes in patients on WD.


KD produces an opposite effect post-TBI

As part of the adaptive metabolic response to injury, the brain shifts towards ketone body metabolism as an alternative energy source [33,74,75] reducing the inefficient glycolytic breakdown of glucose and increased lactate production. This can decrease oxidative damage, improve ATP production, increase ATP hydrolysis, decrease inflammation and free radical production, and increase autophagy [30,76]. Moreover, KD feeding for 72 h post-TBI significantly reduced release of cytochrome c from brain mitochondria, leading to decreased mitochondria-induced apoptosis [77]. Importantly, KD reduced TBI-induced oxidative stress, increase protein expression of cytosolic and mitochondrial antioxidant factors such as Nrf2/ARE, induced NAD (P)H dehydrogenase quinone-1 and superoxide dismutase, and increase ATP production by promoting the activity of complex II [78]. Overall, KD can decrease the impact of brain injury by enhancing cerebral bioenergetics and metabolism.


Mechanisms underlying the effects of WD in TBI


WD disrupts normal neuron-glial cell communication

The increased release of glutamate following TBI could stimulate astrocytic glycolysis and lactate production [79]. Astrocytic clearance of glutamate from the synaptic cleft, which takes place through sodium coupled reuptake, induces Na + /K + ATPase in astrocytes. The Na + /K + ATPase then stimulates glucose uptake and its subsequent glycolysis in astrocytes. The lactate, formed as a byproduct of glycolysis in astrocytes, is then shuttled to neurons and used as an energy source [80]. Several studies support the role of lactate in cerebral metabolism following brain injury, a concept known as "lactate as energy on demand". Yet, this metabolite can only be used in neurons receiving enough oxygen and having functional mitochondria [81]. Findings in animal models back the potential benefit of lactate metabolism in humans following TBI. For example, brain-injured rats supplied with intravenous lactate showed improved cognitive abilities [82]. Furthermore, the ability of the brain to use lactate as a fuel may be one of the key predictors of the outcome of TBI in humans [83]. Interestingly, it was shown that the expression of astrocytic glutamate transporters is reduced in hippocampi of mice on a WD, which correlated with decreased lactate levels [84]. Glutamate transporter downregulation could also lead to the accumulation of glutamate in the synaptic cleft, thus contributing to excitotoxicity [84]. In addition, WD was shown to decrease astrocytic expression of connexin-43, a protein component of gap junctions that connect neighboring astrocytes. Gap junctions are essential for the formation of the astrocyte metabolic network and for proper lactate dynamics [84]. In this context, WD could interfere with the metabolic supply, further contributing to the metabolic dysfunction post TBI.


WD induced-dysbiosis contributes to the secondary injury

The gut-brain axis constitutes a signaling link between the gastrointestinal tract and the CNS [85]. Around 3 £ 10 13 bacterial cells colonize the human body [86]. Of specific interest, this microbial diversity influences the gut-brain axis through a bidirectional interaction. The gut flora can contribute to the production of a range of neuroactive molecules, such as acetylcholine, histamine, melatonin, and serotonin [87]. In addition, several studies show that gut microbiota composition can impact insulin resistance, which is known to compromise cognitive functions as discussed above. Commensal gut bacteria may enhance insulin sensitivity by modulating the production of the incretin hormone glucagon-like peptide-1 [88]. Moreover, alterations in microbial diversity has been linked to microglial activation, BBB disruption, anxiety-like behavior and neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's disease, all of which may indicate a possible impact on TBI outcomes [89].

Following TBI, the gastrointestinal tract is affected possibly due to autonomic nervous system disruption [90]. Specifically, decreased contractility, mucosal atrophy, decreased tight junction proteins and increased permeability were observed [91,92]. Concurrent with the increased intestinal permeability following TBI, more pathogenic substances such as LPS are able to penetrate the vascular system of the host causing endotoxemia. In this context, endotoxemia-induced systemic inflammation is hypothesized to influence the TBI-activated microglia, further contributing to the secondary injury. Importantly, intestinal permeability positively correlated with levels of markers of inflammation and the levels of endotoxins in the plasma post TBI [93].

The gut microbiome is altered as early as 2 h post-TBI in rodent models. Representation of the beneficial bacteria of the Firmicutes phylum was decreased while representation of pathogenic bacterial families of the Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes phyla increased. Interestingly, injury lesion volume positively correlated with the increased levels of Proteobacteria and negatively correlated with the levels of Firmicutes [94].

Along the same lines, WD altered the Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio and decreased the overall microbial diversity [95,96]. Mice on WD exhibited decreased levels of Bifidobacteria, a group of bacteria shown to have protective functions. In addition, WD was noted to increase endotoxin production by the gut microbiota as well as plasma endotoxin concentrations [95]. Interestingly, other studies demonstrated that WD caused decreased hippocampal-related functions accompanied by alteration of gut bacteria [97]. Treatment of WD mice with A. muciniphila successfully reversed the cognitive deficits and improved cognitive performance [97]. In this context, it is evident that intake of WD induces an intestinal dysbiosis that can worsen the inflammation state as well as TBI outcomes (Fig. 1).


WD induces inflammation through the TLR-4 pathway

In the context of neuronal inflammation, WD has been associated with increased microglial reactivity [98]. Interestingly, microglial Male and female C57 BL/6 mice (six month old) HFD was given for four months before induction of the brain injury Mild TBI: controlled cortical impact model -# Corticosterone levels and weight gain in obese male mice subjected to TBI compared to non-injured mice. -HFD-exacerbated TBI-induced microglia activity in male mice -HFD-exacerbated TBI-induced anxiety in male mice (67) HFD: high fat diet; BDNF: Brain-derived neurotrophic factor; CREB: cAMP response element-binding; bHB: b-hydroxybutyrate; CCI: controlled cortical impact.


A. Shaito et al. / EBioMedicine 57 (2020) 102829

reactivity is shown to be mediated by Toll-Like Receptor 4 (TLR-4), a pattern recognition receptor that is highly expressed on brain microglia and known to bind saturated fatty acids [98,99]. In addition, WD-fed rodents exhibited high expression of TLR-4 in the CNS, concurrently with increased microglial activation. Indeed, TAK-242, a TLR-4 antagonist, reduced hippocampal microglial inflammation in WD-fed mice while having no effect on mice fed the normal chow [98]. Downregulation of TLR-4 by TLR-4 shRNA also decreased WDinduced hypothalamic microglial inflammation and successfully restored the WD-induced alteration of glucose homeostasis [99].

In the context of TBI, TLR-4 was studied as a therapeutic target in the management of TBI outcomes. TLR-4 was found to be upregulated in hippocampal astrocytes and neurons post-injury in a manner that correlated with the extent of neuroinflammation, brain edema and neurologic deficits [100]. Silencing cerebral TLR-4 expression in rats by administering TLR-4 shRNA pre-injury successfully decreased the TBI-induced neuroinflammation. Similarly, the experimental group showed decreased brain edema and improved neurobehavioral outcomes [100]. Taken together, one can recognize that TLR-4 is a key mediator of neuroinflammation and neurobehavioral deficit both in the context of WD and TBI. We therefore hypothesize that WD exacerbates TBI outcomes by further contributing to TLR-4 activation, leading to the aggravation of the neuroinflammatory insult and the secondary injury cascade.


WD alters mTOR signaling and autophagy

The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a highly conserved serine/threonine kinase that plays an integral role in cell growth and differentiation. It has been shown to be of specific importance in neuron physiology, where it regulates synaptic plasticity, learning and memory [101]. However, dysregulation and hyperactivation of mTOR has been associated with insulin resistance, systemic inflammation [102] and microglial activation [103]. Interestingly, WD-fed mice exhibit increased phosphorylation of mTOR in the brain coinciding with increased microglial activation and cognitive dysfunction [104]. Moreover, the increased signs of neuroinflammation post TBI, observed in high-caloric intake mice compared to normal caloricintake mice, were accompanied by increased levels of mTOR, which demonstrates that WD contributes to the secondary brain injury in part through activation of mTOR [105]. Alternatively, mTOR acts as a potent inhibitor of autophagy. In this context, the autophagic flux was altered in the hippocampi of WD-fed mice associated with increased accumulation of amyloidogenic plaques [106]. In the context of TBI, calorie-restricted (CR) mice showed increased levels of Beclin1 and LC3B as compared to normal and high calorie-intake mice post-injury. Another study observed that administration of rapamycin (inhibitor of mTOR) post-TBI was associated with improved TBI outcomes and a decrease in apoptotic index [107]. In Fig. 1. WD aggravates the neuronal insult post-TBI: By impacting similar molecular pathways as TBI, WD can dramatically worsen the outcomes that follow TBI. For example WD can exacerbate TBI-induced energy crisis and metabolic dysfunction leading to an exacerbated neuroinflammation. Several potential pathways appear to contribute to the increased vulnerability of the brain to the outcomes of TBI in individuals who are on a WD. These contributing pathways that range from gut dysbiosis to epigenetic modulation in addition to induction of inflammatory pathways, alteration of autophagic/oxidative flux and the alteration of the adipokine profile. All of these pathways culminate in an augmented neuronal injury.

conclusion, mTOR activation plays a role in the secondary injury post-TBI, a situation which can be aggravated by the intake of WD. Specific targeting of this pathway can therefore have beneficial consequences in the management of TBI, especially in obese individuals (Fig. 2).


WD increases oxidative stress parameters by impacting BDNF and anti-oxidant defense systems

Indeed, TBI is known to induce lipid peroxidation in the form of excessive accumulation of oxidized phospholipids that is almost instantaneously triggered post-injury [108]. Chronic WD feeding increased lipid peroxidation in mouse hippocampus [109]. Apart from that, the expression levels of anti-oxidant defense system proteins superoxide dismutase-2 and catalase were significantly decreased upon WD consumption [110], as well as the activation of Nrf2, the primary transcription factor responsible for regulation of phase II antioxidant response [111]. WD feeding before and after mTBI aggravated oxidative damage manifested as increased protein oxidation [112]. In the same study, WD exacerbated the effects of TBI on synaptic plasticity and cognitive functions by the enhanced suppression of BDNF, Synapsin I, and CREB expression, already attenuated by TBI. These results are in agreement with other evidence showing that TBI-induced oxidative stress can affect the injured brain by acting through the BDNF system, which modulates synapsin I and CREB to alter synaptic plasticity and cognition [113,114]. At the same time, WD-induced oxidative stress can also suppress BDNF levels in various brain regions including the hippocampus and frontal cortex [115]. Together, it is evident that WD can exacerbate TBI-induced alteration of the BDNF system leading to impaired synaptic plasticity and cognitive functions (Fig. 1).


WD alters the adipokine profile

Adipokines are bioactive molecules, secreted by adipose tissue, that act in an autocrine, paracrine or endocrine manner and play specific roles in obesity-dependent inflammation and insulin resistance [116]. Based on their target receptors and downstream signaling, adipokines can be classified into hormones such as leptin and adiponectin, angiogenic factors such as resistin and neuregulin, or cytokines including IL-1b, IL-6, IL-10, TNF-a, and TGF-b [117]. Indeed, various adipokine receptors are present in the brain indicating that the metabolic state of the adipose tissue has the potential to modulate neuronal function [118]. Adipose tissue expands in response to excessive caloric intake [119]. This leads to aberrant secretion of adipokines including pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1b, IL-6 and TNF-a. This adipokine imbalance appears to be involved in the mechanisms that take place in the secondary injury post-TBI. During this period of high energy demand, the expression of neuroinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-a is induced [120] mediating the metabolic changes observed following brain injury [121]. While WD feeding alters the expression levels and signaling pathways of leptin and adiponectin [122,123] leading to inflammatory outcomes similar to these observed in Alzheimer's disease and dementia [124], little is known about the possible role of either mediator in the secondary injury post-TBI and the potential alteration of their function in the context of WD feeding (Fig. 1).


WD induces epigenetic dysregulation exacerbating secondary injury

Emerging findings have shown that dietary intake can induce changes in gene expression through alterations in the epigenetic machinery [125]. Studies of normal brains have established the vital role of epigenetic modulators in neuroplasticity, learning and memory [126]. Several epigenetic mechanisms, including DNA methylation, histones post-translational modifications, and miRNA regulation of gene expression are increasingly implicated in the pathophysiology post-TBI [127]. Interestingly, WD feeding was shown to impact neuroplasticity and behavioral changes through the modification of the bdnf gene methylation status in rats [128]. As mentioned previously, the BDNF system malfunction has been implicated in the pathology of TBI. Significantly, studies of the effect of different dietary patterns on bdnf methylation showed that WD enhanced bdnf methylation with a negative impact on cognitive function that was mediated by the downregulation of several cellular metabolic and mitochondrial Fig. 2. HFD exacerbates the effects of TBI on synaptic plasticity and cognitive functions: HFD alters the molecular machinery responsible for maintaining neuronal function and homeostasis following brain injury. HFD increases oxidative stress parameters by impacting BDNF and components of the anti-oxidant defense systems. This is accompanied by pronounced decreases of CREB protein levels (a downstream transcription factor that modulates synaptic transmission). Likewise, HFD can worsen the dysregulation of mTOR which enhances the incidence of insulin resistance, systemic inflammation and microglial activation. factors including Sirt1 and PGC-1a [128]. This adds a further layer of complexity to the effect of WD on neuronal resilience post-TBI as the ensuing epigenetic changes will not only compromise BDNF-mediated neuronal recovery, but also exacerbate the energy crisis. Of particular interest, the epigenetic neuronal impact of WD may persist for several generations. Dietary choices during the critical window of germ line development may profoundly characterize the phenotype of subsequent generations and maternal feeding on a WD can create an unfavorable intrauterine environment during pregnancy leading to long-term health outcomes after birth such as the predisposition to neurological disorders [129].


Exercise can ameliorate the metabolic effects of the WD and TBI

Exercise contributes to the amelioration of WD-and TBI-induced changes by affecting the molecular pathways involved in energy metabolism and synaptic plasticity [130,131]. Its effects include being anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory and anti-apoptotic, in addition to augmentation of neurogenesis and neuroplasticity [131,132]. Exercise can enhance neurogenesis by increasing the levels of BDNF, IGF-1 and VEGF [133,134]. Additionally, exercise-induced mitochondrial biogenesis can assist in repair mechanisms post-TBI [135]. A widespread mitochondrial biogenic response occurs by up-regulating PGC1a, SIRT1 and the mitochondrial enzyme citrate synthase in different regions of the brain [136]. All these mechanisms can help explain the role exercise plays in the amelioration of cognitive deficits post-TBI [137].

The beneficial effects of exercise also extend to the amelioration of the negative impacts of WD on brain function. Exercise can enhance mitochondrial performance and restore insulin sensitivity by increasing TCA cycle flux and by coupling ligand-induced PPAR activity. This pathway also includes remodeling of downstream metabolic processes mediated by PGC1 [138,139]. Interestingly, exercise has been shown to prevent WD-induced dysbiosis. WD-fed mice that exercised exhibited decreased Firmicutes/Bacteriodetes ratio in high-fatfed male mice [140]. In this context, it is evident that exercise can slow down or halt the metabolic changes induced by WD and as a result can alter TBI outcomes.


Conclusion

TBI is a debilitating brain insult associated with significant consequences, mainly due to the secondary injury. Although TBI outcomes can be silent, especially in case of mild injury, they are associated with long term impairment in brain function. Given the drastic change in eating habits in the past century, more effort towards the elucidation of mechanisms of interaction between increased caloric intake and TBI is warranted. The aim of such an effort will be to develop effective interventions to reduce the secondary injurious cascades post-TBI. By impacting similar molecular pathways as TBI, WD can dramatically worsen post-injury outcomes by exacerbating neuroinflammation (Fig. 1). Several potential pathways appear to contribute to the increased vulnerability of the brain to traumatic injury in individuals on western diet. These pathways include gut dysbiosis, epigenetic modulation, induction of inflammatory pathways, alteration of autophagic/oxidative flux, and alteration of the adipokine profile, and ultimately culminate in an augmented neuronal injury.


Outstanding questions

Rigorous systematic investigation of the effect of WD feeding on the progress of secondary injury in TBI patients together with the interaction with metabolic comorbidities is required. Careful experimental design with respect to the adoption of the appropriate timeframes to study different types of injury as well as the establishment of causal relationships will permit the elucidation of crucial signaling pathways with high potential for corrective outcomes after intervention. Moreover, the study of the differential effect of KD as opposed to WD is warranted. Finally, the translation of these concepts into clinical practice is prudent.


Search criteria

To address these questions, studies on the topic were identified by searches of MEDLINE, PubMed, Google Scholar and references from relevant articles using the search terms "High-fat diet AND Cognitive function", "HFD AND TBI", "Ketogenic diet AND TBI", ''Lactate AND HFD OR TBI'', ''HFD AND TBI AND inflammation OR oxidative stress OR insulin resistance OR oxidative stress''. Additionally, searches were performed based on investigator name. Articles published between 1974 and 2019 in English and non-English languages were included.


Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. 


Coordinated literature search and wrote the first draft of the manuscrpit. HH, KJH, and WF -Contributed equally to literature search and providing written summaries of search results. SA -Designed hte figures in the manuscript based on the manuscript. FA, KZ, and AHE -Contributed to literature search for manuscript revisions. AFE and FHK -conceptualized the manuscript idea, supervised the work effort, reviewed, edited and modified all versions of the manuscript. All authors reviewed and agree with the content of the manuscript.

Table 1 .
1The detrimental effects of HFD on the metabolism and cognition of the traumatically injured brain of experimental animals.WD relative toTBI Composition of the diet given Species and age of experimental animalsEndpoint 
Brain injury model 
Outcome and results 
References 


AcknowledgmentsThis work has been funded by a joint grant funded by the National Council for Scientific Research in Lebanon (CNRS-L) and the American University of Beirut (AUB) granted to AFE and an AUB-FM grant to FK (MPP) and AHE (MPP320133). The funding agencies had no role in the writing of the manuscript or the decision to submit it for publication.
Nutritional ketosis for weight management and reversal of metabolic syndrome. V M Gershuni, S L Yan, V Medici, Curr Nutr Rep. 73Gershuni VM, Yan SL, Medici V. Nutritional ketosis for weight management and reversal of metabolic syndrome. Curr Nutr Rep 2018;7(3):97-106.

Is there a "metabolic-mood syndrome"? A review of the relationship between obesity and mood disorders. R B Mansur, E Brietzke, R S Mcintyre, Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 52Mansur RB, Brietzke E, McIntyre RS. Is there a "metabolic-mood syndrome"? A review of the relationship between obesity and mood disorders. Neurosci Biobe- hav Rev 2015;52:89-104.

The impact of obesity on neurodegenerative diseases. J N Mazon, A H De Mello, G K Ferreira, G T Rezin, Life Sci. 182Mazon JN, de Mello AH, Ferreira GK, Rezin GT. The impact of obesity on neurode- generative diseases. Life Sci 2017;182:22-8.

Linking the metabolic state and mitochondrial DNA in chronic disease, health, and aging. M Picard, D M Turnbull, Diabetes. 623Picard M, Turnbull DM. Linking the metabolic state and mitochondrial DNA in chronic disease, health, and aging. Diabetes 2013;62(3):672-8.

Mitochondrial DNA damage is more extensive and persists longer than nuclear DNA damage in human cells following oxidative stress. F M Yakes, B Van Houten, Proc Natl Acad Sci. 942Yakes FM, Van Houten B. Mitochondrial DNA damage is more extensive and per- sists longer than nuclear DNA damage in human cells following oxidative stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94(2):514-9.

High-fat diet causes mitochondrial dysfunction as a result of impaired ADP sensitivity. P M Miotto, P J Leblanc, G P Holloway, Diabetes. 6711Miotto PM, LeBlanc PJ, Holloway GP. High-fat diet causes mitochondrial dysfunc- tion as a result of impaired ADP sensitivity. Diabetes 2018;67(11):2199-205.

Mitochondria in neuroplasticity and neurological disorders. M P Mattson, M Gleichmann, A Cheng, Neuron. 605Mattson MP, Gleichmann M, Cheng A. Mitochondria in neuroplasticity and neuro- logical disorders. Neuron 2008;60(5):748-66.

Mitochondrial DNA repair: a critical player in the response of cells of the CNS to genotoxic insults. S P Ledoux, N M Druzhyna, S B Hollensworth, J F Harrison, G L Wilson, Neuroscience. 1454LeDoux SP, Druzhyna NM, Hollensworth SB, Harrison JF, Wilson GL. Mitochondrial DNA repair: a critical player in the response of cells of the CNS to genotoxic insults. Neuroscience 2007;145(4):1249-59.

Role of brain insulin receptor in control of body weight and reproduction. J C Br€ Uning, D Gautam, D J Burks, J Gillette, M Schubert, P C Orban, Science. 2895487Br€ uning JC, Gautam D, Burks DJ, Gillette J, Schubert M, Orban PC, et al. Role of brain insulin receptor in control of body weight and reproduction. Science 2000;289(5487):2122-5.

Role of insulin and insulin receptor in learning and memory. W-Q Zhao, D L Alkon, Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1771À2Zhao W-Q, Alkon DL. Role of insulin and insulin receptor in learning and memory. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2001;177(1À2):125-34.

Insulin improves memory and reduces chronic neuroinflammation in the hippocampus of young but not aged brains. L Adzovic, A E Lynn, D&apos; Angelo, H M Crockett, A M Kaercher, R M Royer, S E , J Neuroinflamm. 1263Adzovic L, Lynn AE, D'Angelo HM, Crockett AM, Kaercher RM, Royer SE, et al. Insu- lin improves memory and reduces chronic neuroinflammation in the hippocam- pus of young but not aged brains. J Neuroinflamm 2015;12:63.

Brain insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer disease: concepts and conundrums. S E Arnold, Z Arvanitakis, S L Macauley-Rambach, A M Koenig, H Y Wang, R S Ahima, Nat Rev Neurol. 143Arnold SE, Arvanitakis Z, Macauley-Rambach SL, Koenig AM, Wang HY, Ahima RS, et al. Brain insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer disease: concepts and conundrums. Nat Rev Neurol 2018;14(3):168-81.

High-fat diets, insulin resistance and declining cognitive function. C E Greenwood, G Winocur, Neurobiol Aging. 261SupplGreenwood CE, Winocur G. High-fat diets, insulin resistance and declining cogni- tive function. Neurobiol Aging 2005;26(Suppl 1):42-5.

Alzheimer's disease clinical and research update for health care practitioners. P A Defina, R S Moser, M Glenn, J D Lichtenstein, J Fellus, J Aging Res. 2013DeFina PA, Moser RS, Glenn M, Lichtenstein JD, Fellus J. Alzheimer's disease clini- cal and research update for health care practitioners. J Aging Res 2013:1-9.

High fat/high glucose diet induces metabolic syndrome in an experimental rat model. S Moreno-Fernandez, M Garces-Rimon, G Vera, J Astier, J F Landrier, M Miguel, Nutrients. 1010Moreno-Fernandez S, Garces-Rimon M, Vera G, Astier J, Landrier JF, Miguel M. High fat/high glucose diet induces metabolic syndrome in an experimental rat model. Nutrients 2018;10(10):1-15.

Dietary fat intake and the risk of incident dementia in the Rotterdam study. S Kalmijn, L J Launer, A Ott, J C Witteman, A Hofman, M M Breteler, Ann Neurol. 425Kalmijn S, Launer LJ, Ott A, Witteman JC, Hofman A, Breteler MM. Dietary fat intake and the risk of incident dementia in the Rotterdam study. Ann Neurol 1997;42(5):776-82.

Obesity and cognitive decline: role of inflammation and vascular changes. J C Nguyen, A S Killcross, T A Jenkins, Front Neurosci. 8375Nguyen JC, Killcross AS, Jenkins TA. Obesity and cognitive decline: role of inflam- mation and vascular changes. Front Neurosci 2014;8:375.

Traumatic brain injury after frontal crashes: relationship with body mass index. F Tagliaferri, C Compagnone, N Yoganandan, T A Gennarelli, J Trauma. 663Tagliaferri F, Compagnone C, Yoganandan N, Gennarelli TA. Traumatic brain injury after frontal crashes: relationship with body mass index. J Trauma 2009;66 (3):727-9.

Obesity and overweight problems among individuals 1 to 25 years following acute rehabilitation for traumatic brain injury: a NIDILRR traumatic brain injury model systems study. L E Dreer, J M Ketchum, T A Novack, J Bogner, E R Felix, J D Corrigan, J Head Trauma Rehabil. 334Dreer LE, Ketchum JM, Novack TA, Bogner J, Felix ER, Corrigan JD, et al. Obesity and overweight problems among individuals 1 to 25 years following acute reha- bilitation for traumatic brain injury: a NIDILRR traumatic brain injury model sys- tems study. J Head Trauma Rehabil 2018;33(4):246-56.

Hypothalamic proinflammatory lipid accumulation, inflammation, and insulin resistance in rats fed a high-fat diet. K A Posey, D J Clegg, R L Printz, J Byun, G J Morton, A Vivekanandan-Giri, Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2965Posey KA, Clegg DJ, Printz RL, Byun J, Morton GJ, Vivekanandan-Giri A, et al. Hypo- thalamic proinflammatory lipid accumulation, inflammation, and insulin resis- tance in rats fed a high-fat diet. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2009;296(5): E1003-12.

Obesity and the role of adipose tissue in inflammation and metabolism. A S Greenberg, M S Obin, Am J Clin Nutr. 832Greenberg AS, Obin MS. Obesity and the role of adipose tissue in inflammation and metabolism. Am J Clin Nutr 2006;83(2):461s-5s.

A major role of insulin in promoting obesity-associated adipose tissue inflammation. D J Pedersen, A Guilherme, L V Danai, L Heyda, A Matevossian, J Cohen, Mol Metab. 47Pedersen DJ, Guilherme A, Danai LV, Heyda L, Matevossian A, Cohen J, et al. A major role of insulin in promoting obesity-associated adipose tissue inflamma- tion. Mol Metab 2015;4(7):507-18.

Interleukin-1beta and caspase-1: players in the regulation of age-related cognitive dysfunction. C Gemma, P C Bickford, Rev Neurosci. 182Gemma C, Bickford PC. Interleukin-1beta and caspase-1: players in the regulation of age-related cognitive dysfunction. Rev Neurosci 2007;18(2):137-48.

Cellular and molecular basis of neurodegeneration in Parkinson disease. X S Zeng, W S Geng, J J Jia, L Chen, P P Zhang, Front Aging Neurosci. 10109Zeng XS, Geng WS, Jia JJ, Chen L, Zhang PP. Cellular and molecular basis of neuro- degeneration in Parkinson disease. Front Aging Neurosci 2018;10:109.

PPARg agonist improves neuronal insulin receptor function in hippocampus and brain mitochondria function in rats with insulin resistance induced by long term high-fat diets. N Pipatpiboon, W Pratchayasakul, N Chattipakorn, S C Chattipakorn, Endocrinology. 1531Pipatpiboon N, Pratchayasakul W, Chattipakorn N, Chattipakorn SC. PPARg ago- nist improves neuronal insulin receptor function in hippocampus and brain mito- chondria function in rats with insulin resistance induced by long term high-fat diets. Endocrinology 2012;153(1):329-38.

Food and addiction -sugars, fats and hedonic overeating. N M Avena, M S Gold, Addiction. 1067Avena NM, Gold MS. Food and addiction -sugars, fats and hedonic overeating. Addiction 2011;106(7):1214-5 discussion 9-20.

Ketogenic ratio determines metabolic effects of macronutrients and prevents interpretive bias. T Zilberter, Y Zilberter, Front Nutr. 575Zilberter T, Zilberter Y. Ketogenic ratio determines metabolic effects of macronu- trients and prevents interpretive bias. Front Nutr 2018;5:75.

Fibroblast growth factor 21 is a metabolic regulator that plays a role in the adaptation to ketosis. E M Domouzoglou, E Maratos-Flier, Am J Clin Nutr. 934Domouzoglou EM, Maratos-Flier E. Fibroblast growth factor 21 is a metabolic reg- ulator that plays a role in the adaptation to ketosis. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;93 (4):901s-5.

How does the ketogenic diet induce anti-seizure effects?. J M Rho, Neurosci Lett. 637Rho JM. How does the ketogenic diet induce anti-seizure effects? Neurosci Lett 2017;637:4-10.

Neuroprotective and disease-modifying effects of the ketogenic diet. M Gasior, M A Rogawski, A L Hartman, Behav Pharmacol. 175À6Gasior M, Rogawski MA, Hartman AL. Neuroprotective and disease-modifying effects of the ketogenic diet. Behav Pharmacol 2006;17(5À6):431-9.

The antidepressant properties of the ketogenic diet. P Murphy, S Likhodii, K Nylen, W M Burnham, Biol Psychiatry. 5612Murphy P, Likhodii S, Nylen K, Burnham WM. The antidepressant properties of the ketogenic diet. Biol Psychiatry 2004;56(12):981-3.

Dietary ketosis enhances memory in mild cognitive impairment. R Krikorian, M D Shidler, K Dangelo, S C Couch, S C Benoit, D J Clegg, Neurobiol Aging. 332Krikorian R, Shidler MD, Dangelo K, Couch SC, Benoit SC, Clegg DJ. Dietary ketosis enhances memory in mild cognitive impairment. Neurobiol Aging 2012;33(2) 425.e19-27.

Clinical review: ketones and brain injury. H White, B Venkatesh, Crit Care. 152219White H, Venkatesh B. Clinical review: ketones and brain injury. Crit Care 2011;15 (2):219.

Diet and inflammation in cognitive ageing and Alzheimer's disease. A M Mcgrattan, B Mcguinness, M C Mckinley, F Kee, P Passmore, J V Woodside, Curr Nutr Rep. 82McGrattan AM, McGuinness B, McKinley MC, Kee F, Passmore P, Woodside JV, et al. Diet and inflammation in cognitive ageing and Alzheimer's disease. Curr Nutr Rep 2019;8(2):53-65.

Mediterranean diet and cognitive health: initial results from the Hellenic longitudinal investigation of ageing and diet. C A Anastasiou, M Yannakoulia, M H Kosmidis, E Dardiotis, G M Hadjigeorgiou, P Sakka, PLoS ONE. 128182048Anastasiou CA, Yannakoulia M, Kosmidis MH, Dardiotis E, Hadjigeorgiou GM, Sakka P, et al. Mediterranean diet and cognitive health: initial results from the Hellenic longitudinal investigation of ageing and diet. PLoS ONE 2017;12(8) e0182048-e.

Mediterranean diet and age-related cognitive decline: a randomized clinical trial. C Valls-Pedret, A Sala-Vila, M Serra-Mir, Corella D De La Torre, R Martinez-Gonzalez, M A , JAMA Intern Med. 1757Valls-Pedret C, Sala-Vila A, Serra-Mir M, Corella D, de la Torre R, Martinez-Gonza- lez MA, et al. Mediterranean diet and age-related cognitive decline: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175(7):1094-103.

Mediterranean diet improves cognition: the PREDIMED-NAVARRA randomised trial. E H Martinez-Lapiscina, P Clavero, E Toledo, R Estruch, J Salas-Salvado, San Julian, B , J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 8412Martinez-Lapiscina EH, Clavero P, Toledo E, Estruch R, Salas-Salvado J, San Julian B, et al. Mediterranean diet improves cognition: the PREDIMED-NAVARRA rando- mised trial. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2013;84(12):1318-25.

Mediterranean diet and insulin sensitivity, lipid profile and blood pressure levels, in overweight and obese people; the Attica study. N Tzima, C Pitsavos, D B Panagiotakos, J Skoumas, A Zampelas, C Chrysohoou, Lipids Health Dis. 6122Tzima N, Pitsavos C, Panagiotakos DB, Skoumas J, Zampelas A, Chrysohoou C, et al. Mediterranean diet and insulin sensitivity, lipid profile and blood pressure levels, in overweight and obese people; the Attica study. Lipids Health Dis 2007;6(1):22.

The DASH diet and insulin sensitivity. A L Hinderliter, M A Babyak, A Sherwood, J A Blumenthal, Curr Hypertens Rep. 131Hinderliter AL, Babyak MA, Sherwood A, Blumenthal JA. The DASH diet and insulin sensitivity. Curr Hypertens Rep 2011;13(1):67-73.

Traumatic brain injury: integrated approaches to improve prevention, clinical care, and research. Air Maas, D K Menon, P D Adelson, N Andelic, M J Bell, A Belli, Lancet Neurol. 1612Maas AIR, Menon DK, Adelson PD, Andelic N, Bell MJ, Belli A, et al. Traumatic brain injury: integrated approaches to improve prevention, clinical care, and research. Lancet Neurol 2017;16(12):987-1048.

Secondary brain injury: predicting and preventing insults. C Lazaridis, C G Rusin, C S Robertson, Neuropharmacology. 145Lazaridis C, Rusin CG, Robertson CS. Secondary brain injury: predicting and pre- venting insults. Neuropharmacology 2019;145(Pt B):145-52.

Biochemical, cellular, and molecular mechanisms in the evolution of secondary damage after severe traumatic brain injury in infants and children: lessons learned from the bedside. P M Kochanek, R S Clark, R A Ruppel, P D Adelson, M J Bell, M J Whalen, Pediatr Crit Care Med. 11Kochanek PM, Clark RS, Ruppel RA, Adelson PD, Bell MJ, Whalen MJ, et al. Bio- chemical, cellular, and molecular mechanisms in the evolution of secondary dam- age after severe traumatic brain injury in infants and children: lessons learned from the bedside. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2000;1(1):4-19.

Neuroinflammation after traumatic brain injury: opportunities for therapeutic intervention. A Kumar, D J Loane, Brain Behav Immun. 268Kumar A, Loane DJ. Neuroinflammation after traumatic brain injury: opportuni- ties for therapeutic intervention. Brain Behav Immun 2012;26(8):1191-201.

An overview of the basic science of concussion and subconcussion: where we are and where we are going. M L Dashnaw, A L Petraglia, J E Bailes, Neurosurg Focus. 336Dashnaw ML, Petraglia AL, Bailes JE. An overview of the basic science of concus- sion and subconcussion: where we are and where we are going. Neurosurg Focus 2012;33(6):1-9 E5.

Biomechanics of sport concussion: quest for the elusive injury threshold. K M Guskiewicz, J P Mihalik, Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 391Guskiewicz KM, Mihalik JP. Biomechanics of sport concussion: quest for the elu- sive injury threshold. Exerc Sport Sci Rev 2011;39(1):4-11.

Association between recurrent concussion and late-life cognitive impairment in retired professional football players. K M Guskiewicz, S W Marshall, J Bailes, M Mccrea, R C Cantu, C Randolph, Neurosurgery. 574Guskiewicz KM, Marshall SW, Bailes J, McCrea M, Cantu RC, Randolph C, et al. Association between recurrent concussion and late-life cognitive impairment in retired professional football players. Neurosurgery 2005;57(4):719-26 discussion -26.

The neurometabolic cascade of concussion. C C Giza, D A Hovda, J Athl Train. 363Giza CC, Hovda DA. The neurometabolic cascade of concussion. J Athl Train 2001;36(3):228-35.

Metabolic crisis in severely head-injured patients: is ischemia just the tip of the iceberg?. E Carre, M Ogier, H Boret, A Montcriol, L Bourdon, Jean-Jacques , R , Front Neurol. 4146Carre E, Ogier M, Boret H, Montcriol A, Bourdon L, Jean-Jacques R. Metabolic crisis in severely head-injured patients: is ischemia just the tip of the iceberg? Front Neurol 2013;4:146.

Neurochemical changes following combined hypoxemia and hemorrhagic shock in a rat model of penetrating ballistic-like brain injury: a microdialysis study. L Y Leung, Y Deng-Bryant, K Cardiff, M Winter, F Tortella, D Shear, J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 815Leung LY, Deng-Bryant Y, Cardiff K, Winter M, Tortella F, Shear D. Neurochemical changes following combined hypoxemia and hemorrhagic shock in a rat model of penetrating ballistic-like brain injury: a microdialysis study. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2016;81(5):860-7.

Metabolic imaging of energy metabolism in traumatic brain injury using hyperpolarized [1-(13)C]pyruvate. S J Devience, X Lu, J Proctor, P Rangghran, E R Melhem, R Gullapalli, Sci Rep. 711907DeVience SJ, Lu X, Proctor J, Rangghran P, Melhem ER, Gullapalli R, et al. Metabolic imaging of energy metabolism in traumatic brain injury using hyperpolarized [1-(13)C]pyruvate. Sci Rep 2017;7(1):1907.

Metabolic crisis without brain ischemia is common after traumatic brain injury: a combined microdialysis and positron emission tomography study. P Vespa, M Bergsneider, N Hattori, H M Wu, S C Huang, N A Martin, J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 256Vespa P, Bergsneider M, Hattori N, Wu HM, Huang SC, Martin NA, et al. Metabolic crisis without brain ischemia is common after traumatic brain injury: a combined microdialysis and positron emission tomography study. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2005;25(6):763-74.

Cerebral hyperglycolysis following severe traumatic brain injury in humans: a positron emission tomography study. M Bergsneider, D A Hovda, E Shalmon, D F Kelly, P M Vespa, N A Martin, J Neurosurg. 862Bergsneider M, Hovda DA, Shalmon E, Kelly DF, Vespa PM, Martin NA, et al. Cere- bral hyperglycolysis following severe traumatic brain injury in humans: a posi- tron emission tomography study. J Neurosurg 1997;86(2):241-51.

Comprehensive profile of acute mitochondrial dysfunction in a preclinical model of severe penetrating TBI. J D Pandya, L Y Leung, X Yang, W J Flerlage, J S Gilsdorf, Y Deng-Bryant, Front Neurol. 10605Pandya JD, Leung LY, Yang X, Flerlage WJ, Gilsdorf JS, Deng-Bryant Y, et al. Com- prehensive profile of acute mitochondrial dysfunction in a preclinical model of severe penetrating TBI. Front Neurol 2019;10:605.

Glutamate and GABA imbalance following traumatic brain injury. R M Guerriero, C C Giza, A Rotenberg, Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 15527Guerriero RM, Giza CC, Rotenberg A. Glutamate and GABA imbalance following traumatic brain injury. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 2015;15(5) 27-.

Mitochondria in traumatic brain injury and mitochondrial-targeted multipotential therapeutic strategies. G Cheng, R-H Kong, L-M Zhang, J-N Zhang, Br J Pharmacol. 1674Cheng G, Kong R-H, Zhang L-M, Zhang J-N. Mitochondria in traumatic brain injury and mitochondrial-targeted multipotential therapeutic strategies. Br J Pharmacol 2012;167(4):699-719.

Altered mitochondrial dynamics and TBI pathophysiology. T D Fischer, M J Hylin, J Zhao, A N Moore, M N Waxham, P K Dash, Front Syst Neurosci. 1029Fischer TD, Hylin MJ, Zhao J, Moore AN, Waxham MN, Dash PK. Altered mitochon- drial dynamics and TBI pathophysiology. Front Syst Neurosci 2016;10(29):1-12.

When a minor head injury results in enduring symptoms: a prospective investigation of risk factors for postconcussional syndrome after mild traumatic brain injury. R Hou, R Moss-Morris, R Peveler, K Mogg, B P Bradley, A Belli, J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 832Hou R, Moss-Morris R, Peveler R, Mogg K, Bradley BP, Belli A. When a minor head injury results in enduring symptoms: a prospective investigation of risk factors for postconcussional syndrome after mild traumatic brain injury. J Neurol Neuro- surg Psychiatry 2012;83(2):217-23.

Post concussion syndrome. L M Ryan, D L Warden, Int Rev Psychiatry. 154Ryan LM, Warden DL. Post concussion syndrome. Int Rev Psychiatry 2003;15 (4):310-6.

Effect of sex and age on traumatic brain injury: a geographical comparative study. R K Biswas, E Kabir, R King, Arch Public Health. 75143Biswas RK, Kabir E, King R. Effect of sex and age on traumatic brain injury: a geo- graphical comparative study. Arch Public Health 2017;75(1):43.

When is an elder old? Effect of preexisting conditions on mortality in geriatric trauma. M D Grossman, D Miller, D W Scaff, S Arcona, J Trauma. 522Grossman MD, Miller D, Scaff DW, Arcona S. When is an elder old? Effect of preex- isting conditions on mortality in geriatric trauma. J Trauma 2002;52(2):242-6.

Traumatic brain injury: does gender influence outcomes?. A Munivenkatappa, A Agrawal, D P Shukla, D Kumaraswamy, B I Devi, Int J Crit Illn Inj Sci. 62Munivenkatappa A, Agrawal A, Shukla DP, Kumaraswamy D, Devi BI. Traumatic brain injury: does gender influence outcomes? Int J Crit Illn Inj Sci 2016;6(2):70- 3.

Gender differences in acute CNS trauma and stroke: neuroprotective effects of estrogen and progesterone. R L Roof, E D Hall, J. Neurotrauma. 175Roof RL, Hall ED. Gender differences in acute CNS trauma and stroke: neuropro- tective effects of estrogen and progesterone. J. Neurotrauma 2000;17(5):367-88.

Sex matters: repetitive mild traumatic brain injury in adolescent rats. D K Wright, T J O&apos;brien, S R Shultz, R Mychasiuk, Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 49Wright DK, O'Brien TJ, Shultz SR, Mychasiuk R. Sex matters: repetitive mild trau- matic brain injury in adolescent rats. Ann Clin Transl Neurol 2017;4(9):640-54.

The effects of a high-fat sucrose diet on functional outcome following cortical contusion injury in the rat. M R Hoane, A A Swan, S E Heck, Behav Brain Res. 2231Hoane MR, Swan AA, Heck SE. The effects of a high-fat sucrose diet on functional outcome following cortical contusion injury in the rat. Behav Brain Res 2011;223 (1):119-24.

Dietary fructose aggravates the pathobiology of traumatic brain injury by influencing energy homeostasis and plasticity. R Agrawal, E Noble, L Vergnes, Z Ying, K Reue, F Gomez-Pinilla, J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 365Agrawal R, Noble E, Vergnes L, Ying Z, Reue K, Gomez-Pinilla F. Dietary fructose aggravates the pathobiology of traumatic brain injury by influencing energy homeostasis and plasticity. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2016;36(5):941-53.

A saturated-fat diet aggravates the outcome of traumatic brain injury on hippocampal plasticity and cognitive function by reducing brain-derived neurotrophic factor. A Wu, R Molteni, Z Ying, F Gomez-Pinilla, Neuroscience. 1192Wu A, Molteni R, Ying Z, Gomez-Pinilla F. A saturated-fat diet aggravates the out- come of traumatic brain injury on hippocampal plasticity and cognitive function by reducing brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Neuroscience 2003;119(2): 365-75.

Adult obese mice suffer from chronic secondary brain injury after mild TBI. M Sherman, M M Liu, S Birnbaum, S E Wolf, J P Minei, J W Gatson, J Neuroinflammation. 131171Sherman M, Liu MM, Birnbaum S, Wolf SE, Minei JP, Gatson JW. Adult obese mice suffer from chronic secondary brain injury after mild TBI. J Neuroinflammation 2016;13(1):171.

Dietary intake alters behavioral recovery and gene expression profiles in the brain of juvenile rats that have experienced a concussion. R Mychasiuk, H Hehar, I Ma, M J Esser, Front Behav Neurosci. 917Mychasiuk R, Hehar H, Ma I, Esser MJ. Dietary intake alters behavioral recovery and gene expression profiles in the brain of juvenile rats that have experienced a concussion. Front Behav Neurosci 2015;9:17.

Diet, age, and prior injury status differentially alter behavioral outcomes following concussion in rats. R Mychasiuk, H Hehar, L Van Waes, M J Esser, Neurobiol Dis. 73Mychasiuk R, Hehar H, van Waes L, Esser MJ. Diet, age, and prior injury status dif- ferentially alter behavioral outcomes following concussion in rats. Neurobiol Dis 2015;73:1-11.

Traumatic brain injury and obesity induce persistent central insulin resistance. K Karelina, B Sarac, L M Freeman, K R Gaier, Z M Weil, Eur J Neurosci. 438Karelina K, Sarac B, Freeman LM, Gaier KR, Weil ZM. Traumatic brain injury and obesity induce persistent central insulin resistance. Eur J Neurosci 2016;43 (8):1034-43.

Gender differences in insulin resistance, body composition, and energy balance. E B Geer, W Shen, Gend Med. 61Suppl. SupplGeer EB, Shen W. Gender differences in insulin resistance, body composition, and energy balance. Gend Med 2009;6 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):60-75.

Sex differences in the effect of high-fat diet feeding on rat white adipose tissue mitochondrial function and insulin sensitivity. E Amengual-Cladera, I Llado, M Gianotti, A M Proenza, Metabolism. 618Amengual-Cladera E, Llado I, Gianotti M, Proenza AM. Sex differences in the effect of high-fat diet feeding on rat white adipose tissue mitochondrial function and insulin sensitivity. Metabolism 2012;61(8):1108-17.

Sexually dimorphic myeloid inflammatory and metabolic responses to diet-induced obesity. C Griffin, N Lanzetta, L Eter, K Singer, Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 3112Griffin C, Lanzetta N, Eter L, Singer K. Sexually dimorphic myeloid inflammatory and metabolic responses to diet-induced obesity. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2016;311(2):R211-6.

. P M Diet, Neurotrauma Ketones, Epilepsia. 49Diet PM. ketones, and neurotrauma. Epilepsia 2008;49:111-3.

Age-dependent reduction of cortical contusion volume by ketones after traumatic brain injury. M L Prins, L S Fujima, D A Hovda, J Neurosci Res. 823Prins ML, Fujima LS, Hovda DA. Age-dependent reduction of cortical contusion volume by ketones after traumatic brain injury. J Neurosci Res 2005;82(3): 413-20.

Augmenting brain metabolism to increase macroand chaperone-mediated autophagy for decreasing neuronal proteotoxicity and aging. B Loos, D J Klionsky, E Wong, Prog Neurobiol. 156Loos B, Klionsky DJ, Wong E. Augmenting brain metabolism to increase macro- and chaperone-mediated autophagy for decreasing neuronal proteotoxicity and aging. Prog Neurobiol 2017;156:90-106.

Ketogenic diet reduces cytochrome C release and cellular apoptosis following traumatic brain injury in juvenile rats. Z G Hu, H D Wang, Jin W Yin, H X , Ann Clin Lab Sci. 391Hu ZG, Wang HD, Jin W, Yin HX. Ketogenic diet reduces cytochrome C release and cellular apoptosis following traumatic brain injury in juvenile rats. Ann Clin Lab Sci 2009;39(1):76-83.

Ketogenic diet decreases oxidative stress and improves mitochondrial respiratory complex activity. T Greco, T C Glenn, D A Hovda, M L Prins, J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 369Greco T, Glenn TC, Hovda DA, Prins ML. Ketogenic diet decreases oxidative stress and improves mitochondrial respiratory complex activity. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2016;36(9):1603-13.

Cerebral lactate metabolism after traumatic brain injury. C Patet, T Suys, L Carteron, M Oddo, Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 16431Patet C, Suys T, Carteron L, Oddo M. Cerebral lactate metabolism after traumatic brain injury. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 2016;16(4):31.

Astrocytes couple synaptic activity to glucose utilization in the brain. P J Magistretti, L Pellerin, News Physiol Sci. 14Magistretti PJ, Pellerin L. Astrocytes couple synaptic activity to glucose utilization in the brain. News Physiol Sci 1999;14:177-82.

Lactate and glucose as energy substrates and their role in traumatic brain injury and therapy. B Alessandri, M Gugliotta, J E Levasseur, M R Bullock, Future Neurol. 42Alessandri B, Gugliotta M, Levasseur JE, Bullock MR. Lactate and glucose as energy substrates and their role in traumatic brain injury and therapy. Future Neurol 2009;4(2):209-28.

Effect of lactate therapy upon cognitive deficits after traumatic brain injury in the rat. R Holloway, Z Zhou, H B Harvey, J E Levasseur, A C Rice, D Sun, Acta Neurochir Wien. 1499Holloway R, Zhou Z, Harvey HB, Levasseur JE, Rice AC, Sun D, et al. Effect of lactate therapy upon cognitive deficits after traumatic brain injury in the rat. Acta Neuro- chir Wien 2007;149(9):919-27 discussion 27.

Energy dysfunction as a predictor of outcome after moderate or severe head injury: indices of oxygen, glucose, and lactate metabolism. T C Glenn, D F Kelly, W J Boscardin, D L Mcarthur, P Vespa, M Oertel, J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2310Glenn TC, Kelly DF, Boscardin WJ, McArthur DL, Vespa P, Oertel M, et al. Energy dysfunction as a predictor of outcome after moderate or severe head injury: indi- ces of oxygen, glucose, and lactate metabolism. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2003;23(10):1239-50.

High-fat diet suppresses the astrocytic process arborization and downregulates the glial glutamate transporters in the hippocampus of mice. S F Tsai, H T Wu, P C Chen, Y W Chen, M Yu, T F Wang, Brain Res. 1700Tsai SF, Wu HT, Chen PC, Chen YW, Yu M, Wang TF, et al. High-fat diet suppresses the astrocytic process arborization and downregulates the glial glutamate trans- porters in the hippocampus of mice. Brain Res 2018;1700:66-77.

Postnatal microbial colonization programs the hypothalamicÀpituitaryÀadrenal system for stress response in mice. N Sudo, Y Chida, Y Aiba, J Sonoda, N Oyama, X N Yu, J Physiol Lond. 5581Sudo N, Chida Y, Aiba Y, Sonoda J, Oyama N, Yu XN, et al. Postnatal microbial colo- nization programs the hypothalamicÀpituitaryÀadrenal system for stress response in mice. J Physiol Lond 2004;558(1):263-75.

Revised estimates for the number of human and bacteria cells in the body. R Sender, S Fuchs, R Milo, PLoS Biol. 1481002533Sender R, Fuchs S, Milo R. Revised estimates for the number of human and bacte- ria cells in the body. PLoS Biol 2016;14(8):e1002533.

CRF induces intestinal epithelial barrier injury via the release of mast cell proteases and TNF-a. E L Overman, J E Rivier, A J Moeser, PLoS ONE. 7639935Overman EL, Rivier JE, Moeser AJ. CRF induces intestinal epithelial barrier injury via the release of mast cell proteases and TNF-a. PLoS ONE 2012;7(6):e39935.

Impact of gut microbiota on host glycemic control. C G Erard, H Vidal, Front Endocrinol Lausanne. 1029G erard C, Vidal H. Impact of gut microbiota on host glycemic control. Front Endo- crinol Lausanne 2019;10:29.

The microbiome and host behavior. H E Vuong, J M Yano, T C Fung, E Y Hsiao, Annu Rev Neurosci. 40Vuong HE, Yano JM, Fung TC, Hsiao EY. The microbiome and host behavior. Annu Rev Neurosci 2017;40:21-49.

Brain injury induces specific changes in the caecal microbiota of mice via altered autonomic activity and mucoprotein production. A Houlden, M Goldrick, D Brough, E S Vizi, N Lenart, B Martinecz, Brain Behav Immun. 57Houlden A, Goldrick M, Brough D, Vizi ES, Lenart N, Martinecz B, et al. Brain injury induces specific changes in the caecal microbiota of mice via altered auto- nomic activity and mucoprotein production. Brain Behav Immun 2016;57: 10-20.

Traumatic brain injury and intestinal dysfunction: uncovering the neuro-enteric axis. V Bansal, T Costantini, L Kroll, C Peterson, W Loomis, B Eliceiri, J Neurotrauma. 268Bansal V, Costantini T, Kroll L, Peterson C, Loomis W, Eliceiri B, et al. Traumatic brain injury and intestinal dysfunction: uncovering the neuro-enteric axis. J Neu- rotrauma 2009;26(8):1353-9.

The bidirectional gut-brain-microbiota axis as a potential nexus between traumatic brain injury, inflammation, and disease. M H Sundman, N K Chen, V Subbian, Y H Chou, Brain Behav Immun. 66Sundman MH, Chen NK, Subbian V, Chou YH. The bidirectional gut-brain-micro- biota axis as a potential nexus between traumatic brain injury, inflammation, and disease. Brain Behav Immun 2017;66:31-44.

Alterations of intestinal mucosa structure and barrier function following traumatic brain injury in rats. C H Hang, J X Shi, J S Li, W Wu, H X Yin, World J Gastroenterol. 912Hang CH, Shi JX, Li JS, Wu W, Yin HX. Alterations of intestinal mucosa structure and barrier function following traumatic brain injury in rats. World J Gastroen- terol 2003;9(12):2776-81.

Moderate traumatic brain injury alters the gastrointestinal microbiome in a time-dependent manner. S E Nicholson, L T Watts, D M Burmeister, D Merrill, S Scroggins, Y Zou, Shock. 522Nicholson SE, Watts LT, Burmeister DM, Merrill D, Scroggins S, Zou Y, et al. Moder- ate traumatic brain injury alters the gastrointestinal microbiome in a time-depen- dent manner. Shock 2019;52(2):240-8.

High fat diet-induced gut microbiota exacerbates inflammation and obesity in mice via the TLR4 signaling pathway. K A Kim, W Gu, I A Lee, E H Joh, D H Kim, PLoS ONE. 71047713Kim KA, Gu W, Lee IA, Joh EH, Kim DH. High fat diet-induced gut microbiota exac- erbates inflammation and obesity in mice via the TLR4 signaling pathway. PLoS ONE 2012;7(10):e47713.

Dietdriven microbiota dysbiosis is associated with vagal remodeling and obesity. T Sen, C R Cawthon, B T Ihde, A Hajnal, P M Dilorenzo, La De, C B Serre, Physiol Behav. 173Sen T, Cawthon CR, Ihde BT, Hajnal A, DiLorenzo PM, de La Serre CB, et al. Diet- driven microbiota dysbiosis is associated with vagal remodeling and obesity. Physiol Behav 2017;173:305-17.

Early-life high-fat dietinduced obesity programs hippocampal development and cognitive functions via regulation of gut commensal Akkermansia muciniphila. Y Yang, Z Zhong, B Wang, X Xia, W Yao, L Huang, Neuropsychopharmacology. 4412Yang Y, Zhong Z, Wang B, Xia X, Yao W, Huang L, et al. Early-life high-fat diet- induced obesity programs hippocampal development and cognitive functions via regulation of gut commensal Akkermansia muciniphila. Neuropsychopharmacol- ogy 2019;44(12):2054-64.

TLR4 inhibitor TAK-242 attenuates the adverse neural effects of diet-induced obesity. V A Moser, M F Uchoa, C J Pike, J Neuroinflamm. 151306Moser VA, Uchoa MF, Pike CJ. TLR4 inhibitor TAK-242 attenuates the adverse neu- ral effects of diet-induced obesity. J Neuroinflamm 2018;15(1):306.

Knockdown of Tlr4 in the arcuate nucleus improves obesity related metabolic disorders. Y Zhao, G Li, Y Li, Y Wang, Z Liu, Sci Rep. 717441Zhao Y, Li G, Li Y, Wang Y, Liu Z. Knockdown of Tlr4 in the arcuate nucleus improves obesity related metabolic disorders. Sci Rep 2017;7(1):7441.

Toll-like receptor 4 knockdown attenuates brain damage and neuroinflammation after traumatic brain injury via inhibiting neuronal autophagy and astrocyte activation. H Jiang, Y Wang, X Liang, X Xing, X Xu, C Zhou, Cell Mol Neurobiol. 385Jiang H, Wang Y, Liang X, Xing X, Xu X, Zhou C. Toll-like receptor 4 knockdown attenuates brain damage and neuroinflammation after traumatic brain injury via inhibiting neuronal autophagy and astrocyte activation. Cell Mol Neurobiol 2018;38(5):1009-19.

A recollection of mTOR signaling in learning and memory. T E Graber, P K Mccamphill, W S Sossin, Learn Mem. 2010Graber TE, McCamphill PK, Sossin WS. A recollection of mTOR signaling in learn- ing and memory. Learn Mem 2013;20(10):518-30.

Insulin resistance due to nutrient excess: is it a consequence of AMPK downregulation?. A K Saha, X J Xu, T W Balon, A Brandon, E W Kraegen, N B Ruderman, Cell Cycle. 1020Saha AK, Xu XJ, Balon TW, Brandon A, Kraegen EW, Ruderman NB. Insulin resis- tance due to nutrient excess: is it a consequence of AMPK downregulation? Cell Cycle 2011;10(20):3447-51.

Involvement of mTOR kinase in cytokine-dependent microglial activation and cell proliferation. Dello Russo, C Lisi, L Tringali, G Navarra, P , Biochem Pharmacol. 789Dello Russo C, Lisi L, Tringali G, Navarra P. Involvement of mTOR kinase in cyto- kine-dependent microglial activation and cell proliferation. Biochem Pharmacol 2009;78(9):1242-51.

Dysfunctional cerebrovascular tone contributes to cognitive impairment in a non-obese rat model of prediabetic challenge: role of suppression of autophagy and modulation by anti-diabetic drugs. W Fakih, A Mroueh, H Salah, A H Eid, M Obeid, F Kobeissy, Biochem Pharmacol. 178114041Fakih W, Mroueh A, Salah H, Eid AH, Obeid M, Kobeissy F, et al. Dysfunctional cerebrovascular tone contributes to cognitive impairment in a non-obese rat model of prediabetic challenge: role of suppression of autophagy and modulation by anti-diabetic drugs. Biochem Pharmacol 2020;178:114041.

Short-term caloric restriction exerts neuroprotective effects following mild traumatic brain injury by promoting autophagy and inhibiting astrocyte activation. Y Liu, R Wang, Z Zhao, W Dong, X Zhang, X Chen, Behav Brain Res. 331Liu Y, Wang R, Zhao Z, Dong W, Zhang X, Chen X, et al. Short-term caloric restric- tion exerts neuroprotective effects following mild traumatic brain injury by pro- moting autophagy and inhibiting astrocyte activation. Behav Brain Res 2017;331:135-42.

Long-term exposition to a high fat diet favors the appearance of beta-amyloid depositions in the brain of C57BL/6J mice. A potential model of sporadic Alzheimer's disease. O Busquets, M Ettcheto, M Pallas, C Beas-Zarate, E Verdaguer, C Auladell, Mech Ageing Dev. 162Busquets O, Ettcheto M, Pallas M, Beas-Zarate C, Verdaguer E, Auladell C, et al. Long-term exposition to a high fat diet favors the appearance of beta-amyloid depositions in the brain of C57BL/6J mice. A potential model of sporadic Alzheim- er's disease. Mech Ageing Dev 2017;162:38-45.

Rapamycin protects against apoptotic neuronal death and improves neurologic function after traumatic brain injury in mice via modulation of the mTOR-p53-Bax axis. K Ding, H Wang, Y Wu, L Zhang, J Xu, T Li, J Surg Res. 1941Ding K, Wang H, Wu Y, Zhang L, Xu J, Li T, et al. Rapamycin protects against apo- ptotic neuronal death and improves neurologic function after traumatic brain injury in mice via modulation of the mTOR-p53-Bax axis. J Surg Res 2015;194 (1):239-47.

Intracranial hypertension in relation to memory functioning during the first year after severe head injury. H S Levin, H M Eisenberg, H E Gary, A Marmarou, M A Foulkes, J A Jane, Neurosurgery. 282Levin HS, Eisenberg HM, Gary HE, Marmarou A, Foulkes MA, Jane JA, et al. Intra- cranial hypertension in relation to memory functioning during the first year after severe head injury. Neurosurgery 1991;28(2):196-9 discussion 200.

Effect of hypoproteic and high-fat diets on hippocampal blood-brain barrier permeability and oxidative stress. C C De Aquino, R A Leitao, Oliveira Alves, L A Coelho-Santos, V Guerrant, R L Ribeiro, C F , Front Nutr. 5131de Aquino CC, Leitao RA, Oliveira Alves LA, Coelho-Santos V, Guerrant RL, Ribeiro CF, et al. Effect of hypoproteic and high-fat diets on hippocampal blood-brain bar- rier permeability and oxidative stress. Front Nutr 2018;5:131.

The a-lipoic acid improves high-fat diet-induced cerebral damage through inhibition of oxidative stress and inflammatory reaction. Y Liu, Q Zhang, L Wang, H Wang, T Sun, H Xia, Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 56Liu Y, Zhang Q, Wang L, Wang H, Sun T, Xia H, et al. The a-lipoic acid improves high-fat diet-induced cerebral damage through inhibition of oxidative stress and inflammatory reaction. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol 2017;56:219-24.

High fat diet increases hippocampal oxidative stress and cognitive impairment in aged mice: implications for decreased Nrf2 signaling. C D Morrison, P J Pistell, D K Ingram, W D Johnson, Y Liu, S O Fernandez-Kim, J Neurochem. 1146Morrison CD, Pistell PJ, Ingram DK, Johnson WD, Liu Y, Fernandez-Kim SO, et al. High fat diet increases hippocampal oxidative stress and cognitive impairment in aged mice: implications for decreased Nrf2 signaling. J Neurochem 2010;114 (6):1581-9.

Dietary curcumin counteracts the outcome of traumatic brain injury on oxidative stress, synaptic plasticity, and cognition. A Wu, Z Ying, F Gomez-Pinilla, Exp Neurol. 1972Wu A, Ying Z, Gomez-Pinilla F. Dietary curcumin counteracts the outcome of trau- matic brain injury on oxidative stress, synaptic plasticity, and cognition. Exp Neu- rol 2006;197(2):309-17.

Exercise rehabilitation attenuates cognitive deficits in rats with traumatic brain injury by stimulating the cerebral HSP20/BDNF/TrkB signalling axis. W Chou, Y F Liu, C H Lin, M T Lin, C C Chen, W P Liu, Mol Neurobiol. 5511Chou W, Liu YF, Lin CH, Lin MT, Chen CC, Liu WP, et al. Exercise rehabilitation attenuates cognitive deficits in rats with traumatic brain injury by stimulating the cerebral HSP20/BDNF/TrkB signalling axis. Mol Neurobiol 2018;55 (11):8602-11.

The interplay between oxidative stress and brainderived neurotrophic factor modulates the outcome of a saturated fat diet on synaptic plasticity and cognition. A Wu, Z Ying, F Gomez-Pinilla, Eur J Neurosci. 197Wu A, Ying Z, Gomez-Pinilla F. The interplay between oxidative stress and brain- derived neurotrophic factor modulates the outcome of a saturated fat diet on syn- aptic plasticity and cognition. Eur J Neurosci 2004;19(7):1699-707.

Agavins increase neurotrophic factors and decrease oxidative stress in the brains of high-fat diet-induced obese mice. E Franco-Robles, M G Lopez, Molecules. 218Franco-Robles E, Lopez MG. Agavins increase neurotrophic factors and decrease oxidative stress in the brains of high-fat diet-induced obese mice. Molecules 2016;21(8):998-1012.

Adipokines in obesity. V De Oliveira Leal, D Mafra, Clin Chim Acta. 419de Oliveira Leal V, Mafra D. Adipokines in obesity. Clin Chim Acta 2013;419: 87-94.

Adipose tissue angiogenesis in obesity. A Y Lemoine, S Ledoux, E Larger, Thromb Haemost. 11010Lemoine AY, Ledoux S, Larger E. Adipose tissue angiogenesis in obesity. Thromb Haemost 2013;110(10):661-9.

Adipokines in inflammation and metabolic disease. N Ouchi, J L Parker, J J Lugus, K Walsh, Nat Rev Immunol. 11285Ouchi N, Parker JL, Lugus JJ, Walsh K. Adipokines in inflammation and metabolic disease. Nat Rev Immunol 2011;11(2):85.

Regulation of white adipogenesis and its relation to ectopic fat accumulation and cardiovascular risk. B Gustafson, U Smith, Atherosclerosis. 2411Gustafson B, Smith U. Regulation of white adipogenesis and its relation to ectopic fat accumulation and cardiovascular risk. Atherosclerosis 2015;241(1):27-35.

inflammation and the pleiotropic role of white adipose tissue. P Trayhurn, W I Adipokines, Br J Nutr. 923Trayhurn P, Adipokines WI. inflammation and the pleiotropic role of white adi- pose tissue. Br J Nutr 2004;92(3):347-55.

Traumatic brain injury induces adipokine gene expression in rat brain. R Brown, H J Thompson, S A Imran, E Ur, M Wilkinson, Neurosci Lett. 4321Brown R, Thompson HJ, Imran SA, Ur E, Wilkinson M. Traumatic brain injury indu- ces adipokine gene expression in rat brain. Neurosci Lett 2008;432(1):73-8.

The effect of high-fat diet on plasma ghrelin and leptin levels in rats. T Handjieva-Darlenska, N Boyadjieva, J Physiol Biochem. 652Handjieva-Darlenska T, Boyadjieva N. The effect of high-fat diet on plasma ghrelin and leptin levels in rats. J Physiol Biochem 2009;65(2):157-64.

Reduced adiponectin expression after high-fat diet is associated with selective up-regulation of ALDH1A1 and further retinoic acid receptor signaling in adipose tissue. J F Landrier, E Kasiri, E Karkeni, J Mihaly, G Beke, K Weiss, FASEB J. 311Landrier JF, Kasiri E, Karkeni E, Mihaly J, Beke G, Weiss K, et al. Reduced adiponec- tin expression after high-fat diet is associated with selective up-regulation of ALDH1A1 and further retinoic acid receptor signaling in adipose tissue. FASEB J 2017;31(1):203-11.

The role of leptin and adiponectin in obesity-associated cognitive decline and Alzheimer's disease. L Forny-Germano, De Felice, F G Do, Nascimento Vieira, M N , Front Neurosci. 12Forny-Germano L, De Felice FG, do Nascimento Vieira MN. The role of leptin and adiponectin in obesity-associated cognitive decline and Alzheimer's disease. Front Neurosci 2018;12:1-19.

Epigenetic programming, early life nutrition and the risk of metabolic disease. T Block, A El-Osta, Atherosclerosis. 266Block T, El-Osta A. Epigenetic programming, early life nutrition and the risk of metabolic disease. Atherosclerosis 2017;266:31-40.

Epigenetics of memory and plasticity. B T Woldemichael, J Bohacek, K Gapp, I M Mansuy, Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 122Woldemichael BT, Bohacek J, Gapp K, Mansuy IM. Epigenetics of memory and plasticity. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 2014;122:305-40.

Epigenetic mechanisms of traumatic brain injuries. B Nagalakshmi, S Sagarkar, A J Sakharkar, Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 157Nagalakshmi B, Sagarkar S, Sakharkar AJ. Epigenetic mechanisms of traumatic brain injuries. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 2018;157:263-98.

Interactive actions of Bdnf methylation and cell metabolism for building neural resilience under the influence of diet. E Tyagi, Y Zhuang, R Agrawal, Z Ying, F Gomez-Pinilla, Neurobiol Dis. 73Tyagi E, Zhuang Y, Agrawal R, Ying Z, Gomez-Pinilla F. Interactive actions of Bdnf methylation and cell metabolism for building neural resilience under the influ- ence of diet. Neurobiol Dis 2015;73:307-18.

Maternal obesity induced by a high fat diet causes altered cellular development in fetal brains suggestive of a predisposition of offspring to neurological disorders in later life. E K Stachowiak, M Srinivasan, M K Stachowiak, M S Patel, Metab Brain Dis. 284Stachowiak EK, Srinivasan M, Stachowiak MK, Patel MS. Maternal obesity induced by a high fat diet causes altered cellular development in fetal brains suggestive of a predisposition of offspring to neurological disorders in later life. Metab Brain Dis 2013;28(4):721-5.

Effects of aerobic exercise on energy metabolism in the hypertensive rat heart. T L Kinney Lapier, K J Rodnick, Phys Ther. 814Kinney LaPier TL, Rodnick KJ. Effects of aerobic exercise on energy metabolism in the hypertensive rat heart. Phys Ther 2001;81(4):1006-17.

Physical exercise ameliorates deficits induced by traumatic brain injury. T Archer, K Svensson, M Alricsson, Acta Neurol Scand. 1255Archer T, Svensson K, Alricsson M. Physical exercise ameliorates deficits induced by traumatic brain injury. Acta Neurol Scand 2012;125(5):293-302.

Running increases cell proliferation and neurogenesis in the adult mouse dentate gyrus. H Van Praag, G Kempermann, F H Gage, Nat Neurosci. 23van Praag H, Kempermann G, Gage FH. Running increases cell proliferation and neurogenesis in the adult mouse dentate gyrus. Nat Neurosci 1999;2(3):266-70.

Evidence that brain-derived neurotrophic factor is required for basal neurogenesis and mediates, in part, the enhancement of neurogenesis by dietary restriction in the hippocampus of adult mice. J Lee, W Duan, M P Mattson, J Neurochem. 826Lee J, Duan W, Mattson MP. Evidence that brain-derived neurotrophic factor is required for basal neurogenesis and mediates, in part, the enhancement of neuro- genesis by dietary restriction in the hippocampus of adult mice. J Neurochem 2002;82(6):1367-75.

The effects of exercise on spatial learning and anxiety-like behavior are mediated by an IGF-I-dependent mechanism related to hippocampal neurogenesis. J L Trejo, M V Llorens-Martin, I Torres-Aleman, Mol Cell Neurosci. 372Trejo JL, Llorens-Martin MV, Torres-Aleman I. The effects of exercise on spatial learning and anxiety-like behavior are mediated by an IGF-I-dependent mech- anism related to hippocampal neurogenesis. Mol Cell Neurosci 2008;37 (2):402-11.

Exercise induces mitochondrial biogenesis after brain ischemia in rats. Q Zhang, Y Wu, P Zhang, H Sha, J Jia, Y Hu, Neuroscience. 205Zhang Q, Wu Y, Zhang P, Sha H, Jia J, Hu Y, et al. Exercise induces mitochon- drial biogenesis after brain ischemia in rats. Neuroscience 2012;205: 10-7.

Exercise training increases mitochondrial biogenesis in the brain. J L Steiner, E A Murphy, J L Mcclellan, M D Carmichael, J M Davis, J Appl Physiol. 1114Steiner JL, Murphy EA, McClellan JL, Carmichael MD, Davis JM. Exercise training increases mitochondrial biogenesis in the brain. J Appl Physiol 2011;111 (4):1066-71 (Bethesda, Md: 1985).

Exercise-induced improvement in cognitive performance after traumatic brain injury in rats is dependent on BDNF activation. G S Griesbach, D A Hovda, F Gomez-Pinilla, Brain Res. 1288Griesbach GS, Hovda DA, Gomez-Pinilla F. Exercise-induced improvement in cognitive performance after traumatic brain injury in rats is dependent on BDNF activation. Brain Res 2009;1288:105-15.

The role of impaired mitochondrial lipid oxidation in obesity. M M Rogge, Biol Res Nurs. 104Rogge MM. The role of impaired mitochondrial lipid oxidation in obesity. Biol Res Nurs 2009;10(4):356-73.

Effect of high-fat diets on body composition, lipid metabolism and insulin sensitivity, and the role of exercise on these parameters. D F Coelho, Pereira-Lancha, Lo, D S Chaves, D Diwan, R Ferraz, P L Campos-Ferraz, Braz J Med Biol Res. 4410Coelho DF, Pereira-Lancha LO, Chaves DS, Diwan D, Ferraz R, Campos-Ferraz PL, et al. Effect of high-fat diets on body composition, lipid metabolism and insulin sensitivity, and the role of exercise on these parameters. Braz J Med Biol Res 2011;44(10):966-72.

Exercise prevents high fat diet-induced bone loss, marrow adiposity and dysbiosis in male mice. L R Mccabe, R Irwin, A Tekalur, C Evans, J D Schepper, N Parameswaran, Bone. 118McCabe LR, Irwin R, Tekalur A, Evans C, Schepper JD, Parameswaran N, et al. Exer- cise prevents high fat diet-induced bone loss, marrow adiposity and dysbiosis in male mice. Bone 2019;118:20-31.