QUARTERLY ABSTRACTS OF PAPERS ON THE DISEASES


J Milne Chapman 
M B 
M R C P E 
QUARTERLY ABSTRACTS OF PAPERS ON THE DISEASES
(by exam.), M.R.C.S. [These Abstracts will chiefly be taken from American and Foreign Periodicals.]


fuse catarrh of pharynx, larynx, and trachea, with rapid shedding of epithelium, and frequent formation of superficial erosions. In the trachea the swelling around these latter may give rise to stenosis. According to the writer, the appearance of such ulcers in the larynx augurs the occurrence of tuberculosis. In scarlatina the throat is affected 12-36 hours before the outbreak of eruption. The writer states that there is often a sudden disappearance of the affection of the mouth and pharynx coincident with the eruption on the skin coming out. Frequently the eruption in the mouth closely resembles that found with measles. In rubeola there is also hyperemia, diffuse or spotted, of the larynx and trachea. In smallpox the mouth is affected at the same time as the skin. The pustules are small and imperfectly filled, dry up in two or three days, and in six days are only represented by red spots. Bleeding from them is very common. The writer recommends the use of ice poultices round the neck, ice internally, and such astringents as tannin applied after puncture of the pustules. In chicken-pox there occurs either diffuse hyperemia of the mucous membrane, or a few scattered pustules. In typhus and typhoid, acute catarrh of the pharynx, larynx, and trachea is of frequent occurrence, and often proceeds in the larynx to the formation of ulcers, which have little tendency to heal, and occasionally, about the sixth or eighth week of the disease, cause perichondritis. For this latter condition, "when diagnosed with certainty," the writer recommends tracheotomy as early as possible. In whooping-cough there is usually some catarrh of larynx and trachea, and bleeding from the mucous membrane is frequent. The appearance, during the course of whooping-cough, of ulcers in the larynx the writer regards as very suspicious of the onset of phthisis.

The Local Treatment of Diphtheria, by S. Korach (Deutsche Med. lVochciisch., viii. 36).?The writer records the results of his treatment of 112 cases by iodoform, and asserts that this is infinitely the best local application for diphtheritic patches. He used the following solution, painted on six times daily :?Iodoform, 2'5 grammes ; tether, 25 grammes ; balsam of tolu, 5 grammes.

On " TRACHELiEMATOMA," OR CIRCUMSCRIBED SWELLING OF THE Sterno-Cleido-Mastoid in Infants, by Dr Tordens, Brussels, (Arcldv f. Kheilk., Bd. iv. 5-6).?The writer believes that more cases of this affection occur than are noticed, and explains this through the innocent nature of the affection in many cases. The majority of reported cases occurred in infants of under five months of age. The most frequent cause is obstruction to the circulation of the neck during delivery, occasioning rupture of vessels and extravasation of blood, part of which becomes absorbed, while the remainder causes inflammatory action around itself. Syphilis, by causing degeneration of the vessels, may predispose to the occurrence of this affection. The swelling is oftenest found on the right side.

[JULY Its form and size varies, the average for the latter being about threequarters of an inch in length. The consistence is firm and sometimes elastic, and the skin covering is rarely involved. There is usually complete absence of pain. In a few cases the writer noticed turning of the head towards the affected side. The duration of the swelling varies from a few weeks to several months, and the usual termination, whether with or without treatment, is in complete recovery. It may happen that from the persistence of & twist in the neck some orthopedic apparatus may be required.

Fifteen cases are collected and described.

The Use of the Cold Douche in Ophthalmia Neonatorum, by Dr Paulsen (Berlin. Klin. Woclift., 1882, No. 22).?This writer recommends the use of a cold injection against the eyelid as a means of getting rid of the pus in this troublesome affection. He employs it at first for two minutes four times an hour, and afterwards every half-hour. The effect is to cause opening of the eyes, and thus to permit of complete washing away of all secretion. Thereafter, pencilling with nitrate of silver, or any other means of treatment, may be employed. He advises that the water be not used quite cold at first, and that a little sea salt be added to it.


Further Communication on Eetropharyngeal Abscess and

Inflammation of the Eetropharyngeal Lymphatic Glands, by J. Aleny (Jharb.f'. Kheilk., xvii. 2 and 3).?The writer is assistant to Prof. Bokai, who wrote at length on the above subjects in 1876, and the present articles are in continuation of the former papers. Myocarditis after Diphtheria, by Professor Leyden (Deutsche Med. Wochenschrift, 1882, No. 7).?Three cases are related where death followed the development of cardiac symptoms during diphtheria, and where microscopic evidence of myocarditis was found in the presence of small deposits in the muscle substance and new cell growth around the blood-vessels. Associated with this there was dilatation of the heart, and the writer points out that as this predisposes to the formation of thrombi, the latter condition may at first sight be assumed as the cause of death, while in reality it is only dependent on the inflammatory action in the heart substance. He further suggests that in other infectious diseases a similar process may take place and that it may similarly be misunderstood.

Hemorrhage of the Thymus, Baudnitz, Prague (.Archiv f Klicilh, Bd. iv. Hft. 1 and 2).?Two cases are related. In the first, a child aged one month, there were sudden symptoms of internal haemorrhage with coincident blood-staining of the border of the gums, and death supervened in twenty-four hours. The second case lasted ten days and presented similar symptoms. In both the thymus was found to be the seat of haemorrhage, and in both there were sufficient grounds for the diagnosis of congenital syphilis. The causes of such a condition are stated by the writer, after Eppinger, to be?1, mechanical; 2, hereditary syphilis; 3, sepsis; 4, haemophilia. Full references to the literaUire of the subject are given. Tubercular Meningitis, by Ledeser Vienna (Jahrb. f. Kheilk., xix. 2).?Most of his cases presented no traces of previous scrofula, but were, on the contrary, well nourished and of healthy appearance. Nor could he blame unhealthy homes or upbringing, as many of them occurred in the best regulated families. In all of them, however, with the exception of four, he was able to ascertain that one or other of the parents or some of the near relatives suffered from tuberculosis, most frequently of the lungs. He seldom noticed convulsions as the first indication of the disease ; more generally there was vomiting. In one case there was a period of apparent quiet lasting several months, but the average duration was two to three weeks. The differential diagnosis is gone into, and in regard to prognosis the author holds with Steiner and others that this should not be always absolutely unfavourable.

Biedert's Cream Mixture, Martin (Ibid., xviii. 2 and 3), and Closet (Berlin. Klin. Wochcnschrift).?Both writers highly praise this mixture as a substitute for mothers' milk, Martin saying that while it is cheaper than a wet-nurse it is also better. The following is the formula for the No. 1 mixture:?One-eighth of a litre of cream, three-eighths of a litre of boiled water, and fifteen grammes milk sugar.

Diarriicea among Infants, by Dr Jules Simon (Gaz. des Ildpitanx, 1883, Nos. 19-24).?Among other forms of diarrhoea, the writer alludes to the cerebral, and says, " Diarrhoea may assume a cerebral form,?that is, it may be accompanied by certain cerebral phenomena or by eclamptic convulsions, even although the diarrhoea may be but slight. As a result of a profuse drain, a comatose condition may be developed. Again, meningeal symptoms may develop and meningitis be simulated." Many of the reported cases of meningitis with recovery are, the writer thinks, only cases with meningitic symptoms. The various forms of diarrhoea are discussed in detail. For the treatment of cholera infantum the writer recommends, 1st, preventive measures to be adopted during the premonitory catarrhal stage, and 2nd, after the full development of the affection, alcohol internally and externally, and mustard baths.

Note on tiie Improvement of Human Milk when of Inferior Quality, by Dr Delattre (Ibid., No. 29).?The writer strongly recommends that nursing women, especially those living in large EDINBURGH JIED. JOUltN., VOL. XXIX.?NO. I. K [JULY towns, should take Dusart's syrup, or wine of the lacto-phosphate of lime, and he cites cases where it has proved of great value when given for some time before confinement to women who had on former occasions made bad nurses.

Skin Diseases of Infancy, by Dr Greffier (La France, Mediealc, 1883, No. 5).?The author does not include in his paper the skin eruptions of the exanthemata nor, for a like reason, of syphilis.

There remain over?1st, Affections of local causation, being in the majority of instances the results of carelessness, of allowing too long contact with urine or faeces, or of the presence of parasites, and their treatment is to be regulated according to the cause; 2nd, Affections of constitutional causation, which are again divided into a, Dependent upon lymphatic (strumous ?) disposition, some cases of simple eczema, impetigo, lupus. In the constitutional treatment of such cases the author lays stress on the avoidance of too highly nitrogenous a diet. b. Herpetic eruptions, for which is recommended Fowler's solution and mild alkaline preparations internally, c. Prurigo and lichen, which the writer thinks have been clearly shown to be of nervous origin, and which yield most readily to hydropathy and the use of the bromides.


On a Pupil Phenomenon observed in certain Pathological

Conditions of Infancy, by J. Parrot (Revue de Mddecinc, Oct. 1882).?The writer has noticed that in several children affected with acute diseases of the brain or its membranes, while they were in a comatose condition, if he pinched the skin of the epigastrium sharply the pupil suddenly and decidedly widened, sometimes to a size thrice that of what it originally stood at, and he argues that while the general sensibility is lost the sensibility of the skin may remain.

He explains the phenomena on the supposition that it is reflex through anaemia, in consequence of the skin irritation, resembling the mydriasis resulting from a deep inspiration. The cases he relates are as follows :?6 of tubercular meningitis (3 with, 3 without, post-mortem demonstration), 4 of haemorrhage into the pia mater, (2 with P.M.'s), 3 of hydrocephalus, and 2 in which no cerebral lesions were found. He relates seven cases of various diseases other than of the brain, where, during the state of insensibility preceding death, he was unable to elicit the phenomenon. The writer gives the following conclusion :?" A child, with or without convulsions, which is in a state of coma, and whose pupils do not react on sharply pinching the epigastrium, is neither affected with tubercular meningitis nor with haemorrhage into the pia mater-It is in an advanced state of asphyxia, and its death is imminent. almost certain that such lung complications as capillary bronchitis and bronclio-pneumonia may be prevented." In support of his advice he points to the fact that summer attacks of the disease are always milder than those occurring in winter. The drug he recommends is sulphate of atropine, 1-1000, one drop thrice daily for children a year old, two drops for two-year old children, and so on. Syphilitic Hepatitis in Children, Engel, Philadelphia (Am. Journ. Obst., Jany. 1883).?The writer summarizes the following as essential points in regard to the diagnosis of the above affection :? 1. A history of the case like this :?The child having been for a long time occasionally unwell, without this being attributed to any special known ailment. 2. The peculiar colour of the skin, and the somewhat cachectic appearance of the child, which otherwise seems to be in good health. 3. Ascites with the following peculiarities :

?Gradual development, and the absence of any of the usual causes; no tubercular peritonitis, no cancer, etc.; absence of pain ; almost 110 tenderness; and 110 haemorrhage from either nose, stomach, or intestines. After paracentesis, liver very much enlarged, smooth margin and hypertrophied spleen. 4. The accompanying dyspepsia, but utter absence of any other symptom. 5. The rapid success of antisyphilitic treatment. 6. The peculiar fact that all cases of diffused hepatitis due to hereditary syphilis so far reported happened in girls.

Haemophilia, by Dr Thos. D. Dunn (American Journal of the Medical Sciences, January 1883).?The writer reports a number of cases of this disease, and draws some interesting conclusions. Thus he shows that sex is an important predisposing cause in haemophilia, females being much less prone to the disease than males, and in women, also, the danger to life is much less marked; the females, however, of bleeder families, even though themselves exempt from the disease, are much more apt to transmit the tendency to haemorrhage to their children than are the males, even when themselves bleeders. Dr Dunn also points out that there are three forms of the disease :?1. The aggravated form, in which there is a tendency to severe spontaneous, traumatic, and interstitial haemorrhages, associated with swelling of the joints.

[JULY of other physicians. Four of his cases were fatal, and those four before he instituted the bismuth treatment, but under this treatment all of the remaining 20 recovered, though many of them were cases apparently hopeless. Such a percentage of recoveries, the author justly remarks, has hitherto not been met with. His method of using bismuth, and the progress of some of the successful cases, may be given in his own words :?On May 11th I was informed, upon my entrance to the ward, that still another child was, in the words of the sister, " getting the frightful disease in the mouth." This child, Katie H., aged seven years, I examined, and found she had a small ulcer on the inside of the left cheek, with all the characteristics described in the early stages of the other cases. I confess I was in despair. On consideration, I came to the conclusion that following in the old rut of treatment was almost useless, if not quite so. By a process of reasoning, or by accident if you will, I conceived the idea of applying locally the subnitrate of bismuth. After thoroughly cleansing the mouth with a disinfectant lotion, I covered the ulcerated surface with this drug, and the next day, May 12tli, the grayish slough had partly cleared away, and the fetor, which had been most disagreeable, was sensibly lessened. The hardness of the cheek, if not less, had not increased, and the child was not so thirsty. Temperature, 99? F.; pulse, 90. Gum on upper jaw reddish purple, soft and tender. Mouth washed out with solution of carbolic acid; bismuth applied every three hours; syr. ferri iodid., cod-liver oil, and generous diet. May 13tli.-? Fetor markedly less. May 14th.?Much better, sleeps well, ulcerated parts getting a healthy appearance. From this date to the 1st of June, when she was discharged thoroughly cured, the patient did well. On May 12th, after witnessing the happy change effected by the bismuth in the case of Katie H., I determined to try its efficacy on Arthur W. and Nellie H., both of whose cases we looked upon as hopeless. On May 10th I had removed some teeth, together with a large piece of the superior maxilla, from Arthur W. His cheek was then swollen tense, a large black gangrenous ulcer was on its inside surface, and his eye was nearly closed. Separation of a large mass of grayish black slough from ulcer on cheek and cavity whence exfoliated bone was removed. Parts looking healthier, fetor less. May 18th.?Fetor nearly disappeared in toto! Takes food freely; sleeps better; ulcer assuming a very healthy appearance; swelling and hardness of the tissues of the cheek rapidly subsiding. May 25th.?Ulcer on inside of cheek quite filled out and granulating kindly. Removed small piece of dead bone from superior maxilla. Otherwise I doing well. Treatment continued. From this date to July 1st, when discharged cured, the patient did excellently well. Since then he has been taking cod-liver oil, and is now in perfect health. Nellie H. ran the same course, up to May 12th, as the two preceding. Her condition at that time was identically the same? black gangrenous slough on buccal mucous membrane, swelled cheek, etc. Applied treatment as in the last case. May 13th.? Clipped away with scissors a considerable amount of disintegrated tissue, then packed parts with bismuth. Continued treatment to I7tli, when I removed a large piece of exfoliated bone and several teeth from inferior maxilla.

From this date to June 15th she slowly but steadily improved, the bismuth being regularly applied, and the mouth thoroughly syringed. Iron, cod-liver oil, and generous stimulating diet administered. She is now one of the healthiest children in the institution, though showing the loss of hard and soft tissue, but not showing the horrible deformity which formerly cases that recovered under ordinary treatment suffered


60 cases of abscess and 20 of inflammation of the glands, all of which fell under Prof. Bokai's observation, form the groundwork of the article.


The stench from him was intolerable. Usual disinfecting and supporting treatment continued. May 11th.?No change. May 12th.?Filled up cavity in cheek with bismuth, first cleansing it out well with disinfectant wash, and repeated every three hours. May 13th.?No marked change, except odour a little lessened. May 14th.?No increase of gangrenous erosion. Treatment continued.
This form, seldom seen in females, generally lasts throughout life, and usually is the cause of death. 2. The intermediate form has no tendency to the joint affection or traumatic haemorrhages, but frequent spontaneous ones from mucous surfaces and subcutaneous eccliymoses. This form frequently disappears at puberty. 3. The third form is lowest in degree, and seen only in females ; it manifests itself in ecchynioses, and in early and prolonged menstruation.Bismuth as a Specific for Canciium Oris, by C. J. Macguire, M.D., New York (N. Y. Med. Record, 3rd Feb. 1883).?The author had under his care 24 cases of this affection, in most of them the disease having followed measles. As to the accuracy of his diagnosis, he is careful to guard himself by giving the testimony

Congenital Stenosis of Pulmonary Artery, Defect of the Ventricular Septum, with Persistence of the Ductus Arteriosus. La France Gautiez, Mtcl, iv. 24Lotenhoefer, Brcslaucr arztliche Zcitschrift. 1883443Primary Sarcoma of the Mucous Membrane of the Front Vaginal Wall. with Secondary Sarcoma of the Bladder," Soltmann, Jahrb. f Khcilk., xvi. 3 and 4"Note on a case of 'Tic de Salaam,' Eclampsia Nutans, or Salaam Convulsion," Gautiez, La France Mtcl, 1883, No. 17. "Congenital Syphilis with Cerebro-spinal Fever," Chapin, Am. J'. of Obstet., Feb. 1883. "Complete Extrophy of the Bladder in a Young Girl," Berger, Gaz. clcs Hupitaux, No. 21, 1883. " Case of Acardius Amorphus (Amorphus Foerster)," Kroner and Scliuchardt, Virchow's Arcliiv, Bd. xc. Hft. 3, p. 443. " Congenital Unilateral Hypertrophy of the Face," Ziehl, Ibid., xci. 1. " Congenital Stenosis of Pulmonary Artery, Defect of the Ven- tricular Septum, with Persistence of the Ductus Arteriosus, recognised during Life (with P.M. Report)," Nicolaieff, Wratsch, in Arcliiv f. Khcillc., iv. 4. " Partial Defect of the Diaphragm, withProtrusion of Bowel," Ibid. " Case of Meloncelie, with Note," Gaz. dcs Hdpit., 1882, No. 13. "Sclerodem Neonatorium, with Observations," Lotenhoefer, Brcs- laucr arztliche Zcitschrift, iv. 24. "Primary Sarcoma of the Mucous Membrane of the Front Vaginal Wall, with Secondary Sarcoma of the Bladder," Soltmann, Jahrb. f Khcilk., xvi. 3 and 4.