Research on the Improvement Strategy of Employee Satisfaction in JZ Company


Ling Huang 
College of Global Business
Business and Economics
Chongqing University of International
No. 88, Xuefu Road, Heyang City Street

Hechuan District
ChongqingChina

University of Perpetual Help System Dalta
Las Pinas Campus
ManilaPhilippines

Zhengxing Wu 
University of Perpetual Help System Dalta
Las Pinas Campus
ManilaPhilippines

United Front Work Department of Mianyang Municipal Committee
MianyangSichuanChina

Research on the Improvement Strategy of Employee Satisfaction in JZ Company
10.23977/acccm.2023.050704* Corresponding authorJZ companyemployee satisfactionpromotion strategy
With the rapid development of the digital economy and the increasingly fierce competition among enterprises, enterprise managers pay more and more attention to the training and guidance of employees, so as to enhance the core competitiveness and comprehensive strength of employees, and then improve employee satisfaction. In view of this, this paper will take JZ Company as the research object, and adopt the research method of "combining theoretical analysis and empirical research, combining qualitative analysis and quantitative analysis, combining statistical analysis and comparative analysis" to summarize and sort out the relevant literature on employee satisfaction. It will also theoretically analyze the impact of employees' salary management, performance appraisal, job promotion, and work environment dimensions on employee satisfaction. The research team designed, produced and distributed questionnaires, and constructed a regression model of employee satisfaction in JZ Company. With the help of SPSSAU software, they empirically tested the degree to which employee satisfaction is affected by various factors, and will explain the results, and put forward effective countermeasures and suggestions. The results of the study found that the salary management dimension positively improved employee satisfaction at the 1% significance level, while the impact of the dimensions of employee performance appraisal, job promotion, and work environment on employee satisfaction did not pass the significance level test.Accounting and Corporate Management (2023) Clausius Scientific Press, Canada

Introduction

Since China's reform and opening up, with the development of economic internationalization and globalization, the competitive environment of enterprises has become increasingly complex. The rapid development of private enterprises, as an important force to promote market prosperity and social stability. So how each enterprise can effectively control the cost and effectively mobilize the enthusiasm of employees has become an urgent problem to be solved. As a very important aspect in enterprise management, employee satisfaction will directly affect the work performance of employees, work quality, employee retention rate and corporate image and other aspects. Therefore, its employee satisfaction is also being endowed with more and more meanings. At the same time, JZ Company is a representative company in the art training industry. In recent years, the employee turnover rate has increased year by year, and the satisfaction degree has continued to decline. Therefore, it is urgent to effectively discuss and improve the employee satisfaction degree of JZ Company, which needs to be discussed urgently.


Literature review

This paper finds that domestic and foreign scholars' research on employee satisfaction is mainly reflected in three aspects: connotation analysis, influencing factor analysis and measurement method analysis. In particular:

First, research on the connotation of employee satisfaction. Employee satisfaction first appeared in the book Job Satisfaction. Later, different scholars carried out specific connotation analysis and concept definition from different perspectives such as physiological perspective, psychological perspective, attitude perspective, and experience perspective, which enriched the content of theory of employee satisfaction.

Second, research on the influencing factors of employee satisfaction. Some scholars believe that working conditions, work returns, corporate culture, personal development and personal characteristics have a significant impact on employee satisfaction, and some scholars also believe that the main factors affecting employee job satisfaction are salary, working atmosphere, personal characteristics, occupational background, work itself, work relationship and other factors. It can be seen that there are many factors affecting employee satisfaction, involving a wide range of factors, which need to be further selected and optimized by more domestic and foreign scholars [2] .

Third, research on the measurement method of employee satisfaction. This paper finds that there are many methods of measuring employee satisfaction, including qualitative research methods and quantitative research methods, such as interviews, unstructured questionnaires and structured questionnaires, literature search, and non-directive questionnaires. And guided questionnaire survey method, case analysis method, Delphi method, etc [3] . This series of research methods has measured employee satisfaction to a certain extent, added persuasion, and broadened the research perspective of employee satisfaction [1] .

To sum up, this paper can find that the current domestic and foreign scholars' research on employee satisfaction "emphasizes theory rather than evidence". Some scholars have done empirical research on employee satisfaction, but their research is too macroscopic. There is no specific theoretical research and empirical testing for specific micro-enterprises, and the suggestions they put forward lack pertinence and feasibility. Therefore, in order to further optimize the incentive mechanism and put forward effective countermeasures, this paper empirically tests the relationship between employee satisfaction and various variables, and puts forward effective countermeasures and suggestions for this purpose.


Model construction and data description


Model Construction

Based on the theoretical analysis, this paper takes JZ Company as the research object, and further explores the impact on employee satisfaction from the dimensions of salary management, performance appraisal, job promotion, and working environment. Since the explained variable employee satisfaction in this paper is a binary variable, this paper will draw on the idea of building a binary logistic regression model to construct a regression model of JZ company employee satisfaction, as shown in formula 1.


ESD=a0+a1 SMD+a2 PAD+a3 PPD+a4 WED+ε

(1) Among them, ESD represents employee satisfaction, SMD represents the dimension of salary management, PAD represents the dimension of performance appraisal, PPD represents the dimension of job promotion, WED represents the work environment dimension, a0 represents a constant term, a1, a2, a3, a4 represents the influence coefficient of each variable, and ε represents the random error term.


Data source and variable assignment instructions

The data used in this article come from the questionnaire of "JZ Company Employee Satisfaction Research", which is true and effective, and suitable for further empirical discussion and analysis. At the same time, this article explains the assignment of variables involved in the regression model of employee satisfaction as follows: Firstly, the explained variables are measured with the help of employee satisfaction indicators. Secondly, as for the salary management dimension of the explanatory variables, this article will measure from the setting of salary indicators, salary distribution system, and salary management strategy. Thirdly, the dimension of performance appraisal, this paper will measure from the perspective of performance appraisal method, performance appraisal implementation process, and performance appraisal index setting. Then, the dimension of job promotion, this article will measure from the perspective of promotion system, promotion space, and career planning. Finally, work Environmental dimension, this paper will measure from the perspective of operating environment and team environment, so as to empirically explore the impact of employee satisfaction in JZ Company.


Empirical research


Reliability test and validity test of the questionnaire

A total of 17 questions were designed in this paper, a total of 176 questionnaires were distributed, the results of the questionnaire reliability test and validity test were shown in Table 1.  Table 1, it can be found that the Cronbach reliability coefficient of the questionnaire is 0.972, which is greater than 0.9, indicating that the quality of the research data of the questionnaire is high and the reliability is good. At the same time, the value of is 0.909, which is higher than 0.8, indicating that the questionnaire data is suitable for extraction, and the significance level is 0.000, which indicates that the questionnaire is highly effective and ensures the accuracy and feasibility of the questionnaire to a certain extent.


Empirical Analysis This section must be in one column

According to the questionnaire data, based on the regression model of JZ company's employee satisfaction, this paper conducts an empirical research on JZ company's employee satisfaction with the help of SPSSAU software. The results are shown in Table.2. Table 2 shows the regression of employee satisfaction in JZ Company. The results show that the salary management dimension has a positive impact on employee satisfaction at a significance level of 1%, indicating that the employee satisfaction of JZ Company is closely related to the salary management dimension. This also shows that salary management, as a management tool and an incentive mechanism, motivates employees' performance and behavior by setting appropriate reward and punishment mechanisms, aiming to ensure that employees receive fair and reasonable remuneration and improve employee satisfaction, so as to help the company retain and attract more outstanding talents. However, the impact of performance appraisal, job promotion and working environment on employee satisfaction has not passed the significance level test. The reason is that although performance appraisal, job promotion and working environment usually constitute an effective employee motivation mechanism, if employees feel that performance appraisal is unreasonable, job promotion is too subjective, unfair or the promoted position does not meet their own personal development needs and differences in the working environment will also reduce employee satisfaction. It can be seen that there are many factors that affect employee satisfaction. An effective understanding of this series of influencing factors can help companies better manage employees, improve the overall performance of employees, and thus improve employee job satisfaction. 0.513


Conclusion and countermeasures

This paper uses literature search method, case analysis method, econometric analysis method and other research methods to theoretically analyze the impact of employee satisfaction in JZ company on the dimensions of salary management, performance appraisal, job promotion and work environment, and based on this, a survey was designed that a questionnaire was used to build a regression model of employee satisfaction in JZ Company, and an empirical test was carried out with the help of SPSS software. The results are as follows: First, the Cronbacha reliability coefficient of the questionnaire is 0.972, KMO is 0.909, and the significance level has passed the 1% significance level test, indicating that the questionnaire has passed the reliability test and validity test and is suitable for further analysis. Second, the salary management dimension has a positive impact on employee satisfaction at the level of 1%, while the performance appraisal dimension, job promotion dimension and work environment dimension have not passed the significance level test on employee satisfaction.

In view of this, this article suggests: First of all, from the perspective of salary management, JZ Company should systematically set salary indicators, establish and improve a fair and reasonable salary system, so that employees feel that their workload, work nature and work content match, and at the same time, in addition to the basic remuneration, a series of other benefits such as health insurance, free lunch, and vacation system are provided to enhance employee satisfaction and ensure the quality of life of employees. From the perspective of performance appraisal. JZ Company should adopt a fair and reasonable performance appraisal method, formulate clear, specific, and measurable performance goals, and clearly explain the meaning and importance of these goals to employees, and give employees timely feedback to let employees know where they are doing well and they need to improve, so that employees can continue to thrive and improve their work enthusiasm and satisfaction. Secondly, from the perspective of job promotion, JZ Company should formulate a clear career development plan, provide training and development opportunities, establish a fair promotion mechanism, guide employees to develop their potential, encourage employees to innovate and put forward opinions, so as to improve employees' self-confidence and satisfaction. Finally, in terms of the working environment, JZ Company should provide a comfortable workplace and advanced working equipment, establish a good team atmosphere, and create a healthy working environment, so as to improve the work efficiency and productivity of employees, and then promote the healthy and sustainable development of the enterprise.

Table 1 :
1Reliability test and validity test of the questionnaireℎ 
KMO 
P 
reliability test 
0.972 
validity test 
0.909 
0.000 
From 

Table 2 :
2Regression Results 

B 
S.D. 
Z 
Wald X2 
P 
OR 
CI 
SMD 
2.300 
0.759 
3.030 
9.180 
0.002 
9.978 
2.253~44.187 
PAD 
1.144 
0.970 
1.180 
1.391 
0.238 
3.138 
0.469~20.985 
PPD 
0.133 
0.954 
0.140 
0.020 
0.889 
0.875 
0.135~5.676 
WED 
1.321 
0.872 
1.515 
2.294 
0.130 
3.747 
0.678~20.703 
Cons 
1.606 
0.561 
2.865 
8.210 
0.004 
0.201 
0.067~0.602 
McFadden 2 
R 
0.404 

Snell 
Cox & 

2 

R 
0.303 

ke 
Nageliker 

2 

R 

AcknowledgementScience and Technology Project of Chongqing Municipal Education Commission "Digital Economy Empowers the High-quality Development of Chongqing's Manufacturing Industry" (KJQN20222004).
Research on ZL Company Employee Satisfaction Improvement Strategies. Chen Gongxing, Chen Gongxing. Research on ZL Company Employee Satisfaction Improvement Strategies [D].

Tiu Kamdron, Work Motivation and Job Satisfaction: Theories and Research Experience from Estonia. Tiu Kamdron. Work Motivation and Job Satisfaction: Theories and Research Experience from Estonia [M].

. Saarbricken, LAP Lambert Academic Publishing13Saarbricken: LAP Lambert Academic Publishing, 2009:13.

Research on Job Satisfaction of Post-90s Knowledge-based Employees--An Empirical Survey in Guangxi. Yao Wenyan, Liao Binbin, Yao Wenyan, Liao Binbin. Research on Job Satisfaction of Post-90s Knowledge-based Employees--An Empirical Survey in Guangxi [J].

Modern Business. 2022Modern Business, 2022, 630(05): 150-152.