Control of the Topology of Magnetic Structures in a Perforated Film by an Electric Field


E B Magadeev magadeeveb@gmail.com 
Ufa University of Science and Technology
450076UfaRussia

R M Vakhitov 
Ufa University of Science and Technology
450076UfaRussia

Control of the Topology of Magnetic Structures in a Perforated Film by an Electric Field
002196536F0D90A36B1BB8A1F12BEB78806D10.1134/S002136402460410XReceived October 21, 2024; revised November 13, 2024; accepted November 25, 2024
A perforated plane ferromagnetic film with the inhomogeneous magnetoelectric interaction is theoretically studied.It is shown that an applied electric field can change the topology of the magnetic structure in such a film.Moreover, it is demonstrated that the distribution of the electric potential ensuring the occurrence of an arbitrary predetermined topology of the magnetic structure can be found.Explicit expressions determining the topology of the magnetic structure at the potential distribution are presented for the general and some particular cases.

INTRODUCTION

The conditions for the formation of various topologically protected magnetic inhomogeneities (skyrmions, bimerons, etc. [1,2]) have already been studied quite completely and thoroughly (see, e.g., [3][4][5]).However, the problem of controlling the formation of such structures is still incompletely solved, which complicates their wide applications in practice.At the same time, the arising difficulties are not necessarily fundamental: even when an external factor stabilizing a vortex inhomogeneity with given characteristics exists (e.g., the applied magnetic field having some special configuration), the implementation of such factor can be technically difficult or even impossible.In particular, it was theoretically demonstrated in [6] that topologically nontrivial magnetic structures proposed in [7,8], which are formed in perforated inplane ferromagnetic films, become stable if the electric current of a certain magnitude is passed along one of the perforated holes.Although this approach seems to be quite suitable, it has some serious disadvantages: (i) it is applicable only to insulating magnetic materials (in this case, the perforated holes can be filled with a conducting nonmagnetic material), (ii) the currents flowing across the sample can lead to unwanted thermal effects, and (iii) the reduction of the sizes of the perforated holes results in an increase in the electric current density in them.The latter feature restricts the possibilities of miniaturization of perforated film devices.In addition, it is nontrivial to pass the current through only one of several closely spaced nanoholes.In this work, we consider an alternative way to create proposed structures, which involves controlling the magnetic subsystem of the sample by the applied elec-tric field [9,10].This possibility, which appears in materials with inhomogeneous magnetoelectric interaction [11], is attractive because, on the one hand, electric fields can be easily obtained and, on the other hand, there are numerous structures that can be stabilized by suitable fields.In addition, this approach ensures the implementation of energy-saving control technologies [12].


FORMULATION OF THE PROBLEM

We consider an infinite ferromagnetic film of a constant small thickness h, in which there exists a certain number of through cylindrical holes.Let R i be the radius of the ith hole and r ij be the distance between the centers of the ith and jth holes (see Fig. 1).We consider only the case of small holes with the radii max(R i , R j ) r ij made in the in-plane magnetic film, where the unit magnetization vector m necessarily lies in the sample plane.This occurs in the case of a strong easy-plane magnetocrystalline anisotropy [8] or a shape anisotropy [13] arising in thin films due to demagnetizing fields.In such a case, the orientation of the vector m can be determined by a single angle , and the total energy W of the system can be written in the form [7,14] (1.1)Here,
(1.2) (1.3) θ + = . A E W W W ∇θ  2 = ( ) , A W A hdS + ×  2 s = ( div curl ) , E W M b hdS E m m m m

CONDENSED MATTER

where is the exchange parameter, M s is the saturation magnetization, is the inhomogeneous magnetoelectric coupling constant [12], E is the electric field at a given point in the sample, and the integration is taken over the whole film plane except the holes.Note that demagnetizing fields are disregarded in Eqs.(1.1)-(1.3),since their effect in thin films is reduced mainly in the shape anisotropy, which ensures the in-plane magnetization distribution in the case under study.

Due to the exchange interaction, which corresponds to the energy W A , the angle is a continuous function of the spatial coordinates in the entire internal region of the sample.However, this function is not necessarily single-valued: in the course of a clockwise detour around the ith hole, its value can change by the angle 2πk i (here, k i is an arbitrary integer), which corresponds to k i complete revolutions of the magnetization vector.The set of values k 1 , k 2 , k 3 , … for all perforated holes in the sample completely determines the topology of the observed magnetic structure.It easy to see that a vortex magnetic structure is located in the region of the hole array, whereas far from this array, it tends to a uniform magnetization distribution (in this sense, representing a solitary magnetic inhomogeneity).In this case, the condition (2) must be satisfied because otherwise, the vector m will make a noninteger number of revolutions even moving along an infinitely distant contour encircling all holes.

First, let the electric field be zero E ≡ 0. Then the minimum energy condition W = W A reduces to the Laplace equation Δθ = 0.As shown in [8], this equation has solutions corresponding to arbitrary sets of numbers
k 1 , k 2 , k 3 , …, but only if condition (2) is satis- A b θ + + +… 1 2 3 = 0 k k k
fied, the energy of the system is finite and is given by the expression (3) In Fig. 2, we illustrate one such solution for a film with three holes, giving rise to a magnetic structure with the topology corresponding to k 1 = -2, k 2 = +1, and k 3 = +1.Since W A is positively definite, all such states of the system are metastable, except for the stable homogeneous state with , for which k i = 0 for each hole.Nevertheless, after applying the electric field E, the global minimum of the energy given by Eq. (1.1) can be already attained for some topologically nontrivial structures.The further analysis is aimed at finding the values that correspond to a stable magnetic structure at a given electric field configuration.

Note that, although in the case of structures, for which condition (2) is not satisfied, the exchange energy is infinite, this, in general, does not mean that such a structure cannot in principle be stabilized by an electric field.On the contrary, it was shown in [15] that in a film with a single hole, it is possible to achieve stability of the state with an arbitrary value of k 1 , if an infinitely extended charged filament is passed through this hole.In this case, as easily seen, , which resolves the apparent paradox.Nevertheless, this situation is, in fact, the only exception to the rule, whereas the field of an arbitrary charged system bounded in space, of course, cannot stabilize the structure with  .Therefore, the states violating condition (2) will not be considered in this work.
− π Σ < = 4 ln( / ). A ijij i j i j W Ah kk r RR θ = const … 1 2 3 , , , k k k → −∞ E W

GENERAL SOLUTION

Let us introduce the electric potential so that E = -grad .Then, we can represent the components of vector m in Eq. (1.3) in terms of the angle , and write the inhomogeneous magnetoelectric energy in the form (4) where n is the unit vector of the normal to the sample surface.It is clear from Eq. ( 4) that the term W E does not contribute to the variational derivative ; therefore, even at a nonzero field E, all stable and metastable states of the system are still described by solutions of the equation .Consequently, Eq. ( 3) for the exchange energy W A also remains applicable for equilibrium structures with a given topology.In addition, Eq. ( 4) can be represented as a sum of integrals along the hole boundaries as well as by an integral taken along the infinitely distant sample boundary.The latter integral vanishes owing to Eq. ( 2) and to a constant value of potential at infinity.The integrals taken along the hole boundaries can also be calculated explicitly, if we take into account that due to the small hole sizes, potential cannot change significantly near them, and for the boundary of the ith hole one can assume i ≈ = const.Hence, the inhomogeneous magnetoelectric energy has the form (5) Thus, the total energy W of the system at the given values is determined by the sum of Eqs.(3) and (5); i.e., it is a quadratic polynomial of k i .Minimization of this polynomial taking into account additional condition (2) allows us to find out the topology of the magnetic structure that is stable at given values , of the potential.A certain difficulty in solving the optimization problem formulated above arises because the sought values must be chosen, generally speaking, from the set of integers.However, it is clear that this restriction can be abandoned, since the simple form of the function implies that the solution of the problem in integers can be obtained by rounding the actual values corresponding to the minimum of the function W and satisfying condition (2) (it should be emphasized that such rounding in some cases may be nontrivial: for example, it is not always correct to simply choose the nearest integers, since the sum of such integers can be nonzero).Applying the Lagrange multiplier method for such actual values, we obtain (6)
→ +∞ A W ϕ ϕ θ ϕ × ∇θ  2 = div( [ ]) , E s W M b hdS n δ δθ / W Δθ = 0 ϕ ϕ ϕ ϕ π Σ ϕ 2 = 2 . E s ii i W M bh k … 1 2 3 , , , k k k ϕ ϕ 1 2 , ϕ … 3 , i k … 1 2 3 ( , , , ) W k k k i k ϕ ψ Σ + ψ 0 = , i j i j j s C k
where , is an arbitrary constant, and By substituting the integer into Eq.( 6), we can find the potentials , at which the specified exactly minimize the system energy W.This implies that for an arbitrary predetermined topology , we can find out such distribution of electrical potential , at which a stable magnetic structure arising in the sample should have just this topology.It is worth to emphasize that we are not dealing with some specific configuration of the field, which is difficult for being actually obtained: in fact, to form a structure of the desired type, it is sufficient to create suitable voltages between holes in the perforated film, whereas Eq. ( 6) sets only "recommended" values of such voltages allowing for deviations within certain limits.

Then, solving Eq. ( 6) with respect to unknown k i , we find (7) In contrast to Eq. ( 6), where is an additive constant in the potential , which does not affect the field E and can be arbitrarily chosen, the constant in Eq. ( 7) must be specified.Checking whether condition ( 2) is satisfied, we obtain (8) Relations (7) and ( 8) up to the necessity of rounding the values determine the topology of the magnetic structure stabilized in the sample placed in the field having a given configuration.


CASE OF A UNIFORM FIELD

As an example of application of the developed theory, let us consider a film with two holes of the same radius R 1 = R 2 = R, the distance between which is r 12 = a (see Fig. 3).Let the electric field near these holes be uniform, and its projection onto the line connecting their centers is equal to E (the corresponding field component in Fig. 3 is the only one).Then, and, according to Eqs. ( 7) and ( 8),

Thus, the action of a uniform film allows stabilizing a vortex inhomogeneity near a hole pair.In particular, the structure with shown in Fig. 3 can arise according to Eq. ( 9), e.g., at and E = .Moreover, in the case of two holes, there cannot appear any ambiguity with the rounding values; therefore, Eq. ( 9) allows one to estimate the min-
ψ 0 2 2 = s A M b ψ s  ≠   ln( / ), , = 0, = . ij i j ij r RR i j C i j i k ϕ i i k … 1 2 3 , , , k k k ϕ − − ψ Σ ϕ − ψ 1 1 0 = ( ) . i j i j j s k C ψ s ϕ ψ s − − ψ Σ ϕ Σ 1 1 , , = / . s ij i j j ij i j C C i k ϕ − ϕ − 2 1 = Ea − ψ 2 1 0 = = . 2 ln( / ) Ea k k a R + 2 = 1 k / = 10 a R ψ 0 4.5 /a i k
imum field E, at which the stable structure becomes inhomogeneous.Namely, the condition > 1/2 gives us (10) Relation (10) shows that the larger the distance between holes, the lower the fields needed to create a vortex inhomogeneity.This fact is useful for the experimental verification of the formulated theory.

Of course, a uniform field can stabilize topologically nontrivial structures also in the films containing more than two holes.Thus, e.g., the structure shown in Fig. 2 is formed in a field directed along the symmetry axis of the system, and at a/R = 10, it has a value of about , where a is the side of the triangle, at the vertices of which the holes are located.Note that the aforementioned examples reveal the physical meaning of the value as a characteristic voltage applied between the holes, at which inhomogeneous structures begin to form in the film.Moreover, this voltage turns out to be the only parameter characterizing the magnetic material in the framework of the problem under study.In particular, for our system, it is impossible to introduce the concept of characteristic length in a natural way, so that the r ij and R i , which determine the size and mutual arrangement of holes in the film, can be compared only with each other.The role of such a characteristic length, in general, could play the exchange length (possibly, in some combination with the film thickness h), if the contribution of the in-plane components of the demagnetizing fields are explicitly taken into account in the energy of the system given by Eq. (1.1).However, this contribution is considered to be negligibly small in the present analysis (in contrast to the contribution of components normal to the film surface, which are responsible for the shape anisotropy).Corrections corresponding to this contribution in films with specific geome-
2 | | k ψ 0 | | > ln( / ). E a R a ψ 0 8 /a ψ 0 π 2 /(2 ) s A M
tries, involving the fixed thickness h, could be taken into account in next studies.

5. CASE OF REGULAR HOLE ARRAYS From Eqs. ( 7) and ( 8), we see that the dependence of k i on is linear, so that a kind of superposition principle is valid for k i .In addition, we will show that the effect of the electric field on the topology of the magnetic structure is characterized a short-range interaction in the sense that a change in the potential of one of the holes strongly affects the value of k i only for this hole and, possibly, for several other holes close to it.Let us consider a sample containing an infinite number of identical holes with the radius R i = R, located in one straight line with a constant spacing = a between neighboring holes, as shown in Fig. 4.Then, at and C ii = 0, and hence, Eq. ( 6) for k i is a linear convolution of the number sequence k i .In this case, instead of Eq. ( 7), the inverse convolution can be performed, yielding (11) where (12) Here, the function is represented in the form of the series and, in general, it can be expressed in terms of special functions.However, it is important for actual applications, first, that its minimum value is G(π) = , so integral ( 12) converges when a/R > π/2 (this inequality can be considered to be satisfied for sure, since a R).Second, the approximation is valid, ensuring efficient calculations of the integral in Eq. ( 12), and at the choice of q ≈ 2.5 for the fitting parameter, the error in the calculation of M i values begins to manifest itself only at the fourth decimal place.In Fig. 4, we show the results of such calculations at different ratios a/R.Since the coefficients M i represent the convolution kernel (11), it is clear that the plots in Fig. 4 correspond to the k i distribution in the case of , and the field potentials in the regions of the other holes vanish.The rapid decrease in M i with the growth of |i| confirms the above concept of a short-range interactions.Of course, in the case of a square hole lattice with the period a, a similar picture is observed; the results of the corresponding calculations of k i at the potential near one of the holes and at zero potential near other ones are shown in Fig. 5.
ϕ i + , 1 i i r − = ln(| | / ) ij C i ja R ≠ i j − − ψ Σ ϕ 1 0 = , i j i j j k M π − π +  2 0 cos 1 = . 2 ( ) ln( / ) i ip M d p G p a R ( ) G p ∞ −  =2 ( ) = 2 ln cos j G p j jp

CONCLUSIONS

To summarize, it has been shown that the topology of the magnetic structure in a sample can be finely controlled by applying an electric field, in particular, from several sources, each locally and independently affecting the topology of the structure in its certain spatial region.In particular, this makes it possible to − π ln( /2)
( ) π π − ≈ − π − 2 ln 2 ( )(2 )
q G p q p p ϕ ψ 0 0 = ϕ ψ 0 = consider films with arrays of pairs of nearby holes as a physical foundation for the creation of new data carriers.Each such pair of holes could serve as an individual memory cell, where a value is encoded by the topology of a vortex inhomogeneity located in the cell region, and a new value is recorded by switching on the electric field.However, the implementation of this approach requires a magnetic film with not only inhomogeneous magnetoelectric interaction, but also the strong effective easy-plane anisotropy.The possibility of the preparation of such films, as well as the prospects of applications of the inhomogeneous magnetoelectric interaction to control the topology of structures in magnetic materials that are not in-plane, require further investigations.

Fig. 1 .
1
Fig. 1. (Color online) Geometry of the perforated film.The red arrow indicates the direction of the unit magnetization vector.


Fig. 2 .
2
Fig. 2. (Color online) Topologically nontrivial magnetization distribution.Gray arrows indicate the directions of the magnetization at different points of the sample.The magnetization vector makes k 1 = −2 turns and k 2 = k 3 = +1 turn in the clockwise path around the hole shown by the red circle and the holes marked by the blue circles, respectively.


Fig. 3 .Fig. 4 .
34
Fig. 3. (Color online) Magnetization distribution in a film with two holes in a uniform electric field.The green arrow indicates the direction of the field.The gray arrows mark the directions of the magnetization at different points of the sample.The magnetization vector makes k 1 = −1 and k 2 = +1 turns in the clockwise paths around the holes shown by the red and blue circles, respectively.Fig. 4. (Color online) Convolution kernel M i at different the ratios of the distance a between neighboring holes to their radius R. The lower part of the figure illustrates the layout of the hole array in the sample.


Fig. 5 .
5
Fig. 5. (Color online) Distribution of k i values in the square array of holes with the period a in the case where the potential is near one of the holes and zero near other holes.The colors illustrate the sign of k i for the corresponding holes.ϕ ψ 0 =

The authors of this work declare that they have no conflicts of interest.OPEN ACCESSThis article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material.If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/FUNDING This work was supported by the Russian Ministry of Science and Higher Education (state assignment no.075-03-2024-123/1 dated Feb. 15, 2024, theme no.324-21).CONFLICT OF INTERESTTranslated by K. KugelPublisher's Note.Pleiades Publishing remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in maps and institutional affiliations.AI tools may have been used in the translation or editing of this article.
. K Everschor-Sitte, J Masell, R M Reeve, M Kläui, J. Appl. Phys. 1242409012018

. D Kumar, T Jin, R Sbiaa, M Kläui, S Bedanta, S Fukami, D Ravelosona, S.-H Yang, X Liu, S N Piramanayagam, Phys. Rep. 95812022

. C Moreau-Luchaire, S C Mouta, N Reyren, Nat. Nanotechnol. 114442016

. A Fert, N Reyren, V Cros, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2170312017

. D Navas, R V Verba, A Hierro-Rodriguez, S A Bunyaev, X Zhou, A O Adeyeye, O V Dobrovolskiy, B A Ivanov, K Y Guslienko, G N Kakazei, Mater, 2019781114

. E Magadeev, R Vakhitov, I Sharafullin, Entropy. 2411042022

. E B Magadeev, R M Vakhitov, JETP Lett. 1151142022

. E B Magadeev, R M Vakhitov, R R Kanbekov, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter. 352158012023

. G A Meshkov, A P Pyatakov, A D Belanovsky, K A Zvezdin, A S Logginov, J. Magn. Soc. Jpn. 36452012

. D P Kulikova, A P Pyatakov, E P Nikolaeva, A S Sergeev, T B Kosykh, Z A Pyatakova, A V Nikolaev, A K Zvezdin, JETP Lett. 1041972016

. V G Bar'yakhtar, V A , D A Yablonskii, JETP Lett. 376731983

. A P Pyatakov, A K Zvezdin, Phys. Usp. 555572012

A Hubert, R Shafer, Magnetic Domains. BerlinSpringer2007

. I Dzyaloshinskii, Europhys. Lett. 83670012008

. E B Magadeev, R M Vakhitov, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 5871712302023