National Metallurgical Academy of Ukraine
DniproUkraine


Dnipro University of Technology
Ukraine
10.33271/nvngu/20215/176


Introduction. The mining and metallurgical sector (MMS) of Ukraine provides a significant part of GDP and acts as a raw material base for mechanical engineering, transport and con struction industries. The power of this industry is due to the availability of Ukraine's own raw material base. However, to day, given the current economic and political situation, there is a negative trend of development of mining and metallurgical enterprises.

In modern economic conditions, mining and metallurgi cal enterprises face the urgent issue of adapting to the market environment, assessing their strengths and weaknesses for competition and effective operation. Therefore, an important task is to determine further actions taking into account the competitive advantages within a particular strategy.

Literature review. Among the approaches to determining the prospects for strategic development of the mining complex the strategic competitiveness analysis can be identified, which allows building appropriate corporate strategies and opera tional processes for their implementation at the enterprise, industry and government in general [1].

The issues of development of the mining and metallurgical industry in the postcrisis period were studied by Stalinska O. and Volochko G. [2], and the basic principles of the MMS strategy were considered.

Wenger V. V. proposed the State Program of Moderniza tion and Development of the Metallurgical Industry, where he singled out the optimization of metallurgical capacities, devel opment and implementation of an innovative model of indus try development, development of metal product sales markets, improvement of state policy on metallurgy industry develop ment among the main tasks [3].

Kyrychenko O. O. emphasized the cardinal modernization of fixed assets of the mining and metallurgical sector (MMS) of Ukraine, the optimization of production processes and the expansion of the product range [4].

Prospects for the development of the metallurgical indus try of Ukraine are considered in [5], where the authors analyze the production, exportimport of metallurgical products and propose the main ways to overcome problems and achieve fur ther sustainable development of the metallurgical industry of Ukraine.

Melnyk O. V. noted that it is important to combine new materials (alloys) with unique properties in specific products and the use of a global platform to promote their products and services [6].

Kulitsky S. studied the state and problems of development of domestic metallurgy, taking into account the political fac tors of influence [7].

Afanasyev Ye. V. and Nusinov V. Ya. within the key tasks of the "National program of SME development of Ukraine for the period up to 2030" [8] considered the multicriteria and multi variate strategic planning of MMS enterprises; proposed mea sures to improve the direction of technical and economic devel opment of mining enterprises in order to ensure maximal effi ciency of the economic potential of MMS of Ukraine in condi tions of uncertainty and conflict of the market environment [9].

Shulgina L. M. and Yukhimenko V. V. improved the process of building strategies for innovative development of mechanical engineering enterprises by developing a theoreticalgame model and a strategic map based on a process approach [10].

The logistical approach [11], which identifies strategic pri orities to increase the competitiveness of industrial enterprises, can be also identified among the research tools.

Unsolved aspects of the problem. Given the scientific and methodological approaches to determining the strategy of the mining enterprise, the issue of assessing the production system of a legal entity not only at the level of the management object, but also in terms of sectorial and state regulation remains unresolved.

The purpose of the article is to form a strategy for the pro duction system of a mining enterprise, taking into account its competitive advantages.

Methods. To ensure stable data effectiveness, it is proposed to evaluate the production system of the enterprise from three points of view, according to the principle of the triad. Evalua tion is performed by: the object of management (model of selfregulation); industry authority (management model); state regulatory authority (control model). An important step in the analysis of a particular system is the formation of the evaluation base. There are the following criteria of the production system: production rhythmicity; intensity of equipment operation; integrated use of resource base; quality of materials; rates of consumption of material resources per a product unit;

balanced operation of production facilities; expansion of cooperation; change in equipment suppliers. Indicators in this case are evaluated as behavioral charac teristics in terms of usefulness and adaptation. Each party takes into account the usefulness of the indicators they bring to the entity at a particular level: government, industry or enterprise.

The level of adaptation of certain criteria is assessed by the representative of state regulation within the macroenviron ment, i. e. their adaptation to the impact of economic (con sumer income, price of tourist product, exchange rates), geo graphical (place of residence, climatic conditions, pollution and industrialization), political (changes in tax legislation, the size of state budgets, government regulation, ensuring eco nomic independence, strengthening defense capabilities), cul tural (views, social position, religion, family traditions), de mographic (gender, age, education), scientific and technical (introduction of new equipment and technology) and environ mental (state of environmental pollution) factors.

At the industrial level, the criteria are assessed within the microenvironment, i.e. the adaptation of indicators to com petitors, credit and financial institutions, the consumer mar ket, intermediaries and suppliers.

The head of the enterprise evaluates the behavioral charac teristics within the business entity, taking into account their adaptive capabilities to internal factors of influence (organiza tional structure, staff, costs, profits, innovation and invest ment opportunities).

Estimates are based on the Harrington Desirability Scale (Table 1), which is universal and can be used to evaluate many modifications of qualitative indicators. This scale is based on the uneven distribution of criteria and provides a combination of numerical and verbal assessment indicator [12].

After that, the scores are transferred into a scale, the indi cators are sorted by the level of usefulness and adaptation in descending order.

Graphically, the evaluation of criteria is proposed to be represented on the Cartesian coordinate system. The plane is divided into four quadrants, on which the level of adaptation expression (R y ) is plotted along the Y axis, and the level of util ity expression (R x ) of the criterion of the evaluated system is plotted along the X axis (Fig. 1).

The first quadrant "Record state" includes behavioral characteristics, whose record values maximally characterize this legal entity's system. That is, these are certain advantages that distinguish this company in the best way in the mining and metallurgical industry. Positioning in accordance with the usefulness of the enterprise characterizes the satisfaction of highest needs and, in this sense, it is the attention to these characteristics of the enterprise that motivates its effective ac tivity. Thus, this quadrant determines the power of the pro duction position of the enterprise and a high degree of adapta tion to environmental conditions. The second quadrant "Potential state" includes indicators that are potentially able to benefit the entity, but the property of adaptation to the factors of influence in them is weakly ex pressed. These are the potential opportunities that the com pany is ready to use in special cases. And, if to increase the level of their significance in the modeling of the company's activity, there are new motivators for the effectiveness of its ac tivities. Thus, this quadrant allows determining the parameters that contribute to the opening of new opportunities in devel opment.

The third quadrant "Risk state" includes those indicators that are not only weakly expressed in the structure of the eval uated system, but also characterize its weak ability to adapt to external factors. These are the criteria that deserve special at tention and require special skills, knowledge and effort.

The fourth quadrant "Weak state" includes those indica tors that mean a high level of adaptation of the entity's produc tion system to environmental conditions, but which are cur rently less useful than other indicators. The development of these criteria is supported by a natural process due to the de velopment of other more significant qualities in the activity. Thus, this quadrant means the weak point of the production system, that is, the company seeks to be more efficient in the relevant parameters, but in reality is not yet able to do so.

It is proposed to determine the coordinates of the behav ioral characteristics of each quadrant according to the for mulas  Results. The approbation of the offered technique is car ried out. The results of the evaluation of behavioral character istics are shown in the Table 2.
min [ ] , 1 2 if ; ; q q q i i k k k A A A n R j R R q = < = =q q q i i k k k U U U n R j R R q = < = = max [ ] , if ; 3; 2 q q q i i k k k A A A n R j R R q = > = max [ ] , if ; 4, 2 q q q i i k k k U U U n R j R R q = > = where q i k A R is
To automate the calculation process, an information sys tem for forming the strategy of the production system has been developed (Fig. 2). The software module processes the data entered by the user, builds tactics, taking into account the use fulness and adaptation of the behavioral characteristics of the production system and provides results (Fig. 3).

Thus, the following combination of behavioral character istics of record, potential, risk and weak state of production activity is obtained From the company executive's point of view, the indicator of the production rhythmicity is a powerful characteristic; the industry authority and the state regulatory authority believe that the work of the production system is positively affected by the change in equipment suppliers.

According to the head of the company, the second quadrant includes the indicator of integrated use of re sources, and according to the industry authority and the state regulatory authority -the quality of material resourc es. These behavioral characteristics can benefit the compa ny, but the ability to adapt to environmental conditions in them is weak.

Expansion of cooperation is at risk state, which is agreed by experts at three levels. This means that this behavioral char acteristic must be paid attention to and neutralized by record components.

The fourth quadrant "Weak state" from the company ex ecutive's and industry authority's points of view includes an indicator of the rate of consumption of material resources per a product's unit, and from the state regulatory authority point of view it includes the balanced operation of production ca pacities. It is possible to increase the level of these indicators by increasing quality of resources and their integrated use. Table 2 Assessing the level of utility and adaptation of the production system indicators  

R
values of adaptation estimates (ordinate) of the i criteria of the q quadrant from the k position of evaluation, massif of ordinates of indicators with minimal ordinate values of the q quadrant from the k position of evalua tion: SR is an object of management; M is a subject of manage ment; С is state authority; is values of utility estimates (ab scissa) of the i criteria of the q quadrant from the k position of evaluation; n is the number of analyzed criteriamas sif of abscissas of criteria with minimal value of abscissas of the q quadrant from the k position of massif of abscissas of criteria with maximal value of abscissas of the q quadrant from the k position of evaluationmassif of abscissas of criteria with maximal value of abscissas of the q quadrant from the k position of evaluation; n is the number of analyzed criteria; j is an index of the massif element; m is the number of criteria of massifs of an appropriate quadrant.

Fig. 2 .
2Combinations of behavioral characteristics of enterprise production systems Fig. 3. Formation of the company's production system strategy

Table 1
1Modified Harrington scale to assess the severity level of usefulness and adaptation of indicatorsItem 
Evaluation 
interval 

Severity level of usefulness and 
adaptation of behavioral characteristics 

1 
0.8 <= D < 1 
Very high 

2 
0.63 <= D < 0.8 
High 

3 
0.37 <= D 0.63 
Average 

4 
0.2 <= D < 0.37 
Low 

5 
D < 0.2 
Very low 

Fig. 1. Distribution of quadrants of an enterprise activity: re-
cord state, potential state, risk state, weak state 

Conclusion. An approach is proposed that allows evaluat ing the production system of the mining and metallurgical en terprise, and differs from the existing ones in that it does not average the assessments of experts, but allows taking into ac count the opinion of each expert in determining future actions to implement the strategy.An information system has been developed that allows forming a strategy based on the constructed combinations of tactics of the production system, taking into account the re cords, potentials, risks and weaknesses.Basing on the proposed approach it is also possible to car ry out an estimation of other systems of activity and to form the complex strategy of a mining enterprise.References.1.Ruchaievskyi, D. O. (2014). Strategic analysis of the competitive ness of the enterprises of the mining and metallurgical complex of Ukraine. Visnyk Dnipropetrovskoho Universytetu, 8892.  Мета. Формування стратегії гірничопромислового підприємства з урахуванням конкурентних переваг ви робничої системи з метою підвищення ефективності його функціонування.Методика. Базою дослідження виступили: методи те оретичного узагальнення -при уточненні визначень: «поведінкова характеристика», «корисність», «адапта ція»; експертний метод -при оцінюванні й ранжуванні вхідних параметрів системи визначення стратегії вироб ничої системи; сучасні інформаційні технології (середо вище програмування MS Visual Studio) -при розробці програмного модуля.Результати. Представлено алгоритм оцінювання ко рисності та адаптації виробничих показників за принци пом тріади. Сформована стратегія виробничої системи на основі побудованих тактик за рахунок виявлення рекорд них, потенційних, слабких і ризикових сторін поведінко вих характеристик. Розроблено програмний модуль, що надає рекомендації за отриманими розрахунками.Наукова новизна. Удосконалено методичний підхід до оцінювання параметрів виробничої системи гірничоме талургійного підприємства за принципом тріади, який, на відміну від існуючих, дозволяє враховувати три точки зору оцінювання: з позиції об'єкта управління (модель саморе гуляції); з позиції галузевого органа (модель управління); з позиції органа державного регулювання (модель контро лю), що дозволяє виявити конкурентні переваги за раху нок поведінкових характеристик виробничої системи.Практична значимість. Запропонована модель оціню вання на основі тріади є універсальною й може бути вико ристана у практичній роботі суб'єктів господарювання, що сприятиме підвищенню ефективності їх функціону вання та забезпеченню цілеспрямованої діяльності, орієн тованої на прийняття обґрунтованих своєчасних рішень.Ключові слова: стратегія, виробнича система, тріада, позиції оцінювання, адаптація, поведінкова характеристика Recommended for publication by K. F. Kovalchuk, Doctor of Economic Sciences. The manuscript was submitted 03.02.21.