CLINICAL FORMS AND ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAM ASPECTS OF SLEEP DISORDERS -LITERATURE REVIEW General Reviews


Réka Szabó¹ 
Petru Mihancea² 
Florica Voi Ă-Mekereș adress:mekeres_florina@yahoo.com 
Gheorghe Florin Voi 
Mariana Racovi 
Gabriel Mihai Mekeres 

¹Department of Neurology Recovery
²Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy
Municipal Clinical Hospital Dr. Gavril Curteanu
OradeaRomania


Florica Voi ă-Mekereș, lecture; University of Oradea, Medicine and Pharmacy Faculty
University of Oradea
Romania

CLINICAL FORMS AND ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAM ASPECTS OF SLEEP DISORDERS -LITERATURE REVIEW General Reviews
47 Corresponding author: Internal Medicine 20 vol. XV No. -www.srmi.ro 20 II 2 10.2478 20 110 /inmed-20 -0 48insomnianarcolepsyparasomniaapnea
The clinical manifestations in sleep disorders vary according to the type of hypnopathies, a heterogeneous group of conditions, characterized by the presence of any sleep-related symptoms capable of generating discomfort. We aimed to present the diagnostic criteria and the classification of the subtypes of sleep disorders in the most recent classification published in the medical literature. I have searched in the PubMed, Medline, Google Scholar Search databases, using keywords to select the right items. We selected the articles published in English and French language, in the period of 2000-2018.The sleep disturbances may be of quantitative order (hyper-or hyposomnia)  or of qualitative order (parasomnia), respectively hypnopathies related to breathing or movement, due to the circadian rhythm and other categories, according to ICSD-3.Conclusions. The correct classification in the subtypes of sleep disorders is the key to theiroptimal treatment, but this process is complex, staged and multidisciplinary.RezumatManifestările clinice în tulburările de somn variază în func ie de tipul hipnopatiilor, un grup heterogen de afec iuni, caracterizate prin prezen a oricăror simptome legate de somn care generează disconfort. Ne-am propus să prezentăm criteriile de diagnostic și clasificarea subtipurilor tulburărilor de somn conform celei mai recente clasificări publicată în literatura medicală. Am căutat în bazele de date PubMed, Medline, Google Scholar, folosind cuvinte cheie pentru a selecta articolele potrivite. Am selectat articolele publicate în limba engleză și franceză, în perioada 2000-2018. Tulburările de somn pot fi de ordin cantitativ (hiper-sau hiposomnie) sau de ordin calitativ (parasomnie), respectiv hipnopatii legate de respira ie sau mișcare, cauzate de ritmul circadian și alte categorii, conform ICSD-3.

Introduction

The sleep is a physiological, periodic and Insomnia is subdivided into the difficulty of falling asleep (sleep onset insomnia), frequent and prolonged awakenings (sleep maintenance insomnia) or the desire to continue to fall asleep despite a sleep of adequate duration (non-restorative sleep) . (2) According to ICSD-3, insomnia is classified into 11 categories:      We are talking about this hypnic disorder only after the age of 2 years. The inadequate comfort, medical problems of the child or even the lack of parental affection are favorable factors. Once the sleep is initialized, its quality and duration will be normal . (6) (7,8) (13,14,15) . There is also the possibility to forget this aspect immediately after awakening.


11.Organic insomnia (physiological).


EEG Aspects in insomnia

Sleep paralysis mimes the temporary paralysis during the REM sleep period, when dreams also occur.  Pavor nocturnus in the case of adults are more likely uncommon, more related to mental trauma than genetic trauma . (18,19) l Enuresis nocturnus  It may appear as a single sleep disorder or associated with other parasomnias. It is very common and reported in 50% of children, especially in puberty. It seems to be familial . (19) l EEG aspects in NREM parasomnia

The EEG changes begin in the N3 stage of   (19) l EEG aspects in REM parasomnia

In the RBD there is observed a diffuse heart disease or stroke . (22,23,24,25,26) 


EEG aspects in SAS

In the SAS cases, PSG is used for paraclinical assessment, which also includes the selected EEG channels. We can make correlations between the sleep stage, the microarousals and the number of apnea episodes.

During the NREM sleep, thus during the periods of hypopnea, the delta rhytm amplitude generally increases at 10-13 seconds after the breathing disorder occurs.

In the REM phase, however, no similar changes were recorded, suggesting that the occurrence of this phenomenon is rather a wake-up mechanism and not a result of cerebral hypoxemia . 


Disturbances of the circadian rhythm

The persistent disturbances of the circadian rhythm are caused by a reduced ability of the patient to reset his nictemeral cycle according to the temporal clues given by the environment.


Delayed Sleep Phase Syndrome.

These patients fail to sleep early in the evening and thus cannot wake up in the morning at the right time.


Advanced Sleep Phase Syndrome.

Contrary to the previous syndrome, in this  


reversible process characterized by the temporary suppression of consciousness, the slowing down of the vital functions, and the partial abolition of sensitivity. Sleep can be divided into 2 types: paradoxical or rapid eye movement sleep (REM) and slow-wave sleep (NREM). The two types alternate forming sleep cycles. During sleep, there are changes in the majority of the body's systems, which underlie the explanation of the mechanisms of the hypnic disorders. For the purpose of a detailed analysis and diagnosis of the various sleep disorders we use polysomnography. This is a multi-parametric test, which consists of electro -encephalography, paper, our aim is to present the diagnostic criteria and the classification of the subtypes of sleep disorders in the most recent classification published in the medical literature. For this purpose, we have searched in the PubMed, Medline, Google Scholar Search databases, using keywords (insomnia, narcolepsy, parasomnia and apnea) to select the right items. The inclusion criteria were represented by the articles published in English and French language, in the period of 2000-2018. The exclusion criteria were the inaccessibility to the full article, unclear case studies and studies published in other languages. Subsequently, the relevant data Concluzii. Clasificarea corectă în subtipurile tulburărilor de somn este cheia tratamentului optim al acestora, dar acest proces este complex, etapizat și multidisciplinar. Cuvinte cheie: insomnie, narcolepsie, parasomnie, apnee. Abbreviations: ICSD-3 -International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd edition, REM -rapid eye movement, NREM -non rapid eye movement, RBD -REM sleep behavior disorder, SAS -sleep apnea syndrome, RLS -restless leg syndrome, PMLS -periodic limb movement disorder, PSGthe sleep duration and/or decreasing the depth of sleep, which alters the daytime activity.

( ) 5 3 .
3The paradoxical insomnia or the pseudo-insomnia is the inability of sleep perception. It is a disorder in which the patient reports the absence of sleep, but could not object to it. There is an inconsistency between the subjective perception of sleep by the patient and the one objectively found by the examiner and the polysomnography.


T h e p a t i e n t , h o w e v e r, i s f r a n k l y convinced of the existence of his disorder.The psychiatric history is lacking in most cases, but the anxiety-depressive disorders may occur over time .( ) 4,5 4. I n s o m n i a d u e t o a s o m a t i c p a t h o l o g y. P a t h o l o g i e s t h a t c a n accompany insomnia are: pain of any cause (arthritis, cancer); l a d v a n c e d c h r o n i c o b s t r u c t i v e pulmonary pathology; l cardiac ischemia; l in case of men, benign prostatic hypertrophy (due to nocturnal micturition); l chronic renal pathology; l fibromyalgia etc .


Insomnia due to drug or medication abuse. Sleep disorders are common in case of excessive use of psychostimulant substances, alcohol or hypnotic sedatives (rebound insomnia) .

( ) 8 7
8. N o n -o r g a n i c i n s o m n i a . I t i s n o n s p e c i f i c , n o t g i v e n b y k n o w n physiological substances or conditions. T h i s c a t e g o r y i n c l u d e s a l l t h o s e environmental conditions that can cause passive insomnia (e.g. after anesthesia, in case of persons who had no activity for a long time etc.). It is characterised by their installation and their disappearance as soon as the cause is removed . ( ) 4,5,7 8. Insomnia caused by inappropriate hygiene of sleep. The violation of sleep hygiene is highlighted by at least one of the following: l inappropriate sleep timing, consisting of frequent daytime sleep episodes, large bedtime and bed -wake up variations or excessive periods of time spent in bed l frequent use of products containing alcohol, nicotine, caffeine before bedtime l involvement in intellectual, physical or emotional activities immediately before bedtime l frequent use of the bed for other activities (watching TV, using the phone or the computer, reading, learning, eating) l the inability to create a comfortable sleeping atmosphere ( ) 6,9 9. Idiopathic insomnia is the innate inability of the patient to achieve a physiological sleep from birth. There is a clear genetic predisposition and is more likely to be caused by the inappropriate General Reviews 51 development of the brain structures responsible for sleeping. Characteristically, insomnia is invariable, it is not influenced by the affective state of the patient. Over time, a sense of psycho-physical exhaustion is being installed, which significantly affects the quality of life. Some patients with less severe forms adapt relatively well to their hypnic disorder, but others develop a major degree of disability that prevents them from pursuing a lucrative activity. In such clinical forms, the installment of depression and even of the autolytic attempts are common . ( ) 7,8,9 10.Behavioral insomnia of childhood. It is mainly due to the repeated mistakes of adults who are not able to properly manage and supervise the child's upbringing, implying a bad ritual sleep.


The duality of sleep patterns also correspond to a duality of hypersomnia, some corresponding to the slow wave sleep phase and others to the REM sleep phase .

(12) 1 .
1Symptomatic hypersomnia occurs in a number of organic cerebral diseases: cerebral tumors, stroke, infectious meningoencephalitis, cranial-cerebral trauma, multiple sclerosis, neurod e g e n e r a t i v e d i s e a s e s , h e p a t


sleep paralysis; cataplexy and, more rarely, sleep paralysis and hypnosis hallucinations are the major symptoms of the disease, representing the classical narcoleptic tetrad

ll
Excessive diurnal sleepiness The main feature of narcolepsy is the overwhelming sleepiness which leads to the uncontrollable need to sleep during the daytime. Patients fall asleep without warning, anywhere and at anytime. Episodes can take a few minutes or even a half an hour, after which the awakening occurs, followed by a new episode of paroxysmal sleep. In addition, may occur drowsiness between the narcoleptic episodes, which affects the ability to concentrate, resulting in the decreasing of performances. Sleep paralysis It is the failure to make movements or talk while waking up or falling asleep. These episodes had a duration of 1-2 minutes.


a REM sleep period. Thought when the dream begins, the person can be half awakened; the dream is confused with the reality. l Other clinical features Include the restless night-time sleep and various automated behaviors which appear occasionally .

( 16 )p h y s i c a l a c t i v i t y , e m o t i o n a l s t re s
16EEG aspects in hypersomniaIt is known the fact that, in the case of healthyindividuals, the different stages of sleep appear in a regular sequence. In the case of n a rc o l e p t i c s , h o w e v e r , s l e e p a p n e a generally begins in the REM sleep phase with minimal sleep latency. The organization of night sleep is clearly altered, but the results of various studies are specific stages of sleep or sleep transition phases. They are considered to be "parasitic" somatopsychic phenomena, overlapping the different phases of sleep. They can be divided into NREM-and REM parasomnia. The NREM parasomnias are disorders that occur during the third phase of slow wave sleep. They are caused by a psychological activation in which the patient's brain comes out of the NREM and it is caught between sleep and wakefulness. These disorders involve the activation of the autonomic nervous system, motor system or cognitive processes during sleep or sleep-wake transitions. Some parasomnias are common in childhood, but decrease as frequency with aging. They may be triggered in some individuals by alcohol, sleep deprivation, parasomnias allow the individual to act in a dream and can end up with injuries. 90% of these patients are men over 50 years of age. These disorders most commonly occur as a result of adverse effects of antidepressant medication. There are also frequent from sleeping with slow waves, sighing, screaming or groaning, and with agitated behavior because of the fear. The person in question cannot be completely awake from sleep and after this episode he continues to fall asleep. It cannot be remembered later by the s u b j e c t . T h e t e rro r s i n s l e e p a re obligatory accompanied by a vegetative anger: tachycardia, tachypnea, skin congestion, diaphoresis, mydriasis, hypertonia. Children between the ages of 2 and 6 years are most prone to night terrors, affecting 15% of them. The episodes may return a few weeks away and suddenly disappear. There are evidences that suggest a genetic predisposition for these disorders, but there are multiple triggering factors: emotional stress, fever, constipation.


It is characterized by the screech of teeth and is typically accompanied by jaw clenching. It is a parafunctional oral activity that occurs to most people at some point in their life. At the majority of people, bruxism is moderate without being a health problem. It is one of the most common sleep disorders. Its etiology is not known, although some conditions are known to be related to bruxism: diet and anxiety. Most patients are unaware of the bruxism and only 5% develop symptoms such as jaw ache and headache. In most cases, the sleep partner notices the phenomenon before the affected individual. Over time, It can be loud talking, ranging from simple sounds to lengthy speeches and can occur several times during the same sleep period. It occurs either in the NREM stage when it is unintelligible, or in the REM stage, when words from dreams are s a i d o u t l o u d . S o m e t i m e s t h e "somnolicvics" can be contacted and are of absolute sincerity, lacking censorship.


sweating. They lead to sudden awakening, with vigilance and rapid orientation. They appear mostly in the morning, when the REM sleep dominates and can be further detailed by the patient. Favorable factors: stress, alcohol, tricyclic antidepressants, a n t i h i s t a m i n e s , b e n z o d i a z e p i n e withdrawal etc. They have a sporadic f r e q u e n c y ; w e m e e t t h e m m o r e frequently under the age of 20 years . (18) l Sleep paralysis It may occur in the case of normal


slowing on the EEG in the REM sleep stage, with the domination of theta rhythm anteriorly and less rapid beta rhythm, but without significant alteration of the sleep architecture. This diffuse slowing in the theta band is more obvious on the dominant hemisphere. We mention that the evaluated patients were selected in such a way that those with a cognitive impairment were excluded (with physiological slowing of the electric background). With the help of the PSG channels, additional data can be obtained about the changes that occurred and their effect on other systems in the body:for example the EMG channel may prove the absence of the muscle tone at least 10 seconds each, the amount of oxygen that reaches the brain is insufficient. This triggers a partial awakening (microarousal), accompanied by a strong snoring and a sudden inspiration. These microarousals remain unobserved by the patient, but they produce superficiality in


the superior limbs, too) to s t o p u n c o m f o r t a b l e o r s t r a n g e sensations. The movement of the affected part of the body modulates the sensations, bringing temporary relief. The sensations experienced by the patient can be compared to pruritus or tickling in the muscles and

.
case the affected one falls asleep too early in the evening and wakes up in the middle of the night. The affected patients fall asleep every evening later and later and get up early in the morning, as if the day would be over 24 hours for them.

4 .
4Deregulation caused by the time zone affects travelers crossing more time zones. 5. Work done in the night shift. as well as the framing into sleep patterns helps to understand how they can be best influenced by a targeted treatment. The optimal management is performed according to the subtype and gravity of the type of sleep disturbance, the associated comorbidities in each case, the access to the video-EEG and the polysomnographic evaluation. In conclusion, the pathology of sleep is a complex subject, not yet fully elucidated in detail, but having a major impact on the individual's health and requires the expansion of the current knowledge.

1 .
1The adjustment or adaptation insomnia is also known as transient insomnia, short-term or acute insomnia. The adjustment insomnia occurs in response to an environmental factor (too much noise or light at night, extreme temperatures, uncomfortable bed etc.) or stress factors related to the social or familial situation. Patients may also have 2. The psychophysiological insomnia or the primary insomnia begins during a prolonged period of stress and is favored by the person's predisposition for sleep disturbances. This is manifested by the fact that the habit of the sleepless night is quickly consolidated by the patient's hypersensitivity. In case of these patients there is never found the presence of drowsiness and they often complain about headaches .consecutive anxiety, irritability, lethargy 

and somatic symptoms (most commonly 

headaches). Most adults experience 

some episodes of this type of insomnia 

during their lives. Insomnia usually lasts 

for up to 3 months and quickly disappears 

with the removal of the factor that caused 

it . 

( 
) 
3,4 




occurring in young men and consists of several weeks of excessive sleep, almost continuous, with no physiological changes in sleep. Hypersomnia isInternal Medicine 20 
vol. XV No. -www.srmi.ro 
20 
II 
2 

General Reviews 

52 

encephalopathy, renal failure, endocrine 

diseases, psychiatric disorders 
. 

(12,13) 

The Kleine-Levin syndrome: a particular 

syndrome belonging to this category, 

which is a neuro-hormonal hypersomnia, 

associated with hyperinstinctuality, 

namely compulsive hyperphagia and 

hypersexuality; between episodes, 

patients have normal behavior; these 

episodes usually disappear with age, with 

the trend towards decreasing the 

androgenic level . 

(13) 

2. The functional hypersomnia include 

hypersomnias where no organic cause of 

excess sleep can be highlighted. With the 

individualization of the two forms of 

sleep, were created premises for the 

differentiation of functional hypersomnia, 

corresponding to slow sleep, to others 

that correspond to paradoxical sleep 

(narcolepsy). 

There are described some simple 

"essential" hypersomnia (diurnal or 

nocturnal) in which sleep, although it 

lasts a long time, is not accompanied by 

other clinical manifestations or bio-

electric anomalies. 

Functional hypersomnia may take several 

hours, days, even weeks, and may occur 

at intervals of one month to several 

years 
. 



Text mining of journal articles for sleep disorder terminologies. Calvin Lam, PloS one. 115156031Lam, Calvin, et al. Text mining of journal articles for sleep disorder terminologies. PloS one 2016; 11(5): e0156031

International classification of sleep disorders-third edition highlights and modifications. M J Sateia, Sateia M.J. International classification of sleep disorders-third edition highlights and modifications.

. Chest. 1465Chest. 2014; 146(5): 1387-1394

Derivation of research diagnostic criteria for insomnia: report of an American Academy of Sleep Medicine Work Group. Jack D Edinger, Sleep. Edinger, Jack D., et al. Derivation of research diagnostic criteria for insomnia: report of an American Academy of Sleep Medicine Work Group. Sleep 2004;

Assessment of excessive sleepiness and insomnia as they relate to circadian rhythm sleep disorders. Karl Doghramji, The Journal of clinical psychiatry. 65Doghramji, Karl. Assessment of excessive sleepiness and insomnia as they relate to circadian rhythm sleep disorders. The Journal of clinical psychiatry. 2004; 65:17-22

Situational insomnia: consistency, predictors, and outcomes. Michael H Bonnet, Donna L Arand, Sleep. 268Bonnet, Michael H., and Donna L. Arand. Situational insomnia: consistency, predictors, and outcomes. Sleep. 2003; 26 (8): 1029-1036

Insomnia and sleep misperception. C H Bastien, Pathologie Biologie. 625Bastien, C. H., et al. Insomnia and sleep misperception. Pathologie Biologie 2014; 62 (5): 241- 251

. Michael L Perlis, B Charles, Jacqueline D Corbitt, Perlis, Michael L., Charles B. Corbitt, and Jacqueline D.

Insomnia research: 3Ps and beyond. Kloss, Sleep medicine reviews. 183Kloss. Insomnia research: 3Ps and beyond. Sleep medicine reviews. 2014; 18 (3): 191-193

Understanding insomnia in older adults. López-Torres Hidalgo, Jesús, International journal of geriatric psychiatry. 2710López-Torres Hidalgo, Jesús, et al. Understanding insomnia in older adults. International journal of geriatric psychiatry. 2012; 27 (10): 1086-1093

Co-occurring insomnia and obstructive sleep apnea. Sleep medicine. Kenneth L Lichstein, 14Lichstein, Kenneth L., et al. Co-occurring insomnia and obstructive sleep apnea. Sleep medicine. 2013; 14 (9): 824-829

. C Marzano, M Ferrara, Sforza E , De Gennaro, L , General Reviews. 59Marzano C, Ferrara M, Sforza E and De Gennaro L. General Reviews 59

Quantitative Electroencephalogram (EEG) in Insomnia: A New Window on Pathophysiological Mechanisms. Quantitative Electroencephalogram (EEG) in Insomnia: A New Window on Pathophysiological Mechanisms.

. Current Pharmaceutical Design. 143446Current Pharmaceutical Design. 2008; 14: 3446

. Dorota Wołyńczyk-Gmaj, W Szelenberger, Wołyńczyk-Gmaj, Dorota, and Szelenberger W.

Waking EEG in primary insomnia. Acta Neurobiol. Exp. 71Waking EEG in primary insomnia. Acta Neurobiol. Exp 71. 2011; 387-392

Prevalence of narcolepsy symptomatology and diagnosis in the European general population. M M Ohayon, Neurology. 5812Ohayon, M. M., et al. Prevalence of narcolepsy symptomatology and diagnosis in the European general population. Neurology. 2002; 58 (12): 1826-1833

Polysomnographic features of narcolepsy types 1 and 2, and of idiopathic hypersomnia: Strengths and limitations. Michel Billiard, Clinical Neurophysiology. 1289212Billiard, Michel. Polysomnographic features of narcolepsy types 1 and 2, and of idiopathic hypersomnia: Strengths and limitations. Clinical Neurophysiology 2017; 128 (9): 212

. Thomas E Scammell, Narcolepsy, New England Journal of Medicine. 27Scammell, Thomas E. Narcolepsy. New England Journal of Medicine. 2015:373 (27): 2654-2662

The ICSD-3 and DSM-5 guidelines for diagnosing narcolepsy: clinical relevance and practicality. Ruoff Ch, D Rye, Current Medical Research and Opinion. 3210Ruoff Ch, Rye D. The ICSD-3 and DSM-5 guidelines for diagnosing narcolepsy: clinical relevance and practicality. Current Medical Research and Opinion, 2016; 32:10: 1611-1622

NREM sleep alterations in narcolepsy/cataplexy. Raffaele Ferri, Clinical neurophysiology. 11611Ferri, Raffaele, et al. NREM sleep alterations in narcolepsy/cataplexy. Clinical neurophysiology 116.11 ; 2005; 2675-2684

Sleep stage sequence. Panagis Drakatos, Drakatos, Panagis, et al. Sleep stage sequence

. Mark R Pressman, Michel Cramer Bornemann, Pressman, Mark R., and Michel Cramer Bornemann.

The ICSD-3 NREM parasomnia section is evidence based resulting from international collaboration, consensus and best practices. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine. 112The ICSD-3 NREM parasomnia section is evidence based resulting from international collaboration, consensus and best practices. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine 2015; 11(2): 187-188

Parasomnias and other sleeprelated movement disorders. Lee-Chiong, T L Jr, Primary care. 322Lee-Chiong, Jr TL. Parasomnias and other sleep- related movement disorders. Primary care 2005; 32(2):

NREM arousal parasomnias and their distinction from nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy: a video EEG analysis. C P Derry, A S Harvey, M C Walker, J S Duncan, S F Berkovic, SLEEP. 3212Derry CP, Harvey AS, Walker MC, Duncan JS, Berkovic SF. NREM arousal parasomnias and their distinction from nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy: a video EEG analysis. SLEEP 2009; 32(12):1637-1644

Electroencephalographic Finding in Idiopathic REM Sleep Behavior Disorder. Y Inoue, T Sasai, K Hirata, Neuropsychobiology. 71Inoue Y, Sasai T, Hirata K: Electroencephalographic Finding in Idiopathic REM Sleep Behavior Disorder. Neuropsychobiology. 2015; 71:25-33

Daytime sleepiness: more than just Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA). Atul Malhotra, David P White ; Ferini-Strambi, Luigi , La Medicina del lavoro. 3609328Obstructive sleep apnoea. The LancetMalhotra, Atul, and David P. White. Obstructive sleep apnoea. The Lancet. 2002;360 9328):237-245 23. Ferini-Strambi, Luigi, et al. Daytime sleepiness: more than just Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA). La Medicina del lavoro 2017; 108 (4): 260-266

Changes in the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea using the ICSD-3. Stomato-pharyngology. Masami Nakajima, Mutsuko Hara, Akane Numakura, Yasuhiro Kase, 29Masami Nakajima, Mutsuko Hara, Akane Numakura, Yasuhiro Kase, Changes in the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea using the ICSD-3. Stomato-pharyngology. 2016; 29:2: 201-206

Adult obstructive sleep apnoea. The Lancet. Amy S Jordan, G David, Atul Mcsharry, Malhotra, 383Jordan, Amy S., David G. McSharry, and Atul Malhotra. Adult obstructive sleep apnoea. The Lancet. 2014; 383 (9918): 736-747

The utility of routine EEG in the diagnosis of sleep disordered breathing. Ioannis Karakis, Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology. 29Karakis, Ioannis, et al. The utility of routine EEG in the diagnosis of sleep disordered breathing. Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology 29.4, 2012; 333-338

Restless legs syndrome/W-Ekbom disease diagnostic criteria: updated International Restless Legs Syndrome Study Group (IRLSSG) consensus criteria-history, rationale, description, and significance. R P Allen, D L Picchietti, D Garcia-Borreguero, Sleep Med. 15860Allen, R. P., Picchietti, D. L., Garcia-Borreguero, D.et al. Restless legs syndrome/W-Ekbom disease diagnostic criteria: updated International Restless Legs Syndrome Study Group (IRLSSG) consensus criteria-history, rationale, description, and significance. Sleep Med., 2014; 15: 860

Dissociation of periodic leg movements from arousals in restless legs syndrome. M Manconi, R Ferri, M Zucconi, Ann. Neurol. 71Manconi, M., Ferri, R., Zucconi, M. et al. Dissociation of periodic leg movements from arousals in restless legs syndrome. Ann. Neurol. 2012, 71: 834-844

Spectral analysis of sleep EEG in patients with restless legs syndrome. Magdolna Hornyak, Clinical neurophysiology. 116Hornyak, Magdolna, et al. Spectral analysis of sleep EEG in patients with restless legs syndrome. Clinical neurophysiology 116.6, 2005; 1265-1272.

Shift work sleep disorder: prevalence and consequences beyond that of symptomatic day workers. C L Drake, T Roehrs, G Richardson, J K Walsh, T Roth, Sleep. 27Drake CL, Roehrs T, Richardson G, Walsh JK, Roth T. Shift work sleep disorder: prevalence and consequences beyond that of symptomatic day workers. Sleep. 2004; 27: 1453-1462.

Spontaneous human combustion, homicide, suicide or household accident. F Mekereş, C L Buhaş, Rom J Leg Med. 241Mekereş, F., & Buhaş, C. L. (2016). Spontaneous human combustion, homicide, suicide or household accident. Rom J Leg Med, 24(1), 11-13.

. F Mekereș, G F Voi Ă, G M Mekereș, F Bodog, Mekereș, F., Voi ă, G. F., Mekereș, G. M., & Bodog, F.

Psychosocial impact of scars in evaluation of aesthetic prejudice. D , Internal Medicine. 25Rom J Leg MedD. (2017). Psychosocial impact of scars in evaluation of aesthetic prejudice. Rom J Leg Med, 25, 435-438. Internal Medicine 20 vol. XV No. -www.srmi.ro 20 II 2