May 13 th , 2019

Dhion Meitreya Vidhiasi mvdhion@gmail.com 
Akademi Maritim Nusantara Cilacap Cilacap
Indonesia

Fifth PRASASTI International Seminar on Linguistics
May 13 th , 2019The Alignment of the Editorial of Media Indonesia "Membatasi Gerak Bandit Politik" on Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 338alignmentMedia Indonesiaeditorialcritical discourse analysispeople power I
The role of media in reporting something could decide how people may act regarding the news. The Presidential election of Indonesia may be considered as one national event that draws huge attention of the people of Indonesia or even other countries. The election has been done on April 17th, 2019 and the president and vice president candidates (Number 01); Mr. Joko Widodo and Mr. Ma'ruf Amin have been considered as the winner of the election based on the result of the quick count. On the other hand, the president and vice president candidates (Number 02); Mr. Prabowo Subianto and Mr. Sandiaga Salahudin Uno think that they are the winner according to the data of internal quick count. The rejection of the candidates' number 02 issued a term named "People Power." That term may mean anything. Using Critical Discourse Analysis proposed by Fairclough (1989, 1995, 1997), the researcher wants to find the linguistic expressions used in the editorial to find the alignment of the newspaper. This research used a descriptive-qualitative method to explain and describe the phenomena which exist in the data related to the alignment of the newspapers through Critical Discourse Analysis. The researcher collected the data by observing Media Indonesia online newspaper dated May 13th, 2019 entitled "Membatasi Gerak Bandit Politik". The researcher uses referential, inferential, and distributional methods in the making of the interpretation of the findings. The researcher found that there are 5 (five) strategies used in the editorial. Those are Domination of Participant and Process, Hidden Actor, Active-Passive Clause, Positive -Negative Clause, and Metaphors.

INTRODUCTION

Digitalization era holds an important role in human lives. Especially in today's era called Industrial Revolution 4.0. People may access much information from many resources easily. They may find many news considered as "real one" or even "hoax one." This "easy" thing leads people to choose whether they accept it or leave it. It is known to be sure that media play their role in educating people or even make a total change in a country. The presidential election in Indonesia is one example which proves that media may have shaped people's viewpoint.

The Presidential election of Indonesia may be considered as one national event that draws huge attention of the people of Indonesia or even other countries. The election has been done on April 17th, 2019 and the president and vice president candidates (Number 01); Mr. Joko Widodo and Mr. Ma'ruf Amin have been considered as the winner of the election based on the result of the quick count. On the other hand, the president and vice president candidates (Number 02); Mr. Prabowo Subianto and Mr. Sandiaga Salahudin Uno think that they are the winner according to the data of internal quick count. The rejection of the candidates' number 02 issued a term named "People Power." That term may be interpreted differently between one and another media, including Media Indonesia.

Tuchman (1978:1) said that "news is a window of the world." The view through a window depends upon whether the window is large or small, has many panes or few, whether the glass is opaque or clear, whether the window faces a street or a backyard. Every newspaper has its side, which means that they have an option whether to support or against something. The editor of news in a newspaper can choose what and how news is presented. The way the editor choose on that is called framing. Entman (1993:51) explained that framing is a "scattered conceptualization." It is how media organize the idea or storyline to their audiences.

Media Indonesia is a printed newspaper owned by Mr. Surya Paloh. We know that Mr. Surya Paloh is the chairman of the National Democracy (Nasdem) Party. We also know that he is the loyal supporter of candidate number 01. The term of "People Power" explained in the editorial of Media Indonesia related to the act of treason or in another word, it relates to the attempt of coup d'état. The explanation is strengthened with the determination as a suspect of treason for Mr. Eggi Sudjana and someone known as HS.

The study of critical discourse analysis to analyze texts has already been conducted by many researchers such as Nurhayati (2016), Hakim (2016) and Mawene (2016). The study of Nurhayati (2016) is about the representation of media about the political conflict between legislative and executive institutions in the testimony of Sudirman Said. She said that the dominant institution tried to exercise not only their legitimate power but also the illegitimate power abuse to sustain the domination. The manipulation of linguistic expressions has been produced to articulate power. The last two previous studies from Hakim (2016) and Mawene (2016) are about how symbolic violence produced in a discourse. Both showed the power domination in the discourse. The reason is to force the ideology of the discourse maker(s). It is possible when the ideology is about culture. The maker(s) want to make sure that the traditions and beliefs of certain groups of people can stay strong as long as possible. Based on the introduction, the researcher wants to find the alignment of the editorial of Media Indonesia about "People Power."


II. LITERATURE REVIEW


A. Media Indonesia

Media Indonesia is a national newspaper published since January 19 th , 1970. In the beginning, Media Indonesia consisted of only four pages with limited circulation. His first office was then located at Lieutenant General MT Haryono Street, Jakarta, with the issuing institution, is the Warta Indonesia Foundation. In 1976, Media Indonesia developed into eight pages. In the same year, Media Indonesia also had a press issuance business permit (SIUPP). In 1987, the founder of Media Indonesia Teuku Yousli Syah worked with Surya Paloh, the former leader of the Priority newspaper. From this collaboration, Media Indonesia and the new management were born under PT Citra Media Nusa Purnama. Surya Paloh was the managing director, while Teuku Yousli Syah was the general leader. The location of the office also moved to Jalan Gondangdia Lama No 46, Jakarta.

Beginning in 1995, Media Indonesia started its office in the Delta Kedoya complex, Jalan Pilar Mas Raya Kav A-D, Kedoya Selatan, Kebon Jeruk, West Jakarta, and has survived to this day. The change of leadership, both in the editorial and business sections, takes place over time. With the 'Honest Speaking' tagline, Media Indonesia continues to try to present the actual news to meet the information needs of its readers. The vision to build an independent daily and look at a better tomorrow remains unchanged.


B. Critical Discourse Analysis

Van Dijk (2001:352) said that Critical Discourse Analysis or known as CDA is "a type of discourse analytical research that primarily studies the way social power abuse, dominance, and inequality are enacted, reproduced, and resisted by the text and talk in the social and political context." It means that CDA focuses on social problems. Fairclough (1989:22) explains the same thing as van Dijk that a language is a form of social practice. He said that language is a part of society, a social process, and a socially conditioned process. Later he said that language and society influenced each other. Fairclough and Wodak (1997:271-80) summarize the main principles of CDA as follows: (1) The focus of CDA is on social and cultural processes; (2) CDA explains the power and ideology of discourse; (3) CDA is used to uncover the "hidden" thing of certain news.

A term of discourse, according to Fairclough (1989: 24), refers to the whole process of social interaction of which a text is just a part. Those processes are the process of production, of which the text is a product, and the process of interpretation, for which the text is a resource. The production and interpretation of texts are influenced by other things called non-linguistic things. People have to remember that they are part of society. They live in a socially conditioned area. Fairclough (1989: 24) explained that people internalize what is socially produced and made available to them, and use this internalized MR to engage in their social practice, including discourse. MR or Members' Resources is anything people have in their mind. The last form of discourse involves social conditions. Fairclough (1989: 25) defined that social conditions can be divided into social conditions of production and social conditions of interpretation. Those three processes are stored in people's head cognitively as "Members' Resources (MR)". Fairclough (1989: 25) summarized those processes in the figure below. 


C. Media Discourse

Media play a role in shaping the mind of the audience in certain case. Fairclough (1995: 2) described that the power of media is to influence knowledge, beliefs, values, social relations, and social identities. Media has the power to represent things in Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 338 particular ways. Media such as mass media or TV shows construct a relationship between reporter and audience or reader. The reporter here is described as someone who knows the fact and someone who has the right to tell it. The audience or reader is someone who knows nothing and needs to be told.

Therefore, by the power of media, it may decide what news needs to be included and excluded. Fairclough (1995: 56) defined that there are two essential things in analyzing media discourse; those are an analysis of communicative events and the analysis of the order of discourse. The analysis of communicative events has three perspectives which are text, discourse practice, and sociocultural practice. Fairclough (1995: 63) positioned media as a mediator between external relations and internal relations in the analysis of the order of discourse.

Fairclough (1995: 57) defined the analysis of communicative events is an analysis of relationships between three perspectives; those are text, discourse practice, and sociocultural practice. Text can be written or orally such as from newspaper, radio, and television show. Fairclough defined discourse practice as the processes of text production and text consumption. The sociocultural practice is defined as the social and cultural goings-on which the communication event is a part of. The analysis of texts is about the analysis of linguistic devices such as vocabulary, semantics, grammar, phonology, and writing system. Despite the analysis on linguistic devices, the analysis of textual organization above the sentence such as cohesion and turn-taking is needed when we have to analyze texts. Discourse practice analysis deals with the process of text production and text consumption. Fairclough (1995: 62) divided the analysis of sociocultural practice into three different events; those are immediate situational context, the wider context of institutional practices the event is embedded within, and wider frame of the society and the culture.

The second perspectives of critical discourse analysis of media proposed by Fairclough are the analysis of the order of the discourse. It positioned media as the connector or mediator between public order of discourse as the source and private order of discourse as a consumer. Fairclough (1995: 63) divided the analysis of the order of the discourse into two relations: external and internal. External relation analyzes the relation between the order of the discourse of the media and socially adjacent public and private order of discourse. Internal relation analyzes the relation between its constituent and genres. Depends on those two relations, it can be concluded that media can shape the way of people think and media can also be shaped by the society. The process of consuming media can be seen in the figure below. The researcher used descriptive qualitative method to explain and describe the phenomena which exist in the data by employing related theories, which are Critical Discourse Analysis. of certain events is the goal of descriptive qualitative studies. The purpose of this research is to uncover the representation of "People Power" in Media Indonesia media.

The data was then downloaded and observed thoroughly. Sudaryanto (2015: 203) said that the observation method is a kind of method to collect data by observing the language used in the data. The downloaded data was segmented into the unit of analysis. Those units are utterances in the form of clauses, phrases, and words. The theory of transitivity is used to answer the find the issues found in the data by observing the linguistic expressions used in the data. The mood of the discourse is used to find the point of view of the media.

The findings are interpreted using the informal method. Sudaryanto (2015: 241) explained that informal method is a method used by the researcher to represent the findings by only giving description using words. The use of the symbol is not necessary.


IV. RESULT AND DISCUSSION

Based on the analysis of the data, the researcher found that at least the editorial employed 5 (five) strategies to explain about "People Power." Those strategies are (1) Domination of participant and actor; (2) Hidden Actor; (3) Active-Passive Clause; (4) Positive-Negative Clause; and (5) Metaphors.


Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 338

The researcher found that there are 9 (nine) actors presented in the editorial. Even so, there are only 3 (three) dominant actors used by the editor; those are makar, penegak hukum, and purnawirawan TNI. In the beginning, the editor talked about democracy. It was good since Indonesia upholds democracy. However, then, the editor talked about makar or known as the act of treason. The editor wanted to show that even if democracy is good, it must be controlled.

By using the word makar, the editor wanted to differentiate the terminology of Jokowi's "People Power" with the term of "People Power" spoken by the candidate number 02 and their supporters. There is a book entitled "Jokowi People Power" by Bimo Nugroho and M. Yamin Panca Setia created in 2014. Jokowi People Power's book was written to record the phenomenon of the people's movements which at that time endlessly supported Jokowi in the 2014 Presidential Election. It was explained, in the book that people's movements or 'people power' found momentum. However, people power in the book is in the context of democratic elections.

The term of makar which relates to the act of treason, is strengthened by another dominant actor which are Purnawirawan TNI. The people of Indonesia know that Mr. Prabowo Subianto is the former of the Indonesian National Army. It may mean that he has a huge amount of supporter form former army or even from the active member of Indonesian National Army. Back in 2013, the former president of Egypt, Mohamed Morsi, was swept aside by his minister of defense and his army. That history may become the reason for the editor to somewhat link between makar or the act of treason with purnawirawan TNI. As for penegak hukum here means police. Even mostly, the editor talked about the act of treason; he wants the reader to understand that Indonesia has the law to overcome the act of treason.

The hidden actor may be used to focus the reader's mind. The only "clear" actors found in the editorial are Eggi Sudjana and someone named HS. Later he used like Mahkamah, Mahkamah Konstitusi, KUHP, and Penegak hukum. Those 4 (four) example of an actor does not point on a specific name or specific person. Based on that fact, it may be concluded that Eggi and HS must be responsible for the use of "makar." This statement is strengthened by the use of active clause that is "Adapun HS, lewat video yang viral di media sosial, mengancam akan memenggal kepala Presiden Joko Widodo". The word mengancam (threat) and memenggal (cut the head off) are used to visualized the word makar.

The editor wanted to show that the threat of treason is real. It is also strengthened by the use of diringkus in HS diringkus Polda Metro Jaya pada Minggu (12/5) pagi. Diringkus is the synonym of captured, but it has more negative meaning that being captured. Once again, the editor wants to show that the motive of the act for treason is real. The editor employed another metaphor that is bandit in … dari kegenitan para bandit politik. Just like diringkus. Bandit is the synonym of the thie, but it has a more negative meaning.


V. CONCLUSION

Interpreting the meaning of an editorial may be different among one and another. It has been known that the political condition in Indonesia lately is not pure only about political competition. The people of Indonesia cannot just try to forget the case of Ahok. He was accused of articles of religious insult. Since then, religion issues ignite everything easily.

The application of critical discourse analysis can help us "read" the information about the meaning behind "People Power." The dominant participants are about the meaning of "People Power" itself and someone who might use that term. The editor gave only two names in the editorial, they are Eggi and HS. That strategy makes the reader focused their mind only on them. The editor wants to show that they might be responsible for the rumble happened in the society.

As we know that the effect of the recent presidential election is huge. Since Mr. Joko Widodo was the partner of Mr. Ahok when they rule Jakarta as Governor and Vice Governor, people think that they are "best friend." With the accompaniment of opinion that Jokowi was cheating, and then added with the terminology of People Power makes the rumble in the society becomes more pointed. They are easily triggered by anger. The word memenggal is not a simple word that can be said in daily life, especially if it is used for Mr. Joko Widodo, who is the President of Indonesia.

Even if the editor said about Purnawirawan TNI, he did not want to blame them. The editor just wanted to remind them that to be an Indonesian National Army means that they have to obey their commander in chief and do not involve in practical politics. Lastly, from all of the explanation above, the editor wanted to show the readers that the motive of treason is real.

. 

Fig. 1 .
1Discourse as text, interaction, and context

Fig. 2 .
2Process of Consuming Media III. METHOD


.............................................................................................................................................................................

Melawan legalisasi kekerasan bahasa pada anak; Telaah analisis wacana kritis terhadap buku anak "Islam suka membaca" in KOLITA 14. R M Entman, Norman L Fairclough, Discourse Studies: A Multidisciplinary Introduction. Unika Atma Jaya Lambert, V. A., & Lambert, C. E.New York; New York; JakartaNorman L43Journal of CommunicationEntman, R. M. (1993). Framing: Towards clarification of a fractured paradigm. Journal of Communication, 43. Fairclough, Norman L. (1989). Language and power. New York: Longman Inc Fairclough, Norman L. (1995). Media discourse. New York: Edward Arnold Fairclough, Norman L., and Ruth Wodak. (1997). Critical discourse analysis. In Teun A van Dijk (Ed.), Discourse Studies: A Multidisciplinary Introduction, Vol. 2. Discourse as Social Interaction (pp. 258-84). London: Sage Gerot, Linda & Peter Wignel. (1995). Making Sense of Functional Grammar. Cammeray: Gerd Stabler Hakim, Mohammad Andi. 2016. Melawan legalisasi kekerasan bahasa pada anak; Telaah analisis wacana kritis terhadap buku anak "Islam suka membaca" in KOLITA 14 (pp. 357 -361). Jakarta: Unika Atma Jaya Lambert, V. A., & Lambert, C. E. (2012). Qualitative descriptive research: An acceptable design. In Pacific Rim International Journal of Nursing Research, 16 (4), pp. 255-256.

Metode dan Aneka Teknik Analisis Bahasa. Yogyakarta: Sanata Dharma University Press Tuchman. Aleda Mawene, The Handbook of Discourse Analysis. Deborah S, Deborah T, and Heide E.HGaye; New York; Jakarta; MassachusettsBlackwell Publishers Ltd14Critical discourse analysisMawene, Aleda. 2016. Kekerasan simbolik dalam wacana mob Papua. in Kolita 14 (pp. 331 -334). Jakarta: Unika Atma Jaya Sudaryanto. 2015. Metode dan Aneka Teknik Analisis Bahasa. Yogyakarta: Sanata Dharma University Press Tuchman, Gaye. (1978). Making news: A study in the construction of reality. New York: The Free Press Nurhayati. (2016). The power struggle in the testimony of Sudirman said to the house ethics council. In KOLITA 14 (pp. 259 -263). Jakarta: Unika Atma Jaya Van Dijk, Teun. (2001). Critical discourse analysis. In Deborah S, Deborah T, and Heide E.H (Eds.) The Handbook of Discourse Analysis (pp. 352-371). Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishers Ltd