Evaluation of a Novel Non-Penetrating Electrode for Use in DNA Vaccination
2011

A Coppola 
D Cruz 
Y Heller 
R 
Evaluation of a Novel Non-Penetrating Electrode for Use in DNA Vaccination

PLoS ONE
64191812011Received January 26, 2011; Accepted March 29, 2011;Editor: Boris Rubinsky, University of California at Berkeley, United States of America Funding: This research was supported in part by a research grant from the National Institutes of Health R01 EB005441. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. No additional external funding was received for this study. Competing Interests: With respect to competing interests, Dr. R. Heller is an inventor on patents which cover the technology that was used in the work reported in this manuscript. In addition, Dr. R. Heller owns stock and stock options in Inovio Pharmaceutical and has an ownership interest in RMR Technologies. This does not alter the authors' adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. *
Current progress in the development of vaccines has decreased the incidence of fatal and non-fatal infections and increased longevity. However, new technologies need to be developed to combat an emerging generation of infectious diseases. DNA vaccination has been demonstrated to have great potential for use with a wide variety of diseases. Alone, this technology does not generate a significant immune response for vaccination, but combined with delivery by electroporation (EP), can enhance plasmid expression and immunity. Most EP systems, while effective, can be invasive and painful making them less desirable for use in vaccination. Our lab recently developed a non-invasive electrode known as the multi-electrode array (MEA), which lies flat on the surface of the skin without penetrating the tissue. In this study we evaluated the MEA for its use in DNA vaccination using Hepatitis B virus as the infectious model. We utilized the guinea pig model because their skin is similar in thickness and morphology to humans. The plasmid encoding Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) was delivered intradermally with the MEA to guinea pig skin. The results show increased protein expression resulting from plasmid delivery using the MEA as compared to injection alone. Within 48 hours of treatment, there was an influx of cellular infiltrate in experimental groups. Humoral responses were also increased significantly in both duration and intensity as compared to injection only groups. While this electrode requires further study, our results suggest that the MEA has potential for use in electrically mediated intradermal DNA vaccination.

Introduction

The development of vaccines is widely considered to be one of the most important medical advancements of the 20 th century. Current methods have been pushed to the limits of their potential. New techniques need to be developed and employed to combat a new generation of diseases and infections. There are several advantages to DNA vaccination. DNA vaccines are cost effective to produce, they can be easily stored, they are highly specific and their multivalent nature means that they could be combined to vaccinate against several different components simultaneously [1][2][3]. Either due to low expression or lack of immune recognition, injection of plasmid DNA alone does not elicit a strong enough immune response for protective vaccination. Electroporation (EP) is a non viral plasmid DNA delivery approach that effectively enhances plasmid expression [4,5] and immunity [6][7][8][9][10].

EP requires the application of electric fields causing permeabilization of the cell membranes. The permeabilized membrane briefly contains ''pores'' that allow large molecules, like DNA, to enter the cell. Initial studies evaluating in vivo EP for transgene delivery and expression were performed on rat brain tumors [5] and rat livers [4]. Those studies demonstrated enhanced delivery and expression of plasmid DNA from EP mediated delivery. Successful EP mediated DNA delivery has been demonstrated in most tissue types and for several therapeutic and prophylactic indications such as cancer therapy, infectious diseases, wound healing, metabolic disorders and vaccines [11]. Recently several clinical trials have been initiated. Two clinical trials have been completed using EP, one assessing tolerability of intramuscular delivery [12,13] and the other assessing toxicity and clinical utility of delivering pIL-12 intratumorally by EP to melanoma patients [14]. The latter demonstrated the safety, minimal toxicity, and feasibility for the use of EP in the clinic [14]. Since the successful completion of these studies, 19 others are currently active or recruiting. Five of those are involving DNA vaccination against infectious agents (clinicaltrials.gov; Keyword: Electroporation).

Initial in vivo EP DNA vaccine studies evaluated gene expression and immune stimulation from delivery of plasmids encoding either Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) protein or Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) protein, gag, to the muscle. Their results confirmed that increased humoral responses to HBV [6] and cellular [9] immune response to HIV gag from EP compared to injection only (IO) of plasmid DNA. More recent studies have broadened the list of pathogens which EP has been successfully used in vivo to include other viral pathogens such as: Simian Immunodeficiency Virus [15][16][17][18], Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome [19,20], Influenza [21][22][23][24][25], West Nile and Japanese Encephalitis [26,27], as well as Hepatitis B and C [28][29][30][31][32] and Human Papilloma Virus [33,34]. EP delivered DNA vaccines expressing proteins of the parasitic infection Plasmodium falciparum, one of the parasites causing malaria [35], as well as bacterial infections like Bacillus anthracis [36], Clostridium botulinum [37], and Mycobacterium tuberculosis [38] have also been demonstrated to enhance immunogenicity. These results demonstrate the capacity of EP to enhance not only gene delivery and protein expression but also its ability to stimulate the host immune response against a wide variety of pathogens.

Current electrically mediated DNA vaccines employ painful invasive needle electrodes that are inserted into the muscle for electrical stimulation. The primary tissue used for in vivo EP is muscle because it is accessible, highly vascularized, multinucleated, and expresses DNA for long periods of time due to the post-mitotic nature of the tissue [39]. However, pain associated with administration is not desirable. As such, alternative delivery sites and methods have been explored. The skin is an attractive target for vaccination because of the high proportion of antigen presenting cells (APC) and large surface area. Recent studies, as well as work done in our laboratory, demonstrated that intradermal electrically mediated DNA expression can be increased both locally and systemically [8,[40][41][42][43][44]. Electrodes developed for skin EP include: caliper, plate, tweezer, and clip electrodes as well as several needle electrodes [14,[45][46][47][48].

To develop an electrically mediated intradermal DNA vaccine we utilized the non-invasive multi-electrode array (MEA), shown in figure 1, for EP delivery. The MEA has 16 electrodes placed 2 mm apart and is arranged in 4 rows [45]. Pulses are administered in a sequence that utilizes 4 electrodes at a time, forming 262 mm squares (9 total squares). Pulses are applied in pairs, in two directions, perpendicular to each other (18 pulses) for 4 rounds of pulsing (72 total pulses). While we have not as yet modeled or directly measured the fields generated across the treated area of skin, we believe by applying the field across a smaller area (262 mm) will facilitate obtaining a more uniform field then would be obtained when the field is applied across the entire treated area (666 mm). Our lab previously demonstrated that this electrode, when used in a guinea pig skin model, could significantly increase reporter gene activity [45]. Conditions required for optimal expression were determined to be between 200-300 V/cm and 150 ms.

An additional consideration for establishing a MEA delivered DNA vaccine is choosing the appropriate animal model. Guinea pig skin is similar to human skin in thickness and morphology [49]. For this reason, we selected the guinea pig model to better evaluate our delivery approach utilizing a small animal model with skin similar to humans. Therefore, the goal of this study was to evaluate intradermal MEA EP delivery of Hepatitis B surface antigen in a human-like skin model.


Methods


Ethics Statement

All animal procedures were conducted in a facility (USF) that is fully accredited by the Association for the Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC) and the Public Health Service (PHS). Research was conducted under a protocol approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the University of South Florida, College of Medicine (protocol # 2879). All animals were housed, handled and utilizing following guidelines of the United States National Institutes of Health.


Animals

Female Hartley guinea pigs between 200-250 g were used in this study to evaluate skin EP conditions. Guinea pigs were housed at the University of South Florida, College of Medicine vivarium and were rested for one week prior to experimentation. Guinea pigs were anesthetized with 2.5-3.0% isoflurane before and during all procedures. No previous exposure to Hepatitis B virus was known. 2.2 Plasmid: The plasmid used in this study was gWiz TM HBsAg (Aldevron, Fargo, ND). This plasmid encodes for the surface antigen of Hepatitis B and is driven by the CMV promoter.


Immunization

All guinea pigs were intradermally injected with 100 mg (2 mg/ ml) of gWiz TM HBsAg at two sites on the left flank. MEA EP was performed at 300 V/cm and 150 ms and 72 pulses. The two groups used in this study were control group injection of plasmid only (IO) and injection of plasmid plus EP (I+EP). All groups were boosted with the same condition at Day 14.


serum collection

Guinea pigs were bled through the jugular vein at various time points from Day 0 through Day 168. Blood was collected and serum isolated in serum separator tubes. Serum was diluted twofold starting at 1:10.


Tissue collection

Guinea pigs were treated as described with gWiz TM HBsAg with and without EP. Those guinea pigs whose tissue was collected for plasmid expression were sacrificed 48 hours after one treatment and skin samples were harvested by excising the treatment site and snap frozen. Those guinea pigs whose tissue was collected to assess damage and cell infiltrate were treated and harvested 96 hours after one treatment and the tissue was snap frozen.


Indirect ELISA for the detection of Hepatitis B surface antigen antibodies

The enzyme linked immunosorbant assay (ELISA) was used to assess the production of antibodies from treatment and performed per manufacturer's protocol (Aldevron). Briefly, a 96-well plate (Nunc) was coated with 10 mg/ml of Hepatitis B surface antigen (Aldevron) and allowed to coat overnight at 4uC. The plate was blocked with 3% BSA in PBST for 2 hours at 37uC. Serum samples were two-fold diluted in blocking buffer and added to the plate for 2 hours at 37uC. Goat anti-Guinea pig-AP antibody was added at a 1:10000 dilution in blocking buffer. AP substrate, pNPP, (Sigma) was added to colorize and the plate was read at 405 nm.


Immunohistochemistry

Pathological analysis of the skin sections was performed to determine the extent of plasmid expression as well as inflammation and tissue damage. An anti-HBsAg was used to detect plasmid expression. Skin samples taken 48 hours after treatment were frozen, sectioned, and placed on slides. Slides were rehydrated and then blocked with 3% BSA in PBST and incubated in a humidifying chamber for 1 hr. A HRP conjugated anti-HBsAg (AbD Serotec) was made in blocking buffer at a 1:200 dilution. All samples were counterstained with Hematoxylin & Eosin. Samples collected at 96 hours frozen, sectioned, and placed on slides were stained with H & E to determine the extent of cellular infiltrate/ inflammation.


Statistical analysis

All Guinea pigs were bled at Day 0 to determine background optical density (OD). OD's were averaged and 2 standard deviations added to determine positive (0.1 OD). Experimental serum samples were diluted two-fold starting at 1:10. End point titers were calculated and plotted as Geometric Means. Significance was determined by student t-test using the bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons.


Results


Plasmid expression from EP

The first step in evaluating the MEA for delivery of DNA vaccines in a human-like model was to determine the expression levels of gWiz TM HBsAg. Guinea pigs were treated as described with or without EP using the MEA. 48 hours after delivery the guinea pigs were euthanized and the treated skin harvested and processed for histological evaluation. Expression of HBsAg was determined by immunohistochemistry. Expression of HBsAg is seen in IO and I+EP ( Fig. 1a and b), however increased staining was observed in the I+EP samples. Expression is contained within the epidermis of IO animals. When compared to I+EP animals expression can be seen within the epidermis and dermis.


Immune cell infiltrate and tissue damage

To determine whether EP with the MEA would recruit immune cells to the treatment site and cause inflammation, guinea pigs were treated as described and tissue samples harvested 96 hours after treatment. Samples were stained with H&E to assess cellular infiltrate, damage, and necrosis from treatment. The induction of immune stimulation is important for vaccines in general, but can be limited for DNA vaccines. Induction of immune cell infiltrate was observed (Fig. 2 C-F 1006magnification). Background levels, Fig. 2c, of infiltrate are demonstrated in no treatment control and correspond to low levels of cellular infiltrate (purple). IO samples show slight increases in infiltrate as compared to no treatment, Fig. 2d. In contrast, I+EP samples show a large increase in cellular infiltrate, Fig. 2e. I+EP groups contained primarily macrophages and multi-lobed cells, most likely activated neutrophils (2006 magnification Fig. 2f), corresponding to a prolonged inflammatory immune response [50].

Edema was seen in all samples except no treatment controls; and did not appear increased due to EP. This is most likely a result from the injection of plasmid into the tissue. In most samples tissue damage and necrosis were not seen. However, two EP delivered samples had minimal ulcerations at 96 hours after treatment, one of which also had about 1% necrosis. There were no other samples showing damage or necrosis (data not shown).

Gross evaluation of the skin shows no difference between IO and I+EP groups over time (Fig. 3). Complete visual recovery of the skin is seen by Day 7.


Anti-Hepatitis B surface antigen antibodies

While cellular infiltrate can be an early indicator of immunity, a more accurate measure is the induction of specific antibodies generated against HBsAg. Anti-HBs were measured by ELISA over time. Guinea pigs, treated and serum collected as described in methods, showed significant increases in antibody expression from three weeks after initial treatment through week 24. The data collected was from 3 independent experiments (n = 6 for each experiement) with a total n of 18 for both IO and EP groups. Peak expression for both groups occurred at week 18 with IO groups having a GMT of 1000 and I+EP animals at 5000 (Fig. 4). The fold increase over IO remained relatively constant at about 5 fold with the greatest fold increase over IO of 6.5 occurring at week 18.


Discussion

These data demonstrate that the MEA can be effective for the use in electrically mediated DNA vaccination in a human-like skin model. EP with the MEA generated increased plasmid expression as well as an increase in immune infiltrate after treatment. The magnitude of immune infiltrate was greater in EP groups than IO and there was minimal to no skin damage associated. Specific, lasting, and significant levels of antibodies were greater than IO. This is the first report to demonstrate the use of the MEA for DNA vaccination in a human-like skin model. DNA vaccination is advantageous because it does not integrate into the host DNA, it is cost effective to produce and easily stored, it can be highly specific for tissue and/or cell type and can be made to vaccinate against multiple agents simultaneously. The skin is an ideal target for DNA vaccination due to the large surface area and presence of antigen presenting cells like langerhan's and dermal dendritic cells, specialized for induction of immunity [51].

However, injection of plasmid alone does not induce high enough immune responses to be protective. EP is one method that has been shown to increase both plasmid expression as well as immunity. Previous EP methods have involved painful penetrating electrodes that go into the muscle to facilitate delivery. Further advancements have been made using non-penetrating electrodes such as caliper and plate electrodes. However, these electrodes require high voltages to enhance delivery and therefore can cause tissue damage. In this study, we have evaluated a non-penetrating electrode which reduces the gap width between electrodes to 2 mm thereby reducing the absolute voltage applied and preventing visible tissue damage while still increasing plasmid expression and immunity.

As expected from our previous publication [45], EP with the MEA enhanced expression. While the exact reason for the effectiveness of EP remains unknown, increased plasmid expression at least in the case of DNA vaccination, plays an important role in recognition by the immune system [52]. EP has been shown to have an adjuvant effect by recruiting immune cells to the site of pulse application [53]. In our study, we saw an influx of nucleated cells from EP treated samples. These cells are most likely neutrophils and macrophages based on morphology. This is most likely a combination of both an EP mediated adjuvant effect and increased plasmid expression. The induction of macrophages and polymorpho-nucleated neutrophils is indicative of a chronic inflammatory response. While the perception of prolonged inflammation is typically negative in our case it indicates that the expression of the plasmid is present for a prolonged period of time, giving the immune response enough time to perform its function. Based on our earlier work [45] we would expect this  prolonged expression to decrease after approximately 14 days, therefore allowing the body to heal and not generate deleterious effects from inflammation.

These findings seem to correlate with our antibody data, where an increase in the presence of specific antibodies was measured over time. These antibodies were significantly increased as compared to injection only. Geometric mean titers ranged from 4000-16000 peaking at week 18. Antibody levels remained elevated until dropping off after week 21, but still remained increased as compared to injection only. The enhanced intensity of humoral immunity by EP with the MEA corresponds to previously published skin EP results [54][55][56][57]. One of the primary reasons for evaluating our delivery method with Hepatitis B was because it is a well characterized vaccination model. Published studies have reported geometric mean titers in conjunction with protective efficacy in guinea pigs. While the presented GMT's in these papers were higher than ours, they also reported protective levels more than 100 fold above the necessary levels. Our GMT's are likely to still be within the protective range without generating unnecessary additional responses [58,59]. Comparing specifically to Hepatitis B DNA vaccines delivered by EP several animal models have been evaluated and EP has been shown to have protective levels from 10-1000 mIU/ml [6,9,32,60,61]. The most recent comparable publication evaluated a minimally invasive device for protective vaccination against influenza [62]. While their results were only presented as neutralizing titers against flu and cannot be compared directly we believe that our electrode design generates immune responses of equal quality without tissue penetration.

The data represented here demonstrate the capability of the MEA to increase plasmid expression, immune cell infiltrate and inflammatory response, as well as antibody production over 24 weeks in a human-like skin model. This information presents a potential new method for DNA vaccination that may be translatable to humans. Further studies will examine the MEA for use in DNA vaccination against other infectious agents.

Figure 1 .
1Non-invasive Multi-Electrode Array. The MEA has 16 electrodes placed 2 mm apart and is arranged in 4 rows. Pulses are administered in a sequence that utilizes 4 electrodes at a time, forming 262 mm squares (9 total squares). Pulses are applied in pairs, in two directions, perpendicular to each other (18 pulses) for 4 rounds of pulsing (72 total pulses). This image is reprinted from The Journal of Controlled Release doi:10.1016/j.jconrel.2011.01.014 Siqi Guo, Amy Donate, Guarav Basu, Cathryn Lundberg, Loree Heller, Richard Heller ''Electro-gene transfer to the skin using a non-invasive multi-electrode array'' with permission from Elsevier. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0019181.g001

Figure 2 .
2Plasmid expression and inflammation in the skin. Guinea pigs were treated as described in Methods 2.1 with pHBsAg. Expression of plasmid was evaluated at 48 hrs post treatment by IHC (A-IO; B I+EP). Inflammation was measured 96 hrs post treatment and assessed by H&E (C-No treatment; D-IO, E-I+EP) at 1006 magnification and 2006 magnification (F-I+EP). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0019181.g002

Figure 3 .
3Visual assessment of skin damage and healing. Guinea pigs were treated as described in Methods 2.1 with pHBsAg with or without EP. Images were taken of skin pre treatment, immediately post treatment, and at 24, 48, 72, 96 hours and at 7 days. Arrows indicate the treatment sites. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0019181.g003

Figure 4 .
4Evaluation of anti-HBs serum titer. Guinea pigs were treated as described in Methods 2.1 with pHBsAg. Serum was collected at multiple time points and an ELISA performed. Geometric mean titers are expressed. Positive was determined by two standard deviations greater than the Day 0 OD. IO and EP n = 6 for each experiment with 3 independent experiments conducted (total n = 18). Statistics were determined by two-sided student t-test with bonferroni correction to p,0.05. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0019181.g004
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org
April 2011 | Volume 6 | Issue 4 | e19181
AcknowledgmentsWe would also like to thank Mark Jaroszeski Ph.D at the University of South Florida, College of Engineering for construction of the MEA.Author ContributionsConceived and designed the experiments: AD RH. Performed the experiments: AD DC YC. Analyzed the data: AD DC RH. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: AD RH. Wrote the paper: AD RH.
. J Encke, J Zu Putlitz, J R Wands, DNA vaccines. Intervirology. 42Encke J, zu Putlitz J, Wands JR (1999) DNA vaccines. Intervirology 42: 117-24.

DNA-antiviral vaccines: new developments and approaches-a review. M Giese, Virus Genes. 17Giese M (1998) DNA-antiviral vaccines: new developments and approaches-a review. Virus Genes 17: 219-32.

DNA vaccines: immunology, application, and optimization. S Gurunathan, D M Klinman, R A Seder, Annu Rev Immunol. 18Gurunathan S, Klinman DM, Seder RA (2000) DNA vaccines: immunology, application, and optimization. Annu Rev Immunol 18: 927-74.

In vivo gene electroinjection and expression in rat liver. R Heller, M Jaroszeski, A Atkin, D Moradpour, R Gilbert, FEBS Lett. 389Heller R, Jaroszeski M, Atkin A, Moradpour D, Gilbert R, et al. (1996) In vivo gene electroinjection and expression in rat liver. FEBS Lett 389: 225-8.

Highefficiency in vivo gene transfer using intraarterial plasmid DNA injection following in vivo electroporation. T Nishi, K Yoshizato, S Yamashiro, H Takeshima, K Sato, Cancer Res. 56Nishi T, Yoshizato K, Yamashiro S, Takeshima H, Sato K, et al. (1996) High- efficiency in vivo gene transfer using intraarterial plasmid DNA injection following in vivo electroporation. Cancer Res 56: 1050-5.

Increased DNA vaccine delivery and immunogenicity by electroporation in vivo. G Widera, M Austin, D Rabussay, C Goldbeck, S W Barnett, J Immunol. 164Widera G, Austin M, Rabussay D, Goldbeck C, Barnett SW, et al. (2000) Increased DNA vaccine delivery and immunogenicity by electroporation in vivo. J Immunol 164: 4635-40.

Protection against influenza virus infection in mice immunized by administration of hemagglutinin-expressing DNAs with electroporation. S Kadowaki, Z Chen, H Asanuma, C Aizawa, T Kurata, Vaccine. 18Kadowaki S, Chen Z, Asanuma H, Aizawa C, Kurata T, et al. (2000) Protection against influenza virus infection in mice immunized by administration of hemagglutinin-expressing DNAs with electroporation. Vaccine 18: 2779-88.

Cutaneous transfection and immune responses to intradermal nucleic acid vaccination are significantly enhanced by in vivo electropermeabilization. J J Drabick, J Glasspool-Malone, A King, R W Malone, Mol Ther. 3Drabick JJ, Glasspool-Malone J, King A, Malone RW (2001) Cutaneous transfection and immune responses to intradermal nucleic acid vaccination are significantly enhanced by in vivo electropermeabilization. Mol Ther 3: 249-55.

Electroporation improves the efficacy of DNA vaccines in large animals. S Babiuk, M E Baca-Estrada, M Foldvari, M Storms, D Rabussay, Vaccine. 20Babiuk S, Baca-Estrada ME, Foldvari M, Storms M, Rabussay D, et al. (2002) Electroporation improves the efficacy of DNA vaccines in large animals. Vaccine 20: 3399-408.

In vivo electroporation improves immune responses to DNA vaccination in sheep. J P Scheerlinck, J Karlis, T E Tjelle, P J Presidente, I Mathiesen, Vaccine. 22Scheerlinck JP, Karlis J, Tjelle TE, Presidente PJ, Mathiesen I, et al. (2004) In vivo electroporation improves immune responses to DNA vaccination in sheep. Vaccine 22: 1820-5.

In vivo electroporation for gene therapy. L C Heller, R Heller, Hum Gene Ther. 17Heller LC, Heller R (2006) In vivo electroporation for gene therapy. Hum Gene Ther 17: 890-7.

Bleomycin-electrical pulse delivery: electroporation therapybleomycin-Genetronics. Genetronics, Drugs R D. 5Genetronics (2004) Bleomycin-electrical pulse delivery: electroporation therapy- bleomycin-Genetronics. Drugs R D 5: 293-6.

Tolerability of two sequential electroporation treatments using MedPulser DNA delivery system (DDS) in healthy adults. M Wallace, B Evans, S Woods, R Mogg, L Zhang, Mol Ther. 17Wallace M, Evans B, Woods S, Mogg R, Zhang L, et al. (2009) Tolerability of two sequential electroporation treatments using MedPulser DNA delivery system (DDS) in healthy adults. Mol Ther 17: 922-8.

Phase I trial of interleukin-12 plasmid electroporation in patients with metastatic melanoma. A I Daud, R C Deconti, S Andrews, P Urbas, A I Riker, J Clin Oncol. 26Daud AI, DeConti RC, Andrews S, Urbas P, Riker AI, et al. (2008) Phase I trial of interleukin-12 plasmid electroporation in patients with metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol 26: 5896-903.

Analysis of the potential for HIV-1 Vpr as an anti-cancer agent. K Muthumani, V M Lambert, N Y Sardesai, J J Kim, R Heller, Curr HIV Res. 7Muthumani K, Lambert VM, Sardesai NY, Kim JJ, Heller R, et al. (2009) Analysis of the potential for HIV-1 Vpr as an anti-cancer agent. Curr HIV Res 7: 144-52.

Enhancement of DNA vaccine potency in rhesus macaques by electroporation. G Otten, M Schaefer, B Doe, H Liu, I Srivastava, Vaccine. 22Otten G, Schaefer M, Doe B, Liu H, Srivastava I, et al. (2004) Enhancement of DNA vaccine potency in rhesus macaques by electroporation. Vaccine 22: 2489-93.

Potent immunogenicity of an HIV-1 gag-pol fusion DNA vaccine delivered by in vivo electroporation. G R Otten, M Schaefer, B Doe, H Liu, J Z Megede, Vaccine. 24Otten GR, Schaefer M, Doe B, Liu H, Megede JZ, et al. (2006) Potent immunogenicity of an HIV-1 gag-pol fusion DNA vaccine delivered by in vivo electroporation. Vaccine 24: 4503-9.

DNA vaccination in rhesus macaques induces potent immune responses and decreases acute and chronic viremia after SIVmac251 challenge. M Rosati, C Bergamaschi, A Valentin, V Kulkarni, R Jalah, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 106Rosati M, Bergamaschi C, Valentin A, Kulkarni V, Jalah R, et al. (2009) DNA vaccination in rhesus macaques induces potent immune responses and decreases acute and chronic viremia after SIVmac251 challenge. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106: 15831-6.

Humoral and cellular immune responses induced by 3a DNA vaccines against severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) or SARS-like coronavirus in mice. B Lu, L Tao, T Wang, Z Zheng, B Li, Clin Vaccine Immunol. 16Lu B, Tao L, Wang T, Zheng Z, Li B, et al. (2009) Humoral and cellular immune responses induced by 3a DNA vaccines against severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) or SARS-like coronavirus in mice. Clin Vaccine Immunol 16: 73-7.

Comparative analysis of the immunogenicity of SARS-CoV nucleocapsid DNA vaccine administrated with different routes in mouse model. H Hu, X Huang, L Tao, Y Huang, B A Cui, Vaccine. 27Hu H, Huang X, Tao L, Huang Y, Cui BA, et al. (2009) Comparative analysis of the immunogenicity of SARS-CoV nucleocapsid DNA vaccine administrated with different routes in mouse model. Vaccine 27: 1758-63.

Electroporation of synthetic DNA antigens offers protection in nonhuman primates challenged with highly pathogenic avian influenza virus. D J Laddy, J Yan, A S Khan, H Andersen, A Cohn, J Virol. 83Laddy DJ, Yan J, Khan AS, Andersen H, Cohn A, et al. (2009) Electroporation of synthetic DNA antigens offers protection in nonhuman primates challenged with highly pathogenic avian influenza virus. J Virol 83: 4624-30.

A single immunization with HA DNA vaccine by electroporation induces early protection against H5N1 avian influenza virus challenge in mice. L Zheng, F Wang, Z Yang, J Chen, H Chang, BMC Infect Dis. 917Zheng L, Wang F, Yang Z, Chen J, Chang H, et al. (2009) A single immunization with HA DNA vaccine by electroporation induces early protection against H5N1 avian influenza virus challenge in mice. BMC Infect Dis 9: 17.

Protection against influenza virus infection in BALB/c mice immunized with a single dose of neuraminidaseexpressing DNAs by electroporation. J Chen, F Fang, X Li, H Chang, Z Chen, Vaccine. 23Chen J, Fang F, Li X, Chang H, Chen Z (2005) Protection against influenza virus infection in BALB/c mice immunized with a single dose of neuraminidase- expressing DNAs by electroporation. Vaccine 23: 4322-8.

Crossprotection against a lethal influenza virus infection by DNA vaccine to neuraminidase. Z Chen, S Kadowaki, Y Hagiwara, T Yoshikawa, K Matsuo, Vaccine. 18Chen Z, Kadowaki S, Hagiwara Y, Yoshikawa T, Matsuo K, et al. (2000) Cross- protection against a lethal influenza virus infection by DNA vaccine to neuraminidase. Vaccine 18: 3214-22.

Electric pulses increase the immunogenicity of an influenza DNA vaccine injected intramuscularly in the mouse. M Bachy, F Boudet, M Bureau, Y Girerd-Chambaz, P Wils, Vaccine. 19Bachy M, Boudet F, Bureau M, Girerd-Chambaz Y, Wils P, et al. (2001) Electric pulses increase the immunogenicity of an influenza DNA vaccine injected intramuscularly in the mouse. Vaccine 19: 1688-93.

Coimmunization with an optimized IL15 plasmid adjuvant enhances humoral immunity via stimulating B cells induced by genetically engineered DNA vaccines expressing consensus JEV and WNV E DIII. M P Ramanathan, M A Kutzler, Y C Kuo, J Yan, H Liu, Vaccine. 27Ramanathan MP, Kutzler MA, Kuo YC, Yan J, Liu H, et al. (2009) Coimmunization with an optimized IL15 plasmid adjuvant enhances humoral immunity via stimulating B cells induced by genetically engineered DNA vaccines expressing consensus JEV and WNV E DIII. Vaccine 27: 4370-80.

In vivo electroporation of skeletal muscles increases the efficacy of Japanese encephalitis virus DNA vaccine. C J Wu, S C Lee, H W Huang, M H Tao, Vaccine. 22Wu CJ, Lee SC, Huang HW, Tao MH (2004) In vivo electroporation of skeletal muscles increases the efficacy of Japanese encephalitis virus DNA vaccine. Vaccine 22: 1457-64.

Anti-HBV immune responses in rhesus macaques elicited by electroporation mediated DNA vaccination. Y G Zhao, B Peng, H Deng, G Chen, F Yang, Vaccine. 24Zhao YG, Peng B, Deng H, Chen G, Yang F, et al. (2006) Anti-HBV immune responses in rhesus macaques elicited by electroporation mediated DNA vaccination. Vaccine 24: 897-903.

Enhancing B-and T-cell immune response to a hepatitis C virus E2 DNA vaccine by intramuscular electrical gene transfer. S Zucchelli, S Capone, E Fattori, A Folgori, Di Marco, A , J Virol. 74Zucchelli S, Capone S, Fattori E, Folgori A, Di Marco A, et al. (2000) Enhancing B-and T-cell immune response to a hepatitis C virus E2 DNA vaccine by intramuscular electrical gene transfer. J Virol 74: 11598-607.

Enhancement of immune responses to an HBV DNA vaccine by electroporation. A Luxembourg, D Hannaman, B Ellefsen, G Nakamura, R Bernard, Vaccine. 24Luxembourg A, Hannaman D, Ellefsen B, Nakamura G, Bernard R (2006) Enhancement of immune responses to an HBV DNA vaccine by electropora- tion. Vaccine 24: 4490-3.

Increased in vivo immunological potency of HB-110, a novel therapeutic HBV DNA vaccine, by electroporation. C Y Kim, E S Kang, S B Kim, H E Kim, J H Choi, Exp Mol Med. 40Kim CY, Kang ES, Kim SB, Kim HE, Choi JH, et al. (2008) Increased in vivo immunological potency of HB-110, a novel therapeutic HBV DNA vaccine, by electroporation. Exp Mol Med 40: 669-76.

A single HBsAg DNA vaccination in combination with electroporation elicits long-term antibody responses in sheep. S Babiuk, C Tsang, S Van Drunen Littel-Van Den Hurk, L A Babiuk, P J Griebel, Bioelectrochemistry. 70Babiuk S, Tsang C, van Drunen Littel-van den Hurk S, Babiuk LA, Griebel PJ (2007) A single HBsAg DNA vaccination in combination with electroporation elicits long-term antibody responses in sheep. Bioelectrochemistry 70: 269-74.

Administration of HPV DNA vaccine via electroporation elicits the strongest CD8+ T cell immune responses compared to intramuscular injection and intradermal gene gun delivery. S R Best, S Peng, C M Juang, C F Hung, D Hannaman, Vaccine. 27Best SR, Peng S, Juang CM, Hung CF, Hannaman D, et al. (2009) Administration of HPV DNA vaccine via electroporation elicits the strongest CD8+ T cell immune responses compared to intramuscular injection and intradermal gene gun delivery. Vaccine 27: 5450-9.

Optimal induction of HPV DNA vaccine-induced CD8+ T cell responses and therapeutic antitumor effect by antigen engineering and electroporation. S H Seo, H T Jin, S H Park, J I Youn, Y C Sung, Vaccine. 27Seo SH, Jin HT, Park SH, Youn JI, Sung YC (2009) Optimal induction of HPV DNA vaccine-induced CD8+ T cell responses and therapeutic antitumor effect by antigen engineering and electroporation. Vaccine 27: 5906-12.

Enhancement of antibody and cellular immune responses to malaria DNA vaccines by in vivo electroporation. C Dobano, G Widera, D Rabussay, D L Doolan, Vaccine. 25Dobano C, Widera G, Rabussay D, Doolan DL (2007) Enhancement of antibody and cellular immune responses to malaria DNA vaccines by in vivo electroporation. Vaccine 25: 6635-45.

Potentiation of an anthrax DNA vaccine with electroporation. A Luxembourg, D Hannaman, E Nolan, B Ellefsen, G Nakamura, Vaccine. 26Luxembourg A, Hannaman D, Nolan E, Ellefsen B, Nakamura G, et al. (2008) Potentiation of an anthrax DNA vaccine with electroporation. Vaccine 26: 5216-22.

Generation of high-titer neutralizing antibodies against botulinum toxins A, B, and E by DNA electrotransfer. C Trollet, Y Pereira, A Burgain, E Litzler, M Mezrahi, Infect Immun. 77Trollet C, Pereira Y, Burgain A, Litzler E, Mezrahi M, et al. (2009) Generation of high-titer neutralizing antibodies against botulinum toxins A, B, and E by DNA electrotransfer. Infect Immun 77: 2221-9.

Improved cellular and humoral immune responses against Mycobacterium tuberculosis antigens after intramuscular DNA immunisation combined with muscle electroporation. S Tollefsen, T Tjelle, J Schneider, M Harboe, H Wiker, Vaccine. 20Tollefsen S, Tjelle T, Schneider J, Harboe M, Wiker H, et al. (2002) Improved cellular and humoral immune responses against Mycobacterium tuberculosis antigens after intramuscular DNA immunisation combined with muscle electroporation. Vaccine 20: 3370-8.

Electroporation for gene transfer to skeletal muscles: current status. J M Mcmahon, D J Wells, BioDrugs. 18McMahon JM, Wells DJ (2004) Electroporation for gene transfer to skeletal muscles: current status. BioDrugs 18: 155-65.

Enhanced delivery of naked DNA to the skin by non-invasive in vivo electroporation. L Zhang, E Nolan, S Kreitschitz, D P Rabussay, Biochim Biophys Acta. 1572Zhang L, Nolan E, Kreitschitz S, Rabussay DP (2002) Enhanced delivery of naked DNA to the skin by non-invasive in vivo electroporation. Biochim Biophys Acta 1572: 1-9.

Intradermal delivery of interleukin-12 plasmid DNA by in vivo electroporation. R Heller, J Schultz, M L Lucas, M J Jaroszeski, L C Heller, DNA Cell Biol. 20Heller R, Schultz J, Lucas ML, Jaroszeski MJ, Heller LC, et al. (2001) Intradermal delivery of interleukin-12 plasmid DNA by in vivo electroporation. DNA Cell Biol 20: 21-6.

Topical gene transfer into rat skin using electroporation. N Dujardin, P Van Der Smissen, V Preat, Pharm Res. 18Dujardin N, Van Der Smissen P, Preat V (2001) Topical gene transfer into rat skin using electroporation. Pharm Res 18: 61-6.

Skin-targeted gene transfer using in vivo electroporation. H Maruyama, K Ataka, N Higuchi, F Sakamoto, F Gejyo, J Miyazaki, Gene Ther. 8Maruyama H, Ataka K, Higuchi N, Sakamoto F, Gejyo F, Miyazaki J (2001) Skin-targeted gene transfer using in vivo electroporation. Gene Ther 8: 1808-12.

Efficient nonviral cutaneous transfection. J Glasspool-Malone, S Somiari, J J Drabick, R W Malone, Mol Ther. 2Glasspool-Malone J, Somiari S, Drabick JJ, Malone RW (2000) Efficient nonviral cutaneous transfection. Mol Ther 2: 140-6.

Electrically mediated delivery of plasmid DNA to the skin, using a multielectrode array. R Heller, Y Cruz, L C Heller, R A Gilbert, M J Jaroszeski, Hum Gene Ther. 21Heller R, Cruz Y, Heller LC, Gilbert RA, Jaroszeski MJ (2010) Electrically mediated delivery of plasmid DNA to the skin, using a multielectrode array. Hum Gene Ther 21: 357-62.

Delivery of DNA into skin via electroporation. B M Medi, J Singh, Methods Mol Biol. 423Medi BM, Singh J (2008) Delivery of DNA into skin via electroporation. Methods Mol Biol 423: 225-32.

Immunization with DNA through the skin. K K Peachman, M Rao, C R Alving, Methods. 31Peachman KK, Rao M, Alving CR (2003) Immunization with DNA through the skin. Methods 31: 232-42.

Novel electrode designs for electrochemotherapy. R A Gilbert, M J Jaroszeski, R Heller, Biochim Biophys Acta. 1334Gilbert RA, Jaroszeski MJ, Heller R (1997) Novel electrode designs for electrochemotherapy. Biochim Biophys Acta 1334: 9-14.

Hairless guinea pig skin: anatomical basis for studies of cutaneous biology. H Sueki, C Gammal, K Kudoh, A M Kligman, Eur J Dermatol. 10Sueki H, Gammal C, Kudoh K, Kligman AM (2000) Hairless guinea pig skin: anatomical basis for studies of cutaneous biology. Eur J Dermatol 10: 357-64.

Polymorphonuclear neutrophils and T lymphocytes: strange bedfellows or brothers in arms?. I Muller, M Munder, P Kropf, G M Hansch, Trends Immunol. 30Muller I, Munder M, Kropf P, Hansch GM (2009) Polymorphonuclear neutrophils and T lymphocytes: strange bedfellows or brothers in arms? Trends Immunol 30: 522-30.

DNA immunization targeting the skin: molecular control of adaptive immunity. T Tuting, W J Storkus, L D Falo, Jr , J Invest Dermatol. 111Tuting T, Storkus WJ, Falo LD, Jr. (1998) DNA immunization targeting the skin: molecular control of adaptive immunity. J Invest Dermatol 111: 183-8.

Electro-gene-transfer: a new approach for muscle gene delivery. E Fattori, La Monica, N Ciliberto, G Toniatti, C , Somat Cell Mol Genet. 27Fattori E, La Monica N, Ciliberto G, Toniatti C (2002) Electro-gene-transfer: a new approach for muscle gene delivery. Somat Cell Mol Genet 27: 75-83.

DNA vaccines: developing new strategies to enhance immune responses. S A Abdulhaqq, D B Weiner, Immunol Res. 42Abdulhaqq SA, Weiner DB (2008) DNA vaccines: developing new strategies to enhance immune responses. Immunol Res 42: 219-32.

Persistent immune responses induced by a human immunodeficiency virus DNA vaccine delivered in association with electroporation in the skin of nonhuman primates. F Martinon, K Kaldma, R Sikut, S Culina, G Romain, Hum Gene Ther. 20Martinon F, Kaldma K, Sikut R, Culina S, Romain G, et al. (2009) Persistent immune responses induced by a human immunodeficiency virus DNA vaccine delivered in association with electroporation in the skin of nonhuman primates. Hum Gene Ther 20: 1291-307.

Skin targeted DNA vaccine delivery using electroporation in rabbits. I: efficacy. B M Medi, S Hoselton, R B Marepalli, J Singh, Int J Pharm. 294Medi BM, Hoselton S, Marepalli RB, Singh J (2005) Skin targeted DNA vaccine delivery using electroporation in rabbits. I: efficacy. Int J Pharm 294: 53-63.

Optimisation of intradermal DNA electrotransfer for immunisation. G Vandermeulen, E Staes, M L Vanderhaeghen, M F Bureau, D Scherman, J Control Release. 124Vandermeulen G, Staes E, Vanderhaeghen ML, Bureau MF, Scherman D, et al. (2007) Optimisation of intradermal DNA electrotransfer for immunisation. J Control Release 124: 81-7.

Intradermal/subcutaneous immunization by electroporation improves plasmid vaccine delivery and potency in pigs and rhesus macaques. L A Hirao, L Wu, A S Khan, A Satishchandran, R Draghia-Akli, Vaccine. 26Hirao LA, Wu L, Khan AS, Satishchandran A, Draghia-Akli R, et al. (2008) Intradermal/subcutaneous immunization by electroporation improves plasmid vaccine delivery and potency in pigs and rhesus macaques. Vaccine 26: 440-8.

Pre-clinical evaluation of a novel nanoemulsion-based hepatitis B mucosal vaccine. P E Makidon, A U Bielinska, S S Nigavekar, K W Janczak, J Knowlton, PLoS One. 32954Makidon PE, Bielinska AU, Nigavekar SS, Janczak KW, Knowlton J, et al. (2008) Pre-clinical evaluation of a novel nanoemulsion-based hepatitis B mucosal vaccine. PLoS One 3: e2954.

Pulmonary immunization of guinea pigs with diphtheria CRM-197 antigen as nanoparticle aggregate dry powders enhance local and systemic immune responses. P Muttil, B Pulliam, L Garcia-Contreras, J K Fallon, C Wang, AAPS J. 12Muttil P, Pulliam B, Garcia-Contreras L, Fallon JK, Wang C, et al. (2010) Pulmonary immunization of guinea pigs with diphtheria CRM-197 antigen as nanoparticle aggregate dry powders enhance local and systemic immune responses. AAPS J 12: 699-707.

Electroporation-based DNA transfer enhances gene expression and immune responses to DNA vaccines in cattle. S Van Drunen Littel-Van Den Hurk, A Luxembourg, B Ellefsen, D Wilson, A Ubach, Vaccine. 26van Drunen Littel-van den Hurk S, Luxembourg A, Ellefsen B, Wilson D, Ubach A, et al. (2008) Electroporation-based DNA transfer enhances gene expression and immune responses to DNA vaccines in cattle. Vaccine 26: 5503-9.

Enhancement of the effectiveness of electroporation-augmented cutaneous DNA vaccination by a particulate adjuvant. L Zhang, G Widera, D Rabussay, Bioelectrochemistry. 63Zhang L, Widera G, Rabussay D (2004) Enhancement of the effectiveness of electroporation-augmented cutaneous DNA vaccination by a particulate adjuvant. Bioelectrochemistry 63: 369-73.

Prototype development and preclinical immunogenicity analysis of a novel minimally invasive electroporation device. K E Broderick, X Shen, J Soderholm, F Lin, J Mccoy, Gene Ther. 18Broderick KE, Shen X, Soderholm J, Lin F, McCoy J, et al. (2011) Prototype development and preclinical immunogenicity analysis of a novel minimally invasive electroporation device. Gene Ther 18: 258-65.