Management of portal hypertension derived from uncommon causes
2016

Sung Hyun Kim 
Hae Min Lee 
Seung Ho Lee 
Jong Yoon Won 
Radiology, Severance Hospital
Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Severance Hospital
Yonsei University College of Medicine
SeoulKorea

Yonsei University College of Medicine
50-1 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu03722SeoulKorea

Kyung Sik Kim 
Kyung Sik Kim 

Departments of 1 Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery


Management of portal hypertension derived from uncommon causes

Korean J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg
20201610.14701/kjhbps.2016.20.2.81Received: October 27, 2015; Revised: November 18, 2015; Accepted: November 30, 2015Case Report Corresponding author:Portal hypertensionRadiofrequency ablationStenosisStents
Portal hypertension can arise from any condition interfering with normal blood flow at any level within the portal system. Herein, we presented two uncommon cases of the portal hypertension and its treatment with brief literature review. A 71-year-old man who underwent right hemihepatectomy revealed a tumor recurrence adjacent to the inferior vena cava (IVC). After radiofrequency ablation (RFA) with lymph node dissection, he was referred for abdominal distension. The abdomen computed tomography scan showed severe ascites with a narrowing middle hepatic vein (MHV) and IVC around the RFA site. After insertion of two stents at the IVC and MHV, the ascites disappeared. Another 73-year-old man underwent right trisectionectomy of liver and segmental resection of the portal vein (PV). After operation, he underwent conservative management due to continuous abdominal ascites. The abdomen computed tomography scan showed severe ascites with obliteration of the left PV. After insertion of stent, the ascites disappeared. A decrease of the pressure gradient between the PV and IVC is one of the important treatment strategies for portal hypertension. Vascular stent is useful in the reduction of pressure gradient and thus, can be a treatment option for portal hypertension. (Korean J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg 2016;20:81-84)

INTRODUCTION

Portal hypertension is a common clinical syndrome that is characterized by an increased portal pressure gradient.

It causes an increased pressure gradient between the portal vein (PV) and the inferior vena cava (IVC) to above normal values (1)(2)(3)(4)(5). Portal hypertension causes varices within the gastrointestinal tract and can lead to gastrointestinal bleeding with abdominal ascites, diffuse abdominal pain, diarrhea and hepatic dysfunction. [1][2][3] Chronic liver disease is the most common cause of portal hypertension. 1 However, portal hypertension has various rare causes. 2 Herein, we presented two uncommon cases of the portal hypertension and its treatment with a brief literature review.


CASE


Case 1

A 71-year-old man who underwent right hemihepatectomy one year prior due to combined hepatocellular and cholangiocarcinoma was found with elevated CA19-9 level of 60.2 U/ml at the follow-up examination. The imaging studies revealed tumor recurrence in the resection margin that was adjacent to the inferior vena cava (IVC) with an enlarged metastatic lymph node (LN) at the hepatoduodenal area. We performed radiofrequency ablation (RFA) with LN dissection due to severe adhesion between the tumor and IVC.

Pathologic examination confirmed metastatic carcinoma derived from the previous cancerous lesion. Two weeks after discharge, he was referred to the emergency room for abdominal distension. Laboratory tests showed hypoalbuminemia (2.7 g/dl) and prolonged prothrombin time (PT) (1.24 INR). Although the ascitic fluid was slightly   turbid, serum-to-ascites albumin gradient was 1.3 g/dl suggesting transudate ascites. The abdomen computed tomography (CT) scan showed severe ascites with a narrowing of the middle hepatic vein (MHV) and IVC around the RFA site (Fig. 1). The pressure gradient on IVC venography measured 11 mmHg between the IVC and MHV ( Fig. 2A). After insertion of 2 stents at the IVC and MHV, the pressure gradient was decreased to 3 mmHg (Fig. 2B). The patient was discharged home on the fifteenth day with disappearance of ascites.   4 Hepatic vein occlusion after radiofrequency ablation is classified as secondary BCS and its incidence is very rare. Hepatic vein occlusion occurs by liver parenchymal deformity due to hepatic infarction.

However, the reported incidence of hepatic infarction after RFA is only 0.1%. 6 Moreover, because of the heat-sink effect that is due to the adjacent hepatic vessels, hepatic infarction rarely occurs around hepatic vein. 7 Portal venous stenosis by extrahepatic obstruction accounts for 5-10% of portal hypertension. 8 Increasing liver transplantation has led to frequent cases of acquired portal vein stenosis post-transplantation. 9 In the non-transplant population, PV stenosis occurs rarely due to tumor encasement or post-surgical complications. 10 While PV stenosis was manifested in advanced pancreatic and biliary neoplasms a decade ago, it currently presents as post-surgical complications. 10,11 Although portal hypertension is derived from different causes, it causes similar and typical symptoms such as as- There is currently no consensus on prophylactic anticoagulation therapy for maintaining stent patency after its insertion for portal hypertension. Some recommend at least 6 month interval follow-ups for clinical and laboratory evaluations. 2 Our patients were treated with warfarin and evaluated for stent patency using abdomen CT scans every 3 months; consequently, the first stent has been patent for 8 months and the other stent for 6 months.

In conclusion, regardless of the causes, a decrease of the pressure gradient between the PV and the IVC is one of the important treatment strategies of portal hypertension. Vascular stent is useful to reduce the portal pressure gradient and thus, can be a treatment option for portal hypertension.

Fig. 1 .
1Computed tomography of the case 1 shows the amount of ascites with abdominal distension.

Fig. 2 .
2Angiographic finding of the case 1. (A) There is a narrowing IVC without hepatic outflow (arrowhead). (B) After stenting, widening of the IVC with outflow of hepatic vein is seen.

Fig. 3 .
3Computed tomography of the case 2 shows left portal vein thrombosis with amount of ascites (arrow).


after portal vein embolization due to gallbladder cancer with hepatic duct invasion. Portal vein (PV) segmental resection was performed intra-operatively because of adhesion between PV around the hilum and tumor. Pathologic examination confirmed chronic inflammation and metaplasia of gallbladder. After operation, he underwent conservative management at the outpatient department for several months due to continuous abdominal ascites and pleural effusion. Six months after the operation, he visited the emergency room due to melena and

Fig. 4 .
4Angiographic finding of the case 2. (A) There is an obliterated left portal vein with collateral formation (arrowhead). (B) After stenting, widening of the left portal vein is seen. to-ascites albumin gradient was 1.9 g/dl. The abdomen CT scan showed severe ascites and pleural effusion with an oblation of the left PV(Fig. 3). Colonoscopy indicated bleeding at the ascending colon. Small bowel capsule endoscopy was performed to identify an accurate bleeding focus without success. In addition, PV stent insertion was performed in order to prevent varix bleeding and control the portal hypertension-induced ascites and pleural effusion. The pressure gradient on venography measured 11 mmHg between the left PV and splenic vein (Fig. 4A). After insertion of a stent at the LPV, the pressure gradient was decreased to 2 mmHg(Fig. 4B). The patient was discharged home on the twelfth day on recovery from ascites and melena.DISCUSSIONPortal hypertension can arise from any condition that interferes with normal blood flow at any level within the portal system.1-3 Among these, hepatic venous outflow obstruction that is called Budd-Chiari syndrome (BCS) accounts for 5-10% of portal hypertension. 4,5 BCS is classified as primary or secondary BCS. Primary BCS occurs due to intrinsic intraluminal thrombosis or webs and secondary BCS occurs due to intraluminal invasion or extra-luminal compression.


tal blood flow and improve symptoms. Although there is no large scale study of usefulness of stent insertion for portal hypertension, previous reports indicated good clinical outcome at various sites from PV to IVC by various causes of portal hypertension.10,[13][14][15] In our cases, the portal pressure gradient was more than 10 mmHg before the procedure and decreased to below 5 mmHg after the procedure. After control of portal pressure gradient, complications of portal hypertension i.e., ascites, pleural effusion and gastrointestinal bleeding from unknown focus disappeared.cites, varix or gastrointestinal bleeding. The study of por-

tal hypertension during the past decades has dramatically 

changed our knowledge of it. Recently, portal pressure 

gradient has received attention as the complications of 

portal hypertension. 
12 According to causes of portal hyper-

tension, different pressure changes are seen between de-

tailed areas such as intrasplenic pressure, portal vein pres-

sure or right atrial pressure. However, all of them increase 

the portal pressure gradient and can cause the complica-
tions of portal hypertension. 
1-3 The critical threshold value 

of portal pressure gradient is 10 mmHg. In other words, 

if the portal pressure gradient can be controlled at less 

than 10 mmHg, all complications of portal hypertension 

can be prevented. 

In accordance with this trend, several studies have used 

insertion of vascular stent to resolve blockage of the por-



Evolution in the understanding of the pathophysiological basis of portal hypertension: How changes in paradigm are leading to successful new treatments. J Bosch, R J Groszmann, V H Shah, J Hepatol. 621SupplBosch J, Groszmann RJ, Shah VH. Evolution in the under- standing of the pathophysiological basis of portal hypertension: How changes in paradigm are leading to successful new treatments. J Hepatol 2015;62(1 Suppl):S121-S130.

Non-cirrhotic portal hypertension -diagnosis and management. R Khanna, S K Sarin, J Hepatol. 60Khanna R, Sarin SK. Non-cirrhotic portal hypertension -diag- nosis and management. J Hepatol 2014;60:421-441.

Portal hypertension and its complications. A J Sanyal, J Bosch, A Blei, V Arroyo, Gastroenterology. 134Sanyal AJ, Bosch J, Blei A, Arroyo V. Portal hypertension and its complications. Gastroenterology 2008;134:1715-1728.

Budd-Chiari syndrome: in evolution. V Bogin, Marcos A Shaw-Stiffel, T , Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 17Bogin V, Marcos A, Shaw-Stiffel T. Budd-Chiari syndrome: in evolution. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005;17:33-35.

Hepatic venous outflow obstruction: three similar syndromes. U D Bayraktar, S Seren, Y Bayraktar, World J Gastroenterol. 13Bayraktar UD, Seren S, Bayraktar Y. Hepatic venous outflow obstruction: three similar syndromes. World J Gastroenterol 2007;13:1912-1927.

Complications of percutaneous radiofrequency ablation for hepato-cellular carcinoma: imaging spectrum and management. M Akahane, H Koga, N Kato, H Yamada, K Uozumi, R Tateishi, Radiographics. 251SupplAkahane M, Koga H, Kato N, Yamada H, Uozumi K, Tateishi R, et al. Complications of percutaneous radiofrequency ablation for hepato-cellular carcinoma: imaging spectrum and management. Radiographics 2005;25 Suppl 1:S57-S68.

Effect of vessel size on creation of hepatic radiofrequency lesions in pigs: assessment of the "heat sink" effect. D S Lu, S S Raman, D J Vodopich, M Wang, J Sayre, C Lassman, AJR Am J Roentgenol. 178Lu DS, Raman SS, Vodopich DJ, Wang M, Sayre J, Lassman C. Effect of vessel size on creation of hepatic radiofrequency lesions in pigs: assessment of the "heat sink" effect. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2002;178:47-51.

Portal vein thrombosis. S Parikh, R Shah, P Kapoor, Am J Med. 123Parikh S, Shah R, Kapoor P. Portal vein thrombosis. Am J Med 2010;123:111-119.

Interventional treatment for portal venous occlusion after liver transplantation: long-term follow-up results. J Wang, W Yang, Q Huang, K Gao, B Wei, R Zhai, Medicine (Baltimore). 94356Wang J, Yang W, Huang Q, Gao K, Wei B, Zhai R, et al. Interventional treatment for portal venous occlusion after liver transplantation: long-term follow-up results. Medicine (Baltimore) 2015;94:e356.

Portal vein venoplasty and stent placement in the nontransplant population. D A Woodrum, H Bjarnason, J C Andrews, J Vasc Interv Radiol. 20Woodrum DA, Bjarnason H, Andrews JC. Portal vein venoplasty and stent placement in the nontransplant population. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2009;20:593-599.

Portal venous stent placement in patients with pancreatic and biliary neoplasms invading portal veins and causing portal hypertension: initial experience. K Yamakado, A Nakatsuka, N Tanaka, A Fujii, S Isaji, Y Kawarada, Radiology. 220Yamakado K, Nakatsuka A, Tanaka N, Fujii A, Isaji S, Kawarada Y, et al. Portal venous stent placement in patients with pancreatic and biliary neoplasms invading portal veins and causing portal hypertension: initial experience. Radiology 2001;220:150-156.

Management of varices and variceal hemorrhage in cirrhosis. G Garcia-Tsao, J Bosch, N Engl J Med. 362Garcia-Tsao G, Bosch J. Management of varices and variceal hemorrhage in cirrhosis. N Engl J Med 2010;362:823-832.

Clinical usefulness of portal venous stent in hepatobiliary pancreatic cancers. Z Q Zhou, J H Lee, K B Song, J W Hwang, S C Kim, Y J Lee, ANZ J Surg. 84Zhou ZQ, Lee JH, Song KB, Hwang JW, Kim SC, Lee YJ, et al. Clinical usefulness of portal venous stent in hepatobiliary pancreatic cancers. ANZ J Surg 2014;84:346-352.

Percutaneous transhepatic stent placement in the management of portal venous stenosis after curative surgery for pancreatic and biliary neoplasms. K R Kim, G Y Ko, K B Sung, H K Yoon, AJR Am J Roentgenol. 196Kim KR, Ko GY, Sung KB, Yoon HK. Percutaneous trans- hepatic stent placement in the management of portal venous stenosis after curative surgery for pancreatic and biliary neoplasms. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2011;196:W446-W450.

Retrograde puncture assisted hepatic vein recanalization in treating Budd-Chiari syndrome with segmental obstruction of hepatic vein. Y F Cui, Y F Fu, N Wei, H C Zhu, H Xu, Radiol Med. 120Cui YF, Fu YF, Wei N, Zhu HC, Xu H. Retrograde puncture assisted hepatic vein recanalization in treating Budd-Chiari syn- drome with segmental obstruction of hepatic vein. Radiol Med 2015;120:1184-1189.