Current Topics, Etc. The following 2 items are reproduced from Surgical Surgical Treatment of Intractable Asthma Bilateral Thoracolumbar Sympathectomy for Hypertension Thorpe, Welch and Poindexter present observations on 500 patients with hypertensive disease who were ? Normal Blood Pressure Range and its Clinical Implications Establishment of industrial medical services on a large scale during the war afforded an opportunity to obtain blood pressure readings for large numbers of persons who were in
August 1950

B Blades 
E J Beattie 
Jr 
W S Elias 

Department of Surgery
American Journal of Medicine
Division of Cardiology
Department of Medicine, Post-Graduate Medical School
Univereity-Bellevue Medical Centre
Department of Oto-laryngology
The following 2 items are reproduced from Medica
The George Washington University School of Medicine
9, 500-515, Newsletter, Wa-390WashingtonNew York, New York, N.Y.)


Archives of Internal Medicine
From the Deutsche medizinische Wochenschrift
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
Vol. 86Baltimore, VolMd.)

Current Topics, Etc. The following 2 items are reproduced from Surgical Surgical Treatment of Intractable Asthma Bilateral Thoracolumbar Sympathectomy for Hypertension Thorpe, Welch and Poindexter present observations on 500 patients with hypertensive disease who were ? Normal Blood Pressure Range and its Clinical Implications Establishment of industrial medical services on a large scale during the war afforded an opportunity to obtain blood pressure readings for large numbers of persons who were in

October The Journal of the American Medical Association
201August 1950subjected to bilateral thoracolumbar sympathectomy between January 1942 and July 1948. They discussNewsletter, Wa-387, dated March 1951, prepared by the American Medical Association :? The authors are connected with the dated March 1951, prepared by the American Medical Association :?
Blades and his associates briefly mention the operations for asthma that have been performed since Kummell operated on the sympathetic nervous system of patients with severe asthma in 1923. Kappis resorted to vagotomy, Leriche and Fontaine advocated stellate ganglionectomy and combinations of sympathectomy and vagotomy. More recently (1948)   Carr    and Chandler reported on the role of dorsal sympathetic ganglionectomy for asthma, Phillips and Scott use operations on the parasympathetic system, and later June, 1951]    CURRENT TOPICS, ETC.2?3Rienhoff and Gay reported on bilateral posterior pulmonary plexus resection.An operation based on the same general approach employed by Phillips and Scott and later by Rienhoff and Gay has been performed by Blades and his associates in the 38 patients reported on in this paper.They make a left posterolateral incision over the fifth rib and after division of the overlying muscles they resect a long segment of the rib. The pleura is incised and the left thoracic cavity opened.The operation consists of the following steps : 1. Identification of the vagus nerve at the level of the pulmonary plexus. 2. The vagus is freed and retracted gently, but not cut. 3. The pulmonary plexus about the bronchus is destroyed. 4. All branches of the vagus to the pulmonary hilum and lung are divided below the level of the recurrent laryngeal nerve. 5. The oesophageal branches and the main trunk of the vagus are saved. 6. The sheaths of the pulmonary artery and veins are removed as much as possible. 7. The pulmonary ligament is divided. The chest wall is reconstructed in layers with an intercostal catheter placed in a separate stab wound and connected to water-sealed bottle. The authors comment on the considerable variations in the patterns of the vagus nerve distribution. The 38 patients whom they operated on in the course of the past 34 months were completely incapacitated and all known conservative treatment had failed. There were 14 women and 24 men. The majority of the patients were in the third to the fifth decades of life. They were selected from about 300 patients with asthma.Fourteen of the 38 patients are now free of asthma. Eight patients consider themselves improved. In eight cases the disease ia unchanged; and in one instance the asthma appears to be worse. There was one postoperative death and six late deaths. These data demonstrate the bewildering consequences of an empirical surgical approach. the pre-operative status of the patients with regard to duration of hypertension, to their symptoms, their previous histoiy of glomerulonephritis, pyelonephritis and toxaemia of pregnancy, and with regard to diastolic readings, organ involvement and to laboratory data. While grading their hypertensive patients according to the method of Iveith, Wagener and Baker, they found frequent disparity between the vascular changes seen in the fundi and those present in other organs. Therefore they employed the four group classification of Palmer et al., which considers damage to other organs as well.The surgical death rate was 8.8 per cent. The mean period of observation was about three years. At the follow-up a total of 22 per cent were found to be dead.The results of the operation were excellent or good in 27 per cent, fair in 29 per cent, poor in 12 per cent and unknown in 10 per cent. Comparison of the survival curves of this group with a comparable medically treated group at the end of an average period of three years shows no statistically difference in groups I, II and III. Group IV, however, a significantly higher survival rate, '? apparent-in the operated group.The following should be considered as absolute contra-indications to thoracolumbar sympathectomy :(1) Intractable cardiac failure; (2) renal insufficiency which presents a pre-operative blood urea nitrogen level in excess of 20 mg. per cent; (3) evidence of mental confusion; (4) a history of a cerebral vascular accident or myocardial infarction less than six months before operation; (5) a history of a serious psychiatric disturbance at any previous period, e.g. manic-depressive psychosis, severe psychoneurosis, etc. This study verifies the experience of others that a definite decrease in the diastolic blood pressure may be obtained in a significant number of patients over a fairly prolonged period, together with a reversal or amelioration in some patients of other manifestations of the hypertensive process, i.e. fundus changes, electrocardiography, heart size, etc. The operation of choice is the original Smithwick procedure. The degree of blood pressure reduction and subjective improvement with more extensive procedures do not justify the increased morbidity, post-operative complications and higher mortality rate. If one excludes the patients with the aforementioned contra-indications, thoracolumbar sympathectomy is indicated as a palliative procedure for hypertensive patients in class IV and probably in selected cases in class III. average good health and able to work. The data which form the basis of the present study were obtained from industrial plants.Commenting on their observations, Master and his associates say that the probiem of high blood pressure is omnipresent. Both physicians and lay persons consider it important. The physician can easily instil fear in the patient with his blood pressure reading. The number of patients who appear in offices of internists or cardiologists simply because they have been told that they have high blood pressure is so large that the use of the expression ' blood pressure phobia' is warranted. This should change. A number of authors have emphasized that the course of hypertension in patients over 50 years of age is frequently benign. Excess mortality' in hypertensive persons diminishes with age.Although life insurance studies show an increased mortality with even relatively moderate rises in blood pressure above the average with age, these observations do not mean that all or even the majority of persons with elevated blood pressure will suffer a diminution of longevity but simply that an undue proportion of them will, and consequently the average longevity for the group is lowered. This concept of the group used by the life insurance medical director is quite different from that of the clinician, who muefc be concerned with the individual.274THE INDIAN MEDICAL GAZETTE [June, 1951    The authors say that their own investigations gave evidence that blood pressures which are usually considered above normal are not uncommon up to the age of 40 and that after the age of 45 they are more frequent than some so-called normal readings. At ages 55 or 60 and older, systolic pressure of 180 or even to 190 mm. and diastolic pressure of 100 or even 110 mm.should" not ipso facto be considered abnormal. These readings may merely reflect the degree of arteriosclerosis present. This statement is not, of course, intended to include malignant hypertension or hypertension secondary to renal or other disease. But in many persons at present termed hypertensive because of a blood pressure of 170 mm. systolic and 90 mm. diastolic or 160 mm. systolic and 100 mm. diastolic, these figures represent not a specific disease but merely the aging process, and therefore should not be a cause for alarm. The prognosis in patients over 50 years of age with blood pressures even as high as 200 mm. systolic and 110 mm. diastolic may be fair.The whole clinical picture must be taken into account. The history, the physical examination, the size of the heart, the resting electrocardiogram and the two-step exercise electrocardiogram are all important in judging health, presence of disease and study of cardiac function.Just as dependence for diagnosis on a single observation or test may be a dangerous practice in clinical medicine, so the evaluation of the blood pressure reading without correlation with the entire examination of the patient is unsound.In instances in which the blood pressure attains the lower limit of hypertension or goes higher it might be practical to consider it an abnormal reading until proved otherwise. For example, a man or woman aged 52 with a systolic blood pressure of 182 mm. of mercury or a diastolic pressure of 110 mm. -of mercury should receive a complete examination.Hypertension defined as 150/90 mm. Hg., occurred in 60 to 70 per cent of a series of cases of coronaiy occlusion. Hypertension was included among the jetiologic factors of coronary occlusion, but it was found that mortality rate and the incidence of heart failure were no greater among those with than among those without hypertension. The majority of patients with coronary occlusion are over the age of 50, an age when hypertension is exceedingly common. The setiologic relationship between hypertension and coronary artery disease and occlusion should be re-examined. Cardiac enlargement occurring in a hypertensive patient is usually attributed to the hypertension rather than to any coronary disease that may be present.It is widely accepted that among women angina pectoris due to coronaiy disease is commonly associated with hypertension, much more so than among men.Since elevated blood pressures are even commoner in women than in men over the age of 45, the discoveiy of hypertension in female patients with coronaiy disease may be a coincidence.Commenting on low blood pressure the authors say that a figure below 95 to 98 mm. of mercury systolic in an adult is usually found only in patients who have sustained coronary occlusion with slow recovery of strength, in orthostatic hypotension, during convalescence from severe illness or in anaemia, debility states or Addison's disease and in shock and shock-like states. It is not uncommonly associated with fatigue brought about by overwork and lack of sleep. The diastolic pressure may fall to 50 mm. or less after exercise, particularly in young persons, but at rest such a low figure is observed only in aortic insufficiency or in hypotensive states associated with postural hypotension, shock or reactions to drugs like tetra-ethylammonium.The authors show that their observation that blood pressure readings higher than those accepted at present are nevertheless frequently normal should have a bearing on therapy. Since systolic pressures of 160 to 190 mm. of mercury and diastolic pressures of 100 to 110 mm. of mercury are not uncommonly observed after the age of 50, patients with such readings may be in good health, and efforts to lower the blood pressure by means of drugs or strict low sodium or rice diets may be unnecessary. In evaluating the status of these patients, one should first determine cardiac function. If coronary disease, cardiac enlargement or heart failure are present, therapy should be directed toward these conditions rather than toward the hypertension. v (Master

2?3

Rienhoff and Gay reported on bilateral posterior pulmonary plexus resection.

An operation based on the same general approach employed by Phillips and Scott and later by Rienhoff and Gay has been performed by Blades and his associates in the 38 patients reported on in this paper.

They make a left posterolateral incision over the fifth rib and after division of the overlying muscles they resect a long segment of the rib. The pleura is incised and the left thoracic cavity opened.

The operation consists of the following steps :

1. Identification of the vagus nerve at the level of the pulmonary plexus. 2. The vagus is freed and retracted gently, but not cut. 3. The pulmonary plexus about the bronchus is destroyed. 4. All branches of the vagus to the pulmonary hilum and lung are divided below the level of the recurrent laryngeal nerve. 5. The oesophageal branches and the main trunk of the vagus are saved. 6. The sheaths of the pulmonary artery and veins are removed as much as possible. 7. The pulmonary ligament is divided. The chest wall is reconstructed in layers with an intercostal catheter placed in a separate stab wound and connected to water-sealed bottle.

The authors comment on the considerable variations in the patterns of the vagus nerve distribution. The 38 patients whom they operated on in the course of the past 34 months were completely incapacitated and all known conservative treatment had failed. There were 14 women and 24 men. The majority of the patients were in the third to the fifth decades of life. They were selected from about 300 patients with asthma.

Fourteen of the 38 patients are now free of asthma. Eight patients consider themselves improved. In eight cases the disease ia unchanged; and in one instance the asthma appears to be worse. There was one postoperative death and six late deaths. These data demonstrate the bewildering consequences of an empirical surgical approach. Thorpe, Welch and Poindexter present observations on 500 patients with hypertensive disease who were ?subjected to bilateral thoracolumbar sympathectomy between January 1942 and July 1948. They discuss the pre-operative status of the patients with regard to duration of hypertension, to their symptoms, their previous histoiy of glomerulonephritis, pyelonephritis and toxaemia of pregnancy, and with regard to diastolic readings, organ involvement and to laboratory data. While grading their hypertensive patients according to the method of Iveith, Wagener and Baker, they found frequent disparity between the vascular changes seen in the fundi and those present in other organs. Therefore they employed the four group classification of Palmer et al., which considers damage to other organs as well.

The surgical death rate was 8.8 per cent. The mean period of observation was about three years. At the follow-up a total of 22 per cent were found to be dead.

The results of the operation were excellent or good in 27 per cent, fair in 29 per cent, poor in 12 per cent and unknown in 10 per cent. Comparison of the survival curves of this group with a comparable medically treated group at the end of an average period of three years shows no statistically difference in groups I, II and III. Group IV, however, a significantly higher survival rate, '? apparent-in the operated group.

The following should be considered as absolute contra-indications to thoracolumbar sympathectomy :

(1) Intractable cardiac failure; (2) renal insufficiency which presents a pre-operative blood urea nitrogen level in excess of 20 mg. per cent; (3) evidence of mental confusion; (4) a history of a cerebral vascular accident or myocardial infarction less than six months before operation; (5) a history of a serious psychiatric disturbance at any previous period, e.g. manic-depressive psychosis, severe psychoneurosis, etc. This study verifies the experience of others that a definite decrease in the diastolic blood pressure may be obtained in a significant number of patients over a fairly prolonged period, together with a reversal or amelioration in some patients of other manifestations of the hypertensive process, i.e. fundus changes, electrocardiography, heart size, etc. The operation of choice is the original Smithwick procedure. The degree of blood pressure reduction and subjective improvement with more extensive procedures do not justify the increased morbidity, post-operative complications and higher mortality rate. If one excludes the patients with the aforementioned contra-indications, thoracolumbar sympathectomy is indicated as a palliative procedure for hypertensive patients in class IV and probably in selected cases in class III.

(Thorpe, J. J., Welch, W. J., and Poindexter, C. A. :

American Journal of Medicine, 9, 500-515, October 1950. Establishment of industrial medical services on a large scale during the war afforded an opportunity to obtain blood pressure readings for large numbers of persons who were in average good health and able to work. The data which form the basis of the present study were obtained from industrial plants.

Commenting on their observations, Master and his associates say that the probiem of high blood pressure is omnipresent. Both physicians and lay persons consider it important. The physician can easily instil fear in the patient with his blood pressure reading. The number of patients who appear in offices of internists or cardiologists simply because they have been told that they have high blood pressure is so large that the use of the expression '  Although life insurance studies show an increased mortality with even relatively moderate rises in blood pressure above the average with age, these observations do not mean that all or even the majority of persons with elevated blood pressure will suffer a diminution of longevity but simply that an undue proportion of them will, and consequently the average longevity for the group is lowered. This concept of the group used by the life insurance medical director is quite different from that of the clinician, who muefc be concerned with the individual. [June, 1951 The authors say that their own investigations gave evidence that blood pressures which are usually considered above normal are not uncommon up to the age of 40 and that after the age of 45 they are more frequent than some so-called normal readings. At ages 55 or 60 and older, systolic pressure of 180 or even to 190 mm. and diastolic pressure of 100 or even 110 mm.

should" not ipso facto be considered abnormal. These readings may merely reflect the degree of arteriosclerosis present. This statement is not, of course, intended to include malignant hypertension or hypertension secondary to renal or other disease. But in many persons at present termed hypertensive because of a blood pressure of 170 mm. systolic and 90 mm. diastolic or 160 mm. systolic and 100 mm. diastolic, these figures represent not a specific disease but merely the aging process, and therefore should not be a cause for alarm. The prognosis in patients over 50 years of age with blood pressures even as high as 200 mm. systolic and 110 mm. diastolic may be fair.

The whole clinical picture must be taken into account. The history, the physical examination, the size of the heart, the resting electrocardiogram and the two-step exercise electrocardiogram are all important in judging health, presence of disease and study of cardiac function.

Just as dependence for diagnosis on a single observation or test may be a dangerous practice in clinical medicine, so the evaluation of the blood pressure reading without correlation with the entire examination of the patient is unsound.

In instances in which the blood pressure attains the lower limit of hypertension or goes higher it might be practical to consider it an abnormal reading until proved otherwise. For example, a man or woman aged 52 with a systolic blood pressure of 182 mm. of mercury or a diastolic pressure of 110 mm. -of mercury should receive a complete examination.

Hypertension defined as 150/90 mm. Hg., occurred in 60 to 70 per cent of a series of cases of coronaiy occlusion. Hypertension was included among the jetiologic factors of coronary occlusion, but it was found that mortality rate and the incidence of heart failure were no greater among those with than among those without hypertension. The majority of patients with coronary occlusion are over the age of 50, an age when hypertension is exceedingly common. The setiologic relationship between hypertension and coronary artery disease and occlusion should be re-examined. Cardiac enlargement occurring in a hypertensive patient is usually attributed to the hypertension rather than to any coronary disease that may be present.

It is widely accepted that among women angina pectoris due to coronaiy disease is commonly associated with hypertension, much more so than among men.

Since elevated blood pressures are even commoner in women than in men over the age of 45, the discoveiy of hypertension in female patients with coronaiy disease may be a coincidence.

Commenting on low blood pressure the authors say that a figure below 95 to 98 mm. of mercury systolic in an adult is usually found only in patients who have sustained coronary occlusion with slow recovery of strength, in orthostatic hypotension, during convalescence from severe illness or in anaemia, debility states or Addison's disease and in shock and shock-like states. It is not uncommonly associated with fatigue brought about by overwork and lack of sleep. The diastolic pressure may fall to 50 mm. or less after exercise, particularly in young persons, but at rest such a low figure is observed only in aortic insufficiency or in hypotensive states associated with postural hypotension, shock or reactions to drugs like tetra-ethylammonium.

The authors show that their observation that blood pressure readings higher than those accepted at present are nevertheless frequently normal should have a bearing on therapy. Since systolic pressures of 160 to 190 mm. of mercury and diastolic pressures of 100 to 110 mm. of mercury are not uncommonly observed after the age of 50, patients with such readings may be in good health, and efforts to lower the blood pressure by means of drugs or strict low sodium or rice diets may be unnecessary. In evaluating the status of these patients, one should first determine cardiac function. If coronary disease, cardiac enlargement or heart failure are present, therapy should be directed toward these conditions rather than toward the hypertension.  Terramycin inhibited the growth of most of the bacteria tested at slightly lower concentrations than aureomycin.

Oral administration of a single dose of terramycin HC1 to two human subjects resulted in measurable levels of the drug in the blood and urine for at least 24 hours.

Terramycin was more effective than aureomycin in the therapy of K. pneumonia; and II. influenzae infections in mice but was less effective in pneumococcal and hemolytic streptococcal infections.

Aureomycin Therapy in Chronic Liver Disease By J. M. SHAFFER et ah (Abstracted from the American Journal oj Medical Sciences, Vol. 220, August 1950, p. 173) Thirteen cases of chronic liver disease have been treated with oral aureomycin. The usual course of therapy was 2 gm. a day for 30 days.

In 7 cases improvement resulted which may have been related to aureomycin therapy. Case reports of these 7 cases are presented.

In 6 cases there was little or no evidence of benefit from aureomycin. Dermal sensitivity, manifested by skin and nail changes, was observed in 5 cases. In 4 of these 5, the lesions appeared after exposure to sunlight, indicating the possibility that under some circumstances aureomycin may be a photo-sensitizing agent.

The results of this study suggest that aureomycin therapy may be of value in some types of chronic liver A diagnostic problem during the-illness was presented in spite of roentgenologic studies and biopsy of a lymph node. No antemortem diagnosis could be made.

Review of the literature of the last thirty years revealed many instances of pulmonary Hodgkin's disease but few were definitely proved cases of primary type. A large majority of the cases were of secondary Four cases of acute hepatic coma?2 secondary to acute viral hepatitis, and 2 to portal cirrhosis?were treated both parenterally and orally with aureomycin. All improved shortly after such therapy was started. Tn 3 cases the improvement was sufficiently striking to suggest that aureomycin may well have been responsible for the change. In case 4 it is difficult to attribute the improvement to any therapy other than the parenteral aureomycin. Globin insulin with zinc, crystalline protamine insulin (NPC-50 or NPH-50) and a mixture containing twice as much regular as protamine zinc insulin are all intermediate in rapidity, intensity and duration of action between ordinary insulin in solution and standard protamine zinc insulin. Differences in action among these three intermediate insulins are less important than differences in insulin requirement and response of various patients with diabetes mellitus.

All three are superior to ordinary insulin and protamine zinc solution in the routine treatment of patients with severe diabetes by injection once daily before breakfast.

Severe diabetes should be managed with the use of one of the intermediate insulins. The preparation which most closely fits the eating and fasting requirements of the individual patient in the smallest dosage should be determined in each case by trial. There is evidence that in the pathogenesis of skin 'tuberculosis there exists factors other than the virulence of the tubercle bacilli and the allergic condition of the host. Factors such as disturbances in the peripheral circulation, acro-asphyxia, chilblains, radiodermatitis, and scars may diminish resistance locally favouring the localization of tubercle bacilli. The mode of action of vitamin D therapy and of salt-free diets in the treatment of skin tuberculosis shows remarkable similarities. These can be explained by the fact that both forms of treatment are directed towards changes in the metabolism in the skin. The effect of vitamin D therapy seems to be more intensive than that of a salt-free diet. One result is an increase in the mineral [June, 1951 content of the skin; there is an increase in calcium and a diminution in the base content. High dosage of vitamin D apparently increases the excretion of chlorides in the urine. The chloride level in the serum is constant in many cases treated with a salt-free diet.

In contrast, the serum chloride level shows a statistically significant diminution in individuals treated with vitamin D. Experimental and clinical studies seem to indicate that vitamin D acts through metabolic changes in the skin rather than through a chemotherapeutic effect. This would explain the favourable effect of the therapy in skin tuberculosis and its failure in pulmonary tuberculosis. By combining vitamin D therapy and salt-free diet, it is to be expected that equally good therapeutic effects can be obtained with a lower dosage of vitamin D.

Potassium Lack (From the Lancet, ii, 9th September, 1950, p. 369)

It is largely owing to the patient skill of Darrow and his associates in New York that the wider significance of potassium in medicine and surgery is beginning to be recognized. By analysing animal tissues and studying the salt balance of infants with diarrhoea, they showed that large amounts of potassium had to be absorbed and pass into the muscles before these infants could again be classed as normal. Many other causes of potassium deficiency have since been established, including bums and other trauma, haemorrhage, and diabetic coma, post-operative vomiting, pyloric stenosis, and intestinal obstruction. The typical signs are flaccid and feeble muscles, low blood-pressure with a bounding pulse, and a loud systolic precordial murmur.

The diagnosis can be proved by finding a serum-potassium level below about 14 mg. per 100 ml., but even with a flame photometer to speed up the estimations, the latent period of a biochemical department's synopses is often distressingly Jong. In practice, therefore, it may be more convenient to rely on the rougher but reliable guidance of the electrocardiogram which shows a prolonged Q-T interval and lowering or inversion of the T wave.

Many clinicians will be satisfied to recognize and cure their cases of potassium deficiency : few of them are interested at the moment in the factors which control the physiological levels of potassium and of sodium in the cells or in the internal environment.

Cortisone and ACTH (From the Lancet, ii, 9th September, 1950, p. 370) With the purpose of bringing together : prevailing knowledge on these substances, two conferences were held last autumn in the U.S.A., and the proceedings have now been published verbatim. The substances had been tried in the following array of disorders : collagen diseases (rheumatic fever, rheumatoid arthritis, disseminated lupus, periarteritis, dermatomyositis, and scleroderma); overt allergies (atopic dermatitis, drug sensitization, hay fever, asthma_. nasal polyps); glomerulonephritis and nephrotic syndrome; gout; neoplastic diseases (carcinoma, Hodgkin's disease, chronic lymphatic and myeloid leukaemia and acute leukaemia); specific infectious diseases (pneumococcal and virus pneumonia, tuberculosis, poliomyelitis, chronic infectious hepatitis, and herpes); cirrhosis of the liver; ulcerative colitis; pemphigus; hyperthyroidism; diseases of the central nervous system and of muscle (myasthenia gravis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, muscular dystrophies, disseminated sclerosis, and various psychoses); and congenital hypoglycaemia. This form of therapy is not hazard-free. Thus, ACTH may give rise to defects in wound granulation; a rise in blood-pressure possibly endangering life in hyperpietics; and a modified Cushing's syndrome characterized by ' moon-faceacne, and even hyperglycemia. Mental changes have also been noted; often the patient has no more than an exaggerated sense of well-being, but sometimes the picture is more serious. One of Spies's patients, for example, developed hallucinations, and agitated depression has been reported. Hoefer and Glaser have lately recorded significant electro-encephalographic changes in 13 out of 15 patients treated,-with psychiatric symptoms in 10.

Pheochromocytoma Successfully Removed with the Aid of Piperoxan (Benodaine) Hydrochloride By R. J. KOSITCHEK AND OTHER (Abstracted from the Journal of the American Medical Association, Vol. 144, 4th November, 1950, p. 826)

The clinical and laboratory history of a proved case of pheochromocytoma is presented. There have been many treatments for tropical ulcers; their very multiplicity is evidence that they could not be relied upon either to shorten the time till healing began or to lighten the labour entailed in constantly changing pus-soaked dressings. Until the advent of penicillin there was no specific treatment which would rapidly eradicate all the bacteria found in the pus. The evidence here brought forward shows that aureomycin acts in a similar manner to penicillin. Whereas penicillin is not effective when given by mouth except in large doses, aureomycin is active when given orally for as short a period as 3 days. No relapses have occurred in any of the eight cases here reported and, in addition, there was a complete absence of toxicity.

Eight patients with tropical ulcers have been treated with aureomycin by mouth. A daily dose of 750 mg. of aureomycin continued for 2 days was sufficient to eradicate all organisms; the dosage was continued for one day longer. All ulcers healed rapidly and no relapse occurred. No toxic reaction was noted even when a daily dose of gramme 1.5 was continued for 7 days. A patient with cancrum, a child of 3 years, was also successfully treated with aureomycin by mouth, a total dosage of gramme 5.25 being given in 7 Total Body Water in Man By J. M. STEELE et al (Abstracted from the American Journal of Physiology, Vol. 162, 1st August, 1950, p. 313)

The measurement of total body water in living man has become possible in recent years by estimating the degree of dilution of deuterium oxide and tritium oxide in the body, but not many measurements have been carried out because the methods involve costly and tedious procedures. More recently, the degree of dilution of antipyrine has been shown to be an accurate estimate of body water. The compound is evenly distributed throughout the water of tissues in both dogs and humans; it is relatively non-toxic; it is degraded slowly in man, and the method for its estimation is simple and accurate. Its volume of dilution in man agrees well with that of deuterium oxide.

The total body water in a group of males and females was measured as the volume of dilution of antipyrine in the body. The proportion of water in 31 females averaged 45 per cent of body weight and in 51 males, 53 per cent of body weight. Variations in the proportion of water reflect for the most part variation in bodv fat. Availability of a simple method for measuring total body water in living persons by the dilution of antipyrine has made it possible to carry out the procedure in a fairly large group of individuals. The fact that the values obtained for total body water were lower than those usually accepted (average 53 per cent body weight in males and 45 per cent in females) warranted reconsideration of the distribution of water outside and inside the cells of the body.


Estimation of Intracellular

An estimate of intracellular water as the difference between total body water and extracellular water has consequently been attempted. Extracellular water was measured in two ways : by the volume of distribution of bromide and by the volume of distribution of inulin.

The intracellular water compartment calculated -as the difference between total body water and bromide space appears too email to account for the intracellular water of the various organs. It was concluded that the bromide space is considerably larger than the actual extracellular space.

Inulin and bromide spaces were compared in nephrectomized dogs, in human subjects with severe renal insufficiency and in normal human subjects. In all cases the volume of distribution of inulin was considerably less than that of bromide.

The extracellular space calculated on the basis of inulin was found to average 15 per cent of body weight in four human subjects. The intracellular water calculated as the difference between total water and inulin space in these four subjects was approximately 40 per cent of body weight or three-quarters of the total body water.

The body composition has been reconsidered in terms of fat. solids, intracellular and extracellular water. Two short reports out of a small series of eight cases are given.

Early investigations of the literature Avith regard to the inter-relation between sulphapyridine and folic acid reveal some interesting and perhaps significant relationships. Firstly, folic acid deficiency can be artificially created in some experimental animals by the administration of large doses of sulphapyridine. Secondly, folic acid is produced in and absorbed by the bowel by the activity of certain bacteria normally living in the bowel. Thirdly, the metabolism in the body of folic acid, para-aminobenzoic acid, the sulphonamides and aminopterin are known to be closely associated with one another.

It is tentatively suggested that further investigation may well show that folic acid deficiency is an important factor in the causation of toxic symptoms by the sulphonamide group of drugs, and this aspect is being investigated.

It is quite obvious that the remissions seen could be purely coincidental, and that in a disease notorious for spontaneous exacerbation and remission, it would be unwise to draw any firm conclusion from these few The normal range of phospholipid synthesis has now been determined in man. Considerable individual variation has been observed, but in a given person the rate of synthesis or turnover remains rather constant over a period of months. The synthesis of new phospholipids cannot be increased in the normal person by the administration of choline or methionine.

In patients with chronic hepatitis (Laennec's or atrophic cirrhosis), lipotrophic deficiencies can often be demonstrated at the start of therapy. In an acute exacerbation, the administration of a-large dose of [June, 1951 choline or methionine will cause an increase in synthesis of phospholipids. Once the deficiency has been overcome, the rate of phospholipid turnover remains rather constant for that individual, as long as the diet remain adequate and physiologic stress (alcohol intake and activity) is unchanged. In the interpretation of results in a disease which has so many variables,' each subject must serve as his own control. Experiments by these techniques over a period of months in patients with cirrhosis have shown that in this group phospholipid synthesis is in the low normal range. Occasionally, an old, small, scarred liver of chronic cirrhosis will show improvement in other functions?such as pigment metabolism or protein synthesis?without a change in rate of phospholipid synthesis or detectable anatomic change. Phospholipid synthesis must be a primitive function and one of the last to disappear in liver decompensation.

In patients with acute vims hepatitis, no lipotrophic deficiency has been demonstrated and no alteration in the rate of phospholipid synthesis has been detected by the addition of methionine or choline to a treatment regimen. No good evidence exists that a reduction in protein intake is an setiologic factor in the disease or that stores of protein and lipotropic substances are rapidly depleted by the infection and the temporarily reduced food intake resulting from nausea and anorexia. The liver in virus hepatitis is .usually enlarged, and the anatomic changes can be readily followed bv serial aspiration biopsies. Jaundice, in the presence of normal phospholipid turnover, indicates that all functions of the liver are not damaged simultaneously in equal degree. Anatomic as well as physiologic techniques are necessary to assay the type and extent of liver damage.

These important new studies may be immediately applicable to improvement in treatment of human disease. A deficiency in lipotropic substances apparently sets the stage for accumulation of fat in the liver. But how long an interval of time on a proteindeficient diet is required in the absence of stress to produce a lipotrophic deficiency ? In rats the time is as short as five days, but no data are yet available for man.

The rapid decrease in function and increasing seriousness of the clinical condition of those with cirrhosis who go on week-end drinking sprees suggests that the time may be shorter .than now suspected. Since stress (anaesthesia, trauma, infection) will induce a decrease in liver function in normal persons, one wonders whether it will prove possible to prevent liver damage by prophylactic administration of lipotropic and other substances when stress can be anticipated.

It may be possible to improve further the current regimen of treatment of chronic hepatitis by reducing the work now required of the liver. Energy is required to metabolize amino acids and to form urea from the nitrogen of the molecules. Experiments by the same group of investigators have indicated that in animals, at least, the stress of radiation from isotopic phosphorus can be reduced in toxicity and the survival time increased by reduction of the protein content of the diet. This observation suggests the interesting possibility that a decrease in the current, high protein intake of 140 to 150 gm. per day might be feasible without a loss in efficacy of the treatment reeimen, if lipotropic substances are furnished to the body. A high intake of vitamins, especially of the B complex and the unidentified trace substances which are present in^ crude liver, will probably have to be provided, but critically ill patients now being lost may be saved.

Prophylactic Administration of Penicillin (From the British Medical Journal, ii, 23rd September, 1950, p. 711)

The following statement about the prophylactic administration of penicillin in certain cases has been approved by the American Council on Rheumatic Fever of the American Heart Association : '

Following dental extractions and removal of tonsils, and adenoids, bacteria are frequently present in the blood stream for short periods of time. In rheumatic individuals or in patients with congenital heart disease, these bacteria may lodge in the heart valves and cause bacterial endocarditis. Although a variety of bacteria cause this disease, the majority of cases are due to alpha streptococci (Streptococcus viridans). Alpha streptococci are usually resistant to sulphonamide drugs. Penicillin is, therefore,. recommended for prophylaxis as follows:

(1) Except_ in emergencies operative procedures in rheumatic individuals should be deferred until there is no clinical evidence of rheumatic activity and laboratory tests indicate that the rheumatic process is subsiding. (2)  Two doses, 0.5 ml. followed by 1.0 ml., of typhoid endotoxoid either stimulated the formation of, or increased the amount of, circulating protective antibody in the majority of 26 native mine workers, so immunized.

Protective antibody was present in the sera of nine immunized laboratory workers, nine months after the last booster dose of endotoxoid. This protective antibody was present, in spite of the absence of demonstrable Vi agglutinin. The author describes the physiological changes which oocur with cold bathing (at 0? to 24?C.). On entering cold water a sense of constriction is experienced in the chest, respiration becomes shallow and rapid, the pulse is small and rapid, and the skin blanches. This phase is soon followed by deeper breathing, easier movements, a warm sensation in the skin, which becomes bright red, and a full pulse. This feeling of well-being lasts from 10 to 15 minutes, and is followed by a cold sensation with stiffening of the muscles. When the bather leaves the water the skin feels warm but is insensitive for a time. If immersion is prolonged peripheral vasoconstriction is followed by vasodilatation and often by syncope. Certain persons with unstable vasomotor control, especially children under 16, experience severe cold, shivering, headache, and general muscle tightness. The skin has a sickly, pale, cyanotic appearance, similar to that in histamine shock. In people over 50, peripheral vasoconstriction may cause a reactive hypertension and cerebral haemorrhage. The author has seen 11 cases of hemiplegia beginning within an hour of cold bathing, and describes a case in a man of 61. He also suggests the following precautions. The period of .cold bathing. by untrained persons should not exceed 20 minutes, generalized reddening of the skin being a warning sign to leave the water. No bathing should take place for one hour after meals. Persons with respiratory infection, emphysema, or cardiac disease should not dive.

The various theories of cold anaphylaxis, imperfect digestion, the trigeminal naso-pulmonary reflex, congestion, and cramp are discussed as serological factors. A test for cold anaphylaxis is described, susceptible people showing a papular eruption when ice or ethyl chloride spray is applied to the skin. Vitamin Bi2, administered parenterally, is as effective as extracts of liver in the treatment of pernicious anaemia. However, when it is administered by mouth the presence of a potentiating agent is required for its effective utilization. In the absence of such an agent the haematopoietic responses to the oral administration of vitamin Bi?, in doses up to 100 times the minimal effective parenteral dose, are variable and unpredictable. Potentiation may be provided by known sources of intrinsic factor, such as the gastric juice of human beings and extracts of the stomach and intestines of fcwine. Extracts of stomach or duodenum of swine possess intrinsic-factor activity, the activity in duodenal mucosa of swine appearing to be greater than that contained in the entire wall of the stomach .or duodenum.

However, concentrated preparations that yield consistently effective and reliable therapeutic results when given in relatively small doses have not yet been produced. The barrier to the manufacture of dependable commercial products of this nature has been the destruction of a portion or all of the activity of the intrinsic factor during the process of concentrating gastric or duodenal substances. Until methods for preserving intrinsic-factor activity have been devised, patients with pernicious anaemia who are receiving preparations containing vitamin B? by the oral route must be observed closely, and parenteral therapy substituted, if the haematopoietic and clinical response to oral therapy is not satisfactory. The _ assumption seems wan-anted that the role of intrinsic factor must be concerned with absorption of vitamin B? by (1) altering the chemical or physical nature of the compound so that it more _ readily traverses the intestinal barrier; (2) protecting the vitamin from destruction by secretions of the digestive tract; or (3) preventing the removal of vitamin from the contents of the upper part of the gastro-intestinal tract by micro-organisms. Little  There is general agreement that only a small percentage of persons who become infected with the virus of poliomyelitis develop paralysis. In other words the lesions in the anterior horn cells are sufficiently severe to cause overt paralysis in only a small proportion of those who become infected. Rhesus monkeys injected intracerebrally with poliomyelitis virus do not invariably develop paralytic symptoms. In mice inoculated intracerebrally with one of the mouseadapted strains paralysis may develop at any period from 3 to 20 or more days after infection : very few mice survive. The , following experiments were carried out in mice in order to throw light on the mechanism responsible for this variation in susceptibility of the anterior horn cells.

Since there have been suggestions that non-specific shock precipitates the symptoms of paralysis in those infected with poliomyelitis virus, an attempt was made to determine! the effect on the onset of paralysis?and subsequent death?of giving an intravenous injection of a vaccine to mice infected intracerebrally with the Lansing strain of poliomyelitis virus.

In mice infected intracerebrally with the Lansing strain of poliomyelitis virus, an intravenous injection of either T.A.B. vaccine or diphtheria toxoid, or of pertussis vaccine plus diphtheria toxoid, causes a more rapid onset of paralysis and earlier death.

[June, 1S51

The differences in the interval between infection and death in control and in vaccine-treated mice were significant in five out of six experiments. These findings are discussed in relation to the precipitation of poliomyelitis in man by non-specific stimuli, paralysis being most severe in the limb which has been stimulated. The toxicity and therapeutic efficacy of single intravenous injections of chloroquine dihydrochloride in doses of 5.7 to 14.9 mg. of chloroquine base per kilogram of body weight have been studied in 110 patients with falciparum malaria. The drug had been administered by three techniques?by syringe, both diluted with saline (25 patients) and undiluted (10 patients), and by intravenous infusion (75 patients).

The toxic effects varied directly with the speed of injection and appeared to be related principally to a depressor effect of the drug.

Following the rapid intravenous injection of undiluted chloroquine (6.0 to 10.8 mg. of base per kilogram of body weight), the subjective reactions included dizziness, nausea, vomiting, haziness of vision, and drowsiness.

A transitory decrease in systolic blood pressure (average 26 mg. Hg.) was observed.

When administered by intravenous infusion in 500 ml.

of physiologic saline, both subjective reactions and depression of systolic blood pressure were almost completely eliminated.

No serious toxic reactions were observed in this series of patients treated with chloroquine intravenously. Single intravenous injections of chloroquine proved highly effective in terms of temperature response and disappearance time of trophozoites. Recrudescence of the disease was not observed in this series during short periods of post-treatment observations.

In view of the low order of toxicity and high degree of therapeutic efficacy, chloroquine administered intravenously is the method of choice for initiating treatment in falciparum malaria, especially in severely ill patients. Six members of one family and one of another family were affected, and there has been one death \ At the same time the District Surgeon stated that there had been a similar outbreak on Farm B in 1946 when five coloured persons had been affected and three had died. He stated further that the onset in the 1946 outbreak was explosive and so was the onset in tho present one. Both outbreaks had occurred just after the winter months.

The writer was sent to investigate this outbreak, which was possibly an outbreak of senecio poisoning. This opinion was partly confirmed by the owner of Farm A, who had observed that fowls fed the same wheat that had been fed to his coloured employees, had developed a similar condition. In addition the farmer stated that this wheat was contaminated with the. seeds of what is known in that area as the bloudissel, i.e. Argemone mexicana or Mexican poppy. He, therefore, attributed the outbreak to the seed of this plant which was present in the wheat and his conclusion was eventually found to be the correct one.

This condition is one which is fairly common in India.

At the time the writer could not obtain any literature on Argemone mexicana seed poisoning locally, and did not know that mustard oil poisoning (epidemic dropsy) was the same condition. 


120/20

These readings were taken three times.


Post-mortem findings

There were four deaths in this outbreak. The deceased were : three coloured females, aged 31, 10 and 10 years; one coloured male aged 8 years.

Autopsies were performed on two of the deceased, namely, the coloured female aged 31 and the coloured female aged 10 years.

In each instance the District Surgeon concluded that death was due to myocardial failure.

Only the main findings will be described. (Edema.?The adult coloured female had slight oedema and the coloured female child had very marked cedema of the legs.

Pericardial sac and heart.?Straw-coloured fluid was found in the pericardial sacs of both of the deceased. In the child there were small hemorrhages on the pericardium and the external surface of the heart. Large blood vessels.?These were described as congested.

Pleural sac and lungs.?In both patients these contained straw-coloured fluid varying in quantity from f to 1 pint. The lungs were grossly congested but no consolidation could be detected.

Peritoneum and peritoneal sac.?There was a small quantity of straw-coloured fluid in the peritoneal cavity of the coloured female child.

Liver, kidneys and spleen.?These were congested and in both cases there appeared to be some signs of liver degeneration. The conclusion that death was due to myocardial failure was based upon the finding of transudate in both pleural cavities, congestion of lungs, and degeneration of liver. v> Histological findings.?Section of the heart muscle shows the presence of segmentation and fragmentation. In addition the muscle cells show fatty change. The myocardial capillaries are widely patent and mostly empty.

Section of the liver tissue shows marked dilatation of the sinusoids and portal vessels. In addition there is focal fatty degeneration of the hepatic cells. The histological features are quite unlike those usually seen in the chronic venous congestion of the congestive cardiac failure, but are compatible with an acute cardiac or peripheral failure.

Section of the kidney tissue shows the presence of slight dilatation of the glomerular capillaries and renal vessels generally, which are mostly empty. In addition there is tubular necrosis largely post mortem in origin. The interstitial tissues show no significant pathological change.

Section of the stomach shows autolysis of the mucosa. Nothing significant has been noted in the submucosa or muscularis. The subseral vessels show dilatation and are empty. The above histological features taken in conjunction with the major autopsy observations of cedema of the legs, pleural and peritoneal transudates and congested liver and spleen indicate either acute myocardial or peripheral failure.

Investigations in loco.?The owner of Farm A had already formed an opinion of the cause of death when the investigations were conducted on the 12th September, 1947. Specimens of the wheat which had been consumed by the coloured persons and by the poultry on Farm A were examined and found to contain seeds which microscopically resembled those of the Mexican poppy.

A visit to a second farm (Farm C), on which there were coloured persons also reported to be ill, revealed that these victims had oedema of the legs and complained of blurred vision:

The farmer denied that his coloured labourers had eaten any wheat containing any of the seed. However, it was decided, despite the protests of the farmer, to examine the wheat which they were consuming. They had in their possession some ground wheat which was a portion of what they normally consumed. On compressing a sample in the palm of one hand with the fingers of the other, the presence of what appeared to be portions of the husks and the contents of the seed of the Mexican poppy were detected, and there is no doubt whatsoever that these patients were suffering from the same condition as those on Farm A.

An inspection was made of the two local mills and it was found that these were fitted with efficient sieves and winnowing apparatus to extract the seeds of this plant. However, it was discovered that the farmers in the district were in the habit of collecting the rejects from these mills and using rejects for the purposes of feeding their coloured. folk and poultry. It also appeared that some of the farmers, not necessarily the two farmers whose farms were investigated, were in the habit of grinding their own wheat, or alternatively of giving wheat containing the seeds to the coloured folk who ground, for their own consump-^ tion, the wheat together with the seeds.

The owner of one of these mills stated that he knew it to be a common practice for the owners of wheat to request the miller net to set the sieves because they would loose too much wheat. This resulted in the wheat, which is rejected and collected subsequently, being heavi^ contaminated with the seeds of the Mexican poppy. The contaminated wheat was then used as is described above.

Further investigations.?Samples of the wheat were analysed. The Collecre of Agriculture, Potehefstroom, found it to contain 13.5 per cent of the seed of Mexican poppy. The Chief of the Division of Botany and Plant Pathology, Pretoria, reported that the seed found in the wheat was microscopically almost certainly identical with the seed of the Mexican poppy.

(
Blades, B., Beattie, E. J., Jr., and Elias, W. S. : Journal of Thoracic Surgery, 201, 584-597, October 1950. The authors are connected with the Department of Surgery, The George Washington University School of Medicine, Washington, D.

(
Master, A. M., New York, N.Y., Dublin, L. I., and Marks, H. H. : The Journal of the American Medical


case of primary Hodgkin's disease of the lung is reported because of its rarity and rapid course.


Univereity-Bellevue Medical Centre, New York, N.Y.)The following 2 items are reproduced from Medica, Newsletter, Wa-390, dated March 1951, prepared by the American Medical Association :?The authors are connected with the Division of 
Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Post-Graduate 

Medical 

School, 

New 
York 

Normal Blood Pressure Range and its 
Clinical Implications 




blood pressure phobia' is warranted. This should change. A number of authors have emphasized that the course of hypertension in patients over 50 years of age is frequently benign. Excess mortality' in hypertensive persons diminishes with age.


Association,143, 1464143,  -1470143,  , August 1950. The authors are connected with the Cardiography Department of the Mount Sinai Hospital and the Statistical Bureau, the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.) November 1950. The author is connected with the Department of Otolaryngology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md.) Studies on Terramycin, In Vivo and In Vitro By E. A. BLISS et al.Observations on Changes taking place in the 
Upper Respiratory Tract of Patients 
under ACTH and Cortisone Therapy 

Bokdley says that when the first study on the effect 

of pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) in 
allergic diseases was planned at the Johns Hopkins 

Hospital, it was decided to have as many cases as 
possible observed from the point of view of tissue 
changes in the upper respiratory tract. 

Since the beginning of the study, in July 19-19, 

47 patients have been observed and approximately 

400 examinations have been carried out on this group. 

Routine study has included palpation of the neck 

glands, anterior rhinoscopy, examination with the 
electric nasopharyngoscope, inspection of the mouth, 

tongue, and throat, and transillumination of the sinuses. 
X-ray pictures of the sinuses were obtained on admis-
sion and at discharge. Nasal polyps were removed 

from five patients; nasopharyngeal lymphoid tissue 
was removed from 16 patients. A total of 47 biopsies 

was performed at varying intervals during the course 

of treatment. 

During exhibition of ACTH, the nasal mucous 

membranes lose their swelling, develop a slate-pink 

colour and are covered with a thin layer of clear mucus. 
Polyps lose their translucence, become pink and begin 
to shrink, in many cases disappearing completely. 
Such changes seem to be correlated with the initial 
eosinopenia developing under ACTH therapy. Changes 
have also been observed in the nasopharyngeal lym-

phoid tissue. It becomes clearly outlined from its 

surrounding structures, developing an orange-pink 
colour. Discharge around it clears up and the crypts 
become more prominent. Microscopic studies show no 
demonstrable change in such lymphoid tissue or in 
the nasal polyps. 

The changes in the nose and nasopharynx regress 

after discontinuing therapy. Within a few days the 

nasal mucosa loses its dusky appearance, and the lym-

phoid tissue returns to its former state. Nasal polyps 

return in from two weeks to two months. 

Cortisone therapy has veiy much the same effect on 

the tissue of the respiratory tract, except that no 
marked colour change was noted in the nasal mucosa 

or in the nasopharyngeal lymphoid tissue in the patients 

under such treatment. Nasal 
sprays of cortisone 

resulted in a slow but definite regression of nasal 
polyps. 

(Bordley, J. E., Baltimore, Md. : Bulletin of Johns 
Hopkins Hospital, 87, 415-424, (Abstracted from the Bulletin oj the Johns Hopkins 
Hospital, Vol. 87, September 1950, p. 171) 



involvement .
involvementThe probable sourcs of Hodgkin's disease is the peri-bronchial 

lymphatics 

in 
which 
reticular 
cells 

predominate. Many more cases of primary pulmonary 
Hodgkin's disease have perhaps occurred, but were not 
reported because post-mortem studies were not made 
or because diffuse involvement of the lymphatic system 

and other organs made it impossible to decide which 
of the organs was the primary focus. 

A Note on Aureomycin Therapy in 
Hepatic Coma 

By J. D. FARQUHAR et al. 
(Abstracted from the American Journal of Medical 

Sciences, Vol. 220, August 1950, p. 166) 




The Action of Globin Insulin compared with that of Protamine Insulin Modifications By A. R. COLWELL et al (Abstracted from the Archives of Internal Medicine, Vol. 86, August 1950, p. 178)


Vitamin D for Skin TuberculosisBy R. BRETT AND OTHER 

(From 
the 
Deutsche 

medizinische Wochenschrift, 

Vol. 74, 15th July, 1949, p. 2728; as abstracted in the 

American Review of Tuberculosis, Vol. 62, September 

1950, p. 46) 




Abstracted from the Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Vol. 44, December 1950, p. 307)The 
value 
of 
the 
histamine 
and 

piperoxan 

(benodaine) hydrochloride (formerly known as benzo-

dioxan hydrochloride) tests as diagnostic aids is 
graphically presented. 

The transabdominal approach is recommended as the 

surgical procedure of choice. 
The value of piperoxan during surgical procedures 

is stressed. 

Epinephrine and arterenol (norepinephrine) are 
compared as distinct entities. 
A pheochromocytoma should be suspected in all cases 
of hypertension. 

Oral Aureomycin in the Treatment of 
Tropical Ulcers and Cancrum Oris 

By 0. AMPOFO AND OTHER 
(


Water in ManBy E. Y. BERGER et al (Abstracted from the American Journal of Physiology,Vol. 162, 1st August, 1950, p. 318)    

cases .
casesHowever, it is suggested that where danger to the white cells from sulphapyridine exists, and where doses result in toxic symptoms of any sort, folic acid in doses of from 10 to 20 milligrams per day may enable adequate dosage to be maintained. Oral Penicillin in Children By S. A. DOXIADIS et al. (Abstracted from the British Medical Journali, 6th January, 1951, p. 16) Blood levels of penicillin after oral administration of the drug with and without an antacid have been estimated in 76 children, who were given 208 test doses.To attain a reliable bacteriostatic level of 0.06 unit per ml. three hours after the ingestion, the single dose of penicillin should be not smaller than 6,000 units per lb. of body weight?that is, 48,000 units per lb. of body weight in 24 hours.Simultaneous administration of an antacid maj' allow a reduction of this dose by approximately 50 per cent.Action of Lipotropic Substances in Liver 
Disease as Measured by Radioactive 
Phosphorus 

(Abstracted from the Journal of the American Medical 

, 

Association, Vol. 144, 30th December, 1950, p. 1566) 




There was no correlation between the O agglutinin and the protective antibody titres.^Physiology of Cold Bathing and 

its Accidents 

? 

By M. BOIGEY 

(From Presse Medicate, Vol. 58, p. 854, as abstracted 
in Abstracts of World Medicine, Vol. 9, January 1951, 

p, 47) 




Argemone mexicana Seed Poisoning By R. E. MEAKER (Abstracted from the South African Medical Journal, Vol. 24, 6th May, 1950, p. 331) On 29th August, 1947, a District Surgeon wrote to the Magistrate stating that there was an 'epidemic of a peculiar disease on Farm A, where there were seven coloured people suffering from the following symptoms : swelling of the legs; breathlessness; slight enlargement of liver; occasional diarrhoea.' 




Clinical findings : South African casesThe cases in this country were identical to the Indian cases except for the following :1. Diarrhoea and vomiting were rare. Many of the patients gave a history of constipation.2. Peripheral neuritis was present in one case. Knee jerks were absent. The peripheral neuritis was thought to have no relation to the disease under discussion.3. Skin.?Exanthemata were not usually present. One child showed a rubeolar exanthem on the trunk and thighs. A naevus was seen in only one case. 4. Glaucoma.?Eye symptoms were very common.Most of those affected complained of blurred vision, but the presence of glaucoma was not ascertained. specific gravity and the amounts of urine passed were not measured in any of the cases. Albumin was not present in the urine of five patients examined. In a sixth patient a slight trace of albumin was detected, examinations stated that this patient was probably suffering from some other condition. (b) The blood pressure readings are interesting and are submitted here without comment, for the writer has not seen such low diastolic pressures recorded and is not in a position at present to investigate medical literature to ascertain whether or not such low,diastolic pressures have been recorded :? Patient B!ood Pre*!Ure in mm. Hg.5. Blood 

pressure 

and 

urine: (a) XJrine.?Tho 

1 

.. 

120/60 

2 

.. 
.. 
.. 

130/20 

3 

.. 
.. 
.. 

130/65 

4 

.. 
..