Low frequency response of a collectively pinned vortex manifold
10 May 2001

S E Korshunov 
Institute for Theoretical Physics
Kosygina 2117940MoscowRussia

L D Landau 
Institute for Theoretical Physics
Kosygina 2117940MoscowRussia

Low frequency response of a collectively pinned vortex manifold
10 May 2001numbers: 7460Ge7476-w7425Nf
A low frequency dynamic response of a vortex manifold in a type-II superconductor can be associated with thermally activated tunneling of large portions of the manifold between pairs of metastable states. We suggest that statistical properties of these states can be verified by using the same approach for the analysis of thermal fluctuations the behaviour of which is well known. The exponent describing the frequency dependence of a linear response is found for the generic case of a vortex manifold with non-dispersive elastic moduli and also for the case of thin superconducting film in which the compressibility modulus is always non-local.

I. INTRODUCTION

In various situations the theory of weak collective pinning (for a review see Ref. [1]) treats a vortex medium in a type-II superconductor like an elastic manifold interacting with a random pinning potential. In particular, a vortex contribution to a low frequency response to an applied current (impedance) is ascribed to the classical (thermally activated) tunneling of large portions of the vortex manifold between different minima of the uncorrelated random potential [2][3][4]. In the framework of this approach the pairs of states that allow for thermally activated tunneling between them are treated as currentbiased two-level systems. Earlier analogous ideas were applied for the description of the dynamic response of spin glasses [5] and of randomly pinned dislocations and interfaces [6].

The frequency dependence of the two-level systems contribution to specific impedance z tl (ω) ≡ ρ tl (ω) + iωl tl (ω) of a type-II superconductor penetrated by external magnetic field has been found by different groups of authors [2][3][4] to be of the form: l tl (ω) ∝ [ln(1/τ 0 |ω|)] y ;

(1a) ρ tl (ω) ∝ |ω|[ln(1/τ 0 |ω|)] y−1 .

(1b) but the conclusions of these three groups on the value of the exponent y are not compatible with each other. Comparison shows that the discrepancy appears because the calculation of Fisher, Fisher and Huse [2] is based on a semi-phenomenological conjecture that a contribution of an active two-level system to inductance can be estimated (from above) by replacing this two-level system with an insulating hole of the same volume. This assumption does not take into account that the motion of vortices inside of a two-level system leads to a change of a phase distribution in superconductor (and of the energy of electric current in it) also outside of the limits of this particular two-level system. Accordingly, it turns out to be in direct contradiction with the explicit expression for a two-level system contribution to impedance derived by Koshelev and Vinokur [4] and used in their calculation of z tl (ω), and naturally leads to a different value of y. The less pronounced descrepancy between the results of Ref. [3] and Ref. [4] can be explained, in particular, by the difference in assumptions on statistics of metastable states.

In the present work we revisit this problem following the more reliable (as is demonstrated below) approach of Koshelev and Vinokur [4]. We start by deriving the value of the exponent y for the generic case of a vortex manifold with a single elastic modulus (but with arbitrary dimensionality). Any more complex system with different (but local) elastic moduli will be characterized by the same value of y. In Ref. [4] the value of y in non-dispersive system has been found only for the particular case of a single vortex pinning.

We then suggest a new independent way to check the validity of the numerous assumptions involved in calculation of the two-level systems contribution to a linear dynamic response by using the same set of assumptions for calculation of another quantity (the amplitude of thermal fluctuations), which on the other hand can be calculated exactly, because in the framework of a random manifold description it has to be the same as in absence of disorder [7]. It turns out that application of the assumptions used in the previous calculation indeed produces an answer which is in agreement with the well known result for the pure case.

The possibility of the additional check turns out to be very useful when we address the case of a thin superconducting film in which the compressibility modulus c 11 of vortex manifold is always non-local. It allows to draw some conclusions about size and shape distribution of two-level systems which otherwise would be unavailable. Inclusion of these conclusions into calculation leads [for c 11 (q) ∝ 1/q 2 ] to very weak (double logarithmic) frequency dependence of l tl (ω) corresponding to y = 0.

The case of a thin superconducting film is also of a special interest in relation with recent experimental investigation of z(ω) in ultrathin YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 films [8,9]. Note that in a two-dimensional (2D) geometry with complete penetration of the magnetic field the frequencydependent specific (sheet) impedance directly determines the response of a film to external field, whereas in the case of a bulk superconductor it has to be extracted from the surface impedance.

In all the cases we have considered l tl (ω) diverges for ω → 0. Thus the important consequence of our results is that the random manifold approximation can not be sufficient for the description of a truely superconducting vortex glass phase [10,11] with finite superfluid density.

The outline of the article can be summarized as follows. In Sec. II the random manifold problem is briefly introduced and some situations when it is appropriate for the description of a vortex manifold in a superconductor are specified. In Sec. III the statistical properties of the metastable states which have to be taken into account in the framework of the two-level system approach are discussed. In Sec. IV the application of this approach to calculation of the vortex medium contribution to impedance is presented in the systematic form for the non-dispersive case.

In Sec. V the same approach is used for the analysis of thermal fluctuations. We show that (with the same set of assumptions as used earlier in calculation of a linear dynamic response) it indeed produces an answer which is consistent with expectations based on consideration of pure system.

Sec. VI is devoted to the discussion of a thin superconducting film in which the non-locality of the compressibility modulus is always important. We show that if one assumes that the dominant two-level systems in this case are strongly anisotropic (as suggested by the energy balance estimates used in the analysis of the non-linear creep [11][12][13][14]), the expression for thermal fluctuations amplitude turns out to be convergent in contrast to its logarithmic divergence in the pure system. The only way to resolve this contradiction consists in assuming that the statistics of metastable states is dominated by the presence of hierarchical sequence of quasi-isotropic two-level systems. The same distribution is then used for the calculation of the components of z tl (ω). In Sec. VII the results are summarized and discussed.


II. RANDOM MANIFOLD PROBLEM

An elastic manifold (with internal dimension D) interacting with a random pinning potential can be described by the Hamiltonian:
H = H el + H d = 1 2 d D x 1 d D x 2 [G −1 0 (x 1 − x 2 )] ab u a (x 1 )u b (x 2 ) + d D x v[x, u(x)](2)
where the N -dimensional vector u(x) ≡ u a (x) is the displacement of the manifold. The first term in Eq. (2) describes (in a most general form) the elastic energy of the manifold and the second the energy of its interaction with a random pinning potential v(x, u). The simplest assumption would consist in assuming that the random potential v(x, u) has a Gaussian distribution with
v(x, u) d = 0 (3) v(x 1 , u 1 )v(x 2 , u 2 ) d = δ(x 1 − x 2 )w(u 1 − u 2 )(4)
Here and further on the angular brackets with subscript d stand for the average over disorder, and with subscript th for the thermal average. We discuss only the case of a short-ranged random potential correlation function w(u).

In the simplest situation (which would imply, in particular, full isotropy and absence of dispersion) the first term in Eq. (2) can be chosen in the form
H el = J 2 d D x ∂u a ∂x β 2(5)
with a single elastic modulus J.

The physical systems which can be described by the Hamiltonian of the form (2) include, in particular, a domain wall in a 2D or 3D Ising type ferromagnet/antiferromagnet (D = 1, 2; N = 1); a dislocation in a crystal (D = 1, N = 2); a single vortex line in a large area Josephson junction (D = 1, N = 1) or bulk superconductor (D = 1, N = 2); a vortex medium in superconducting film (D = 2, N = 2) or bulk superconductor (D = 3, N = 2), a layered superconductor with in-plane field (D = 3, N = 1) or a large area Josephson junction with in-plane field (D = 2, N = 1). In all these cases the random pinning potential is automatically provided by impurities present in any solid or/and by geometrical inhomogeneities.

Note, however, that the random manifold approximation assumes the energy of the interaction with the inhomogeneities to be uncorrelated for different displacements, whereas the energy of the interaction of an ideal vortex crystal with the inhomogeneities does not change if the vortex crystal is shifted as a whole by one lattice constant. Thus, the area of applicability of the random manifold approximation for the description of vortex crystal pinning is resticted. One can use this approach if the relevant displacements do not exceed the lattice period (Larkin regime [15]) or when the ordering in the vortex crystal is destroyed by the presence of defects whose motion with respect to the vortex manifold is dynamically frozen in comparison with the motion of the manifold itself.

Recent experiments of the Neuchâtel group on ultrathin YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 films [9] have demonstrated a crossover to the regime in which the contribution to resistivity associated with the motion of point-like defects is negligible in comparison with the contribution which can be ascribed to collective pinning behaviour.


III. LOW ENERGY METASTABLE STATES

The low-frequency dynamics of a weakly pinned elastic manifold can be associated with the thermally activated tunneling of large domains of the manifold between different minima of the random potential [6]. In a simple system with a discrete spectrum only the tunneling between the ground state and the first excited state is of importance at low temperatures, thus it can be reduced to a two-level system. For an infinite manifold one should take into account that such two-level systems appear at all scales and form a hierarchical structure, i. e. if some domain of the manifold can tunnel between some states one also has to consider the possibility of tunneling of smaller domains inside this area between different pairs of states. Each of such two-level systems can be characterized by its (linear) size L, its volume V ∼ L D (untill specified we discuss the simplest isotropic case with a single non-dispersive elastic modulus), the typical vortex displacement between the two states u, which, for example, can be defined by
u 2 = 1 V d D x u 2 (x),(6)
the energy difference between the two states ∆ and the energy barrier U which has to be overcome for moving the manifold (the vortex bundle) from one of the two states to the other. The universality hypothesis introduced by Ioffe and Vinokur [6] suggests that for each length scale L there should exist only one relevant energy scale E(L) such that, in particular, the typical values of ∆ and U for a system of size L are proportional to E(L). The magnitude of E(L) can be then estimated by estimating the elastic energy associated with the displacement of the vortex bundle of the size L:
E(L) ∼ JV (L) u 2 (L) L 2 .(7)
If the scale dependence of the typical displacement u(L) is given by u(L) ∝ L ζ (where ζ is usually called the wandering exponent) Eq. (7) leads to E(L) ∝ L χ with
χ = 2ζ + D − 2.(8)
On the other hand Fisher, Fisher and Huse [2] have suggested that the scale dependence of the typical energy barrier U (L) can be described by another exponent ψ not necessariliy coinsiding with χ (ψ ≥ χ). For the sake of generality in the following we will keep (for a while) the separate notation for ψ, although we will assume that the typical value of ∆ (for the given length scale L) can be estimated with the help of Eq. (7). Various properties of the manifold depend also on the form of the size distribution function ν(L) of the twolevel systems. The hierarchical distribution implies that any two-level system can include smaller two-level systems whose size differ from that of the "parent" two-level system by some numerical factor of the order of one. Thus the ratio of the typical "neighboring" length scales has to be more or less constant across the whole length-scale range involved [5]. This is compatible with a uniform distribution of the logarithms of the length scales. However, for each length scale one should also include the factor 1/V (L) proportional to the largest possible concentration of non-overlapping two-level systems of size L. Thus ν(L) has to be of the form
dL ν(L) ∝ dL L 1 V (L)(9)
Koshelev and Vinokur [4] have introduced the first factor (imposed by the hierarchical structure) in the r.h.s. of Eq. (9) in the form dU/U (without any explanation), which for U (L) algebraically dependent on L is equivalent to dL/L, whereas in Ref. [3] the hierarchical nature of the size distribution of two-level systems has not been taken into account.


IV. TWO-LEVEL SYSTEMS CONTRIBUTION TO IMPEDANCE

The contribution of the two-level systems to the specific impedance of a superconductor is given [4] by
z tl (ω) = n γ T (V u) 2 cosh 2 (∆/2T ) iω 1 + iτ ω d ; γ = B 2 4c 2 (10)
where n is the concentration of such systems, B is the magnetic induction and T is the temperature, whereas V , u, ∆ and τ are parameters characterizing a particular two-level system: V is the volume in which the vortices are displaced (or the area in the case of a 2D superconductor), u is the average displacement of the vortices inside the bundle in the direction of current-induced force and ∆ is the difference in energy between the two states. The relaxation time τ describing the rate of the thermally activated (incoherent) tunneling between the two states depends exponentially:
τ = τ 0 exp(U/T )(11)
on the barrier U separating them. If one splits z tl (ω) into real and imaginary parts:
z tl (ω) = ρ tl (ω) + iωl tl (ω)(12)
and assumes that the average over disorder can be estimated by taking for each length scale the typical (scaledependent) values of all the parameters involved, the expression for the two-level systems contribution to specific impedance l tl (ω) is reduced to
l tl (ω) ∼ γ T Lω Lc dL ν(L)V 2 (L)u 2 (L) cosh −2 (∆/2T ) d (L)(13)
Due to the exponentially fast increase of τ with L, instead of including in Eq. (13) the factor
1 1 + [τ (L)ω] 2(14)
the integration in it is cut off (at the upper limit) at a frequency-dependent length scale L ω defined by the rela-
tion τ (L ω )ω ∼ 1. For U (L) ∝ ǫ(L/L c ) ψ L ω ∝ L c T ǫ ln 1 τ 0 |ω| 1/ψ(15)
The integration interval in Eq. (13) is limited from below by the (temperature dependent) collective pinning length L c [1] which determines the boundary between the different regimes of fluctuations. At length scales lower than L c the manifold can be considered as fluctuating within one of the minima of the (thermally renormalized) random potential, whereas for larger scales only the jumps between different valleys of the potential are of importance. The contribution to l(ω) from length scales smaller than L c has a finite limit for ω → 0.

Since ∆ is the difference in energy between the two spatially separated states in the uncorrelated random potential, the distribution function p(∆) can be expected to remain finite for ∆ → 0 (the broad distribution assumption [5]). The last factor in the r.h.s. of Eq. (13) (the fraction of "thermally active" two-level systems) can be then estimated [5,6] as
cosh −2 (∆/2T ) d (L) ∼ T ∆(L)(16)
where ∆(L) is the typical value of ∆ for the length scale L [for example the width of p(∆)]. Note that (for any scale) only small fraction of two-level systems is assumed to be not frozen and therefore involved in linear dynamic response (or thermal fluctuations). Thus they are expected to be well separated from each other, which justifies neglecting their interaction. Substitution of Eq. (16) into Eq. (13) leads to
l tl (ω) ∼ γ Lω Lc dL ν(L) V 2 (L)u 2 (L) ∆(L)(17)
According to the universality hypothesis [6] ∆(L) has to be of the same order of magnitude as the elastic contribution to energy estimated in Eq. (7), which for u ∼ u gives:
V 2 (L)u 2 (L) ∆(L) ∼ V (L) L 2 J(18)
Substitution of Eqs. (9) and (18) into Eq. (17) then leads to
l tl (ω) ∝ γ J Lω Lc dL L L 2 ∝ γ J L 2 c T ǫ ln 1 τ 0 |ω| y ,(19)
where y = 2/ψ. With the same assumptions that have been used for the derivation of Eq. (19) the two-level system contribution to the resistivity is given by
ρ tl (ω) ∝ γ J ∞ Lc dL L τ (L)ω 2 1 + [τ (L)ω] 2(20)
Alternatively ρ tl (ω) can be restored from l tl (ω) with the help of the simplified form [16,17] of the Kramers-Kronig relation:
ρ tl (ω) ≈ −|ω| π 2 d d ln |ω| l tl (ω)(21)
which is applicable for l tl (ω) = f (ln |ω|). Both methods give
ρ tl (ω) ∝ γ J T ǫ y |ω| ln 1 τ 0 |ω| y−1(22)
It can be shown that y is equal to 2/ψ not only for the simplest case of a single elastic modulus, but for the general case of non-dispersive moduli. In a bulk superconductor at large enough scales (which corresponds to low enough frequencies) all elastic moduli become local. The case of a thin film in which the strong dispersion of the compressibility modulus is unavoidable is considered in Sec. VI.

For finite values of the current density j Eq. (10), which has been the starting point of our calculation, is applicable only if V uB/c is small in comparison with temperature. This determines the current dependence of the length scale L j ∝ (T /j) 1 D+ζ at which the integration in Eq. (13) should be cut off if L j ≪ L ω . In that case the growth of l tl (ω) with decreasing ω saturates at l tl (ω = 0, j) ∝ (T /j) 2 D+ζ .


V. COMPARISON OF TWO APPROACHES TO CALCULATION OF THERMAL FLUCTUATIONS AMPLITUDE

In the present work we suggest an independent way to check the validity of the two-level system approach for the description of the linear dynamic response of a collectively pinned manifold. This can be done because in the random manifold problem the static irreducible correlation function
u a (x 1 )u b (x 2 ) ≡ [u a (x 1 ) − u a (x 1 ) th ] ×[u b (x 2 ) − u b (x 2 ) th ] th d(23)
(which can be associated with thermal fluctuations) according to Shultz et al [7] should be exactly the same as in the absence of disorder:
u a (x 1 )u b (x 2 ) = T G ab 0 (x 1 − x 2 ).(24)
(a brief derivation can be found in Appendix). An analogous relation for the case of periodic behaviour of w(u) with respect to displacement has been suggested by Dotsenko and Feigel'man [18].

In the presence of disorder the long-distance behaviour of the correlation function (23) has to be mediated by the two-level systems. Therefore, the investigation of thermal fluctuations in terms of the two-level system approach and comparison of the result with well known result for the pure system allows to check the validity of different conjectures involved in the calculation of a linear dynamic response. Instead of considering the dependence of u a (x 1 )u b (x 2 ) on |x 1 − x 2 | one can alternatively investigate the dependence of u 2 on the size of the system L 0 , which also has to be the same as in the pure case. For a single two-level system with the energy gap ∆ the amplitude of the thermal fluctuations of the displacement is given by
u 2 ≡ (u − u th ) 2 th = (u 1 − u 2 ) 2 4 cosh 2 (∆/2T )(25)
For a collectively pinned manifold the dominant largescale contribution to u 2 (x) should come from the twolevel systems which include the point x and [on the same assumptions as have been used while calculating l tl (ω) and ρ tl (ω)] can be estimated as
u 2 tl ∼ T L0 Lc dL ν(L) V (L)u 2 (L) ∆(L)(26)
where the upper limit of integration is now imposed by the size of the system and [in accordance with Eq. (16)] cosh −2 (∆/2T ) d has been already replaced with T /∆(L). Substitution of Eqs. (7) and (9) into Eq. (26) then gives
u 2 tl ∝ T J L0 Lc dL L D−1(27)
which, if compared with the trivial result for the case without disorder (for which u 2 ≡ u 2 th ):
u 2 ≈ T J |q α |>π/L0 d D q (2π) D 1 q 2(28)
reproduces all its important features. Namely, the r.h.s. of Eq. (27) (i) contains the correct prefactor T /J; (ii) demonstrates the correct dependence on the size of the system:
u 2 ∝    L 2−D 0 D < 2 ln(L 0 ) D = 2 L 2−D c − L 2−D 0 D > 2(29)
and (iii) the system-size dependent contribution to u 2 tl does not depend on the unknown disorder-related parameters L c and ǫ.

This allows to conclude that different assumptions which have been used while calculating l tl (ω), ρ tl (ω) and u 2 tl [the universality hypothesis, the hierarchical distribution of two-level systems, the broad distribution assumption for p(∆)] were indeed chosen in a reasonable way.


VI. THIN SUPERCONDUCTING FILM IN PERPENDICULAR MAGNETIC FIELD

The long-range interaction of vortices makes the compressibility modulus c 11 of a bulk superconductor strongly non-local for the wave-lengths smaller than the magnetic field penetration depth λ. In a thin superconducting film the penetration depth Λ is strongly increased in comparison with that of a bulk superconductor: Λ = 2λ 2 /d [19], where d ≪ λ is the thickness of the film. Therefore, in a thin film the dependence c 11 (q) ≈ c 11 /q 2 (where c 11 ≈ B 2 /2πΛ ∝ c 66 a −2 ) resulting from a non-screened vortex-vortex interaction holds in a much wider range of length scales than in a bulk superconductor. Here c 66 ≈ Φ 0 B/32π 2 Λ is the shear modulus of the film (which in contrast to c 11 is always local), Φ 0 = hc/2e is the flux quantum and a −2 = B/Φ 0 is the vortex density.

If one tries to shift a vortex bundle in such a system (in search of the next potential minimum), it turns out that the optimal shape of the bundle is strongly anisotropic [11][12][13][14] with the size in the direction of the displacement L much larger than the size in the perpendicular direction L ⊥ . The optimal relation between L and L ⊥ can be found by minimizing the total elastic energy for the given area of a bundle S ∝ LL ⊥ . Minimization (for fixed S) of E com + E sh where [14,20] 
E com ∼ c 11 S 2 u L 2(30)
and
E sh ∼ c 66 S u L ⊥ 2 (31) or a simple comparison of E com with E sh for u ∼ u gives L ∝ L 3 ⊥ a 2 ≫ L ⊥ .(32)
Note, however, that when the energy scale defined by Eq.

(31) is used as an estimate for ∆, the factor Su 2 /∆ in the 2D version of Eq. (26) is reduced to
Su 2 ∆ ∼ L 2 ⊥ c 66(33)
for arbitrary relation between L and L ⊥ . The calculation of Sec. V has confirmed that the form of the size distribution of two-level systems can be correctly estimated by assuming that they do not overlap with each other, but can be situated inside each other forming hierarchical structures. Such estimate is consistent with the conjecture that the number of metastable states to which a particular domain of a manifold can tunnel (without moving a much larger part of the manifold) is always of the order of one [6]. In what follows we assume that the same property holds also in presence of dispersion.

The most optimistic estimate for ν(L) can be then obtained by assuming that for all scales the strongly anisotropic two-level systems are arranged in the most advantageous way to cover all the area available, which corresponds to
dL ν(L) ⇒ dL L 1 LL ⊥ .(34)
The more realistic estimate should probably take into account that independent anisotropic two-level systems are likely to have uncorrelated orientations, so the requirement of non-overlapping will lead to ν(L) ∝ L −3 . After substitution of Eq. (33) into the integral [of the form (26)] defining u 2 tl one obtains that for L ∝ L 3 ⊥ it is convergent at the upper limit:
u 2 tl ∝ T c 66 ∞ Lc dL L L ⊥ L < ∞(35)
even for the optimistic form of ν(L) given by Eq. (34). On the other hand, we know that in a pure system the contribution of the transverse modes (which depends only on the shear modulus which is local) leads to the logarithmic divergence of u 2 ≡ u 2 th . It follows from the results of Schulz et al [7] that in the presence of disorder the same behaviour should be mediated by the large-scale two-level systems.

A plausible way to explain the logarithmic divergence of u 2 tl consists in assuming that the film should contain not only anisotropic two-level systems with L ≫ L ⊥ , but also an hierarchical sequence of quasi-isotropic twolevel systems in which L ⊥ is of the same order as L. For such two-level systems the requirement of the balance between the different contributions to the elastic energy (E com ∼ E sh ) leads to u ∝ (a/L)u ≪ u, which means that the displacement of the vortices in quasi-isotropic bundles is mostly of rotational type.

The linear dynamic response has to be associated with the same degrees of freedom as are taken into account in the calculation of the static thermal fluctuations. However, z tl (ω) can not be obtained by direct application of the fluctuation-dissipation theorem to u 2 tl , since these two quantities include different linear combinations of the degrees of freedom involved. Nonetheless, when calculating z tl (ω) one should take into account the same set of two-level systems as for the calculation of u 2 tl , in contrast to the case of the non-linear creep for which the shape of the moving vortex bundles is imposed by the applied current [12][13][14].

Application of the expression (30) for E com as an estimate for ∆ shows that the factor S 2 u 2 /∆ in the 2D version of Eq. (17) does not depend on L ⊥ and can be estimanted as L 2 /c 11 ∼ L 2 Λ/B 2 . For the hierarchical sequence of quasi-isotropic two-level systems with ν(L) ∝ L −3 this leads to the extremely weak (double logarithmic) frequency dependence of
l tl (ω) ∝ γΛ B 2 Lω Lc dL L ∝ Λ c 2 ln T ǫ ln 1 τ 0 |ω| ,(36)
which can hardly be expected to be resolvable from the background superfluid contribution l 0 in the experiments probing the low-frequency response of thin films. However, substitution of Eq. (36) into Eq. (21) gives
ρ tl (ω) ∝ Λ c 2 |ω| ln(1/τ 0 |ω|)(37)
which, in contrast to Eq. (36), does not exhibit any specially weak dependence on ω. Note that two unknown disorder-related parameters L c and ǫ as well as the magnetic field dependence have dropped out from Eq. (37). The presence of the hierarchical sequence of quasiisotropic two-level systems still leaves enough place for more optimal anisotropic two-level systems with L ⊥ ≪ L. Although they do not contribute much to u 2 tl , their contributions to the components of z tl (ω) could be of importance. However, their size distribution will be forced by the presence of hierarchical sequence of quasi-isotropic two-level systems to be of the same form ν(L) ∝ L −3 and, therefore, their contribution to l tl (ω) and ρ tl (ω) will be of the same form as given by Eqs. (36)-(37).

In a thin superconducting film the compressibility modulus c 11 is non-local not only for Λq ≫ 1 where c 11 (q) ≈ c 11 /q 2 , but also for Λq ≪ 1 where c 11 (q) ≈ B 2 /2πq. An analogous calculation for such form of c 11 (q) produces for the components of z tl (ω) the answers of the form (1) with y = 1/ψ.


VII. CONCLUSION

In the present work we argue that thermal fluctuations of a collectively pinned vortex manifold are determined by the same degrees of freedom (related to thermally activated tunneling between the pairs of low-lying metastable states -two-level systems) as its low-frequency linear dynamic response. Therefore one can use the known dependence of thermal fluctuations amplitude on the size of the system (which has to be exactly the same as in absence of disorder [7]) for checking the consistency of the conjectures which are used in the calculation of the linear dynamic response. The set of the assumptions which are necessary to produce the correct answer for the thermal fluctuations amplitude includes, in particular, the conjecture on hierarchical distribution of two-level systems (which means that they can be situated inside each other) and also the universality hypothesis. If the same set of assumptions is used for the calculation of a vortex manifold contribution to impedance its frequency dependence (in absence of dispersion) is given by Eqs. (1) with y = 2/ψ, where ψ is the exponent (which depends both on D and N ) describing the scale dependence of the typical energy barrier U (L).

The same result is also applicable in the limit af small fields, when one can neglect the interaction between different vortices and treat each vortex separately as 1D manifold. In that case one should take the value of ψ corresponding to D = 1.

Note that in the framework of our analysis the universality hypothesis has been used only for the estimate of ∆(L). If (as suggested by Ioffe and Vinokur [6]) it is further assumed that the same energy scale can be used for the estimate of U (L), the value of ψ will coinside with χ given by Eq. (8). Different approaches including scaling arguments [11,21], functional renormalization group [22,23] and a self-consistent calculation incorporating replica symmetry breaking [24] lead to
ζ = 4 − D 4 + βN(38)
with 1/2 ≤ β ≤ 1. For the case of thin superconducting film (D=2, N=2) or bulk superconductor (D=3, N=2) Eqs. (8) and (38) give the values of χ in the interval from 2/3 to 7/5, that is around 1. Koshelev and Vinokur [4] have found the value of the exponent y only for the particular values of ζ and χ corresponding to D = 1 and N = 2 and not in the general form as above. In Ref. [3] the hierarchical nature of the size distribution (of the two-level systems) has not been taken into account and the estimate of ρ tl (ω) has been obtained without integrating over the scales, which has led (in our notation) to y = 2/ψ + 1. As has been already mentioned in the Introduction the analogous calculation in Ref. [2] has been performed using the assumption which is in contradiction with Eq. (10) and therefore can not be used for comparison.

Note that l tl (ω) diverges in the limit of ω → 0, which corresponds to supression of superfluid density [inversely proportional to lim ω→0 l(ω)]. Thus the results of this work are not in agreement with the popular point of view that random manifold approach provides an exhaustive description of dynamic properties of a truely superconducting vortex glass phase (which is supposed to be formed at low temperatures due to pinning [10,11]), at least if superconductivity is understood as the ability to carry a superconducting (non-dissipative) current and not only as the vanishing of the linear resistance. Our analysis suggests that in the framework of random manifold approach the finite value of l tl (ω → 0) is incompatible with the correct scale dependence of u 2 tl . Therefore one has to conclude that the accurate description of a vortex glass phase which can carry a superconducting current (if such phase exists at all) requires a more sophisticated treatment than the description of vortex medium in terms of an elastic manifold interacting with a random potential. For example, it possibly should take into account that some of the defects of a vortex lattice are generated by a disorder and can not freely move with a vortex manifold.

However, both in the case of Larkin regime and in the case of dynamically frozen thermally excited defects (frozen vortex liquid regime) the frequency range of the applicability of the random manifold description of a vortex medium in a superconductor is anyway restricted from below. Moreover, the two-level system contribution to impedance l tl (ω) is only logarithmic in ω and in a practical situation may be negligible in comparison with "bare" impedance l 0 down to exponentially low frequencies.

On the other hand ρ tl (ω) produces in the low frequency limit the dominant contribution to the resistivity in comparison with the contributions related with the normal channel conductance and with the oscillations of manifold within each minimum of a random potential, both of which at low frequencies are proportional to ω 2 .

In thin superconducting films the compressibility modulus of vortex manifold is always non-local. This leads to the strong anisotropy of the vortex bundles participating in the non-linear creep [11][12][13][14]. However our analysis has shown that the correct length-scale dependence of thermal fluctuations amplitude requires the presence of a hierarchical sequence of quasi-isotropic two-level systems. A linear dynamic response (which has to be calculated assuming that the applied current does not change the properties of the system) produced by the same set of the two-level systems corresponds to y = 1/ψ for c 11 (q) ∝ 1/q (Λq ≪ 1) and to y = 0 [with l tl (ω) still diverging at ω → 0 but only as a double logarithm] for c 11 (q) ∝ 1/q 2 (Λq ≫ 1). The contribution from the more optimal anisotropic two-level systems can be expected to be of the same form. In both regimes [c 11 (q) ∝ 1/q and c 11 (q) ∝ 1/q 2 ] the value of the magnetic field B drops out from the expression for z tl (ω).

Although in thin films the dc resistivity is always finite due to thermally activated motion of point-like defects of vortex lattice (vacancies, interstitials, dislocation pairs) [12,13], the collective pinning behaviour has been found to be accessible to experimental observation [9] in the range of frequencies/temperatures where the activated contribution to resistivity is too small.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work has been supported in part by the Program "Scientific Schools of the Russian Federation" (grant No. 00-15-96747) and by the Swiss National Science Foundation. The author is grateful to G. Blatter, V. B. Geshken-
 APPENDIX:In the case of a random manifold described by Eqs.(2)-(4) it is possible to show that the irreducible correlation function of the form (23) remains the same as in absence of disorder[7]. To this end one can express this correlation function through the second derivativeof the (disorder-averaged) free energỹwith respect to the coefficients in the auxilary (source) terms added to the HamiltoniañIn order to calculateF it is convenient to shift the variables u(x) (over which the integration in the partition function is performed) according towhich allows to split the non-random contribution tõ H{u a } into two terms: H el {u a * } + E(s a 1 , s a 2 ), the first of which does not depend on s a 1,2 and the seconddoes not depend on u a * (x). On the other hand the distribution function of the random potential v(x, u) is not affected by the shift defined by Eq. (A4). Therefore the free energy defined by Eq. (A2) differs from its value for original problem (that is for s a 1 = s a 2 = 0) only by addition of the term E(s a 1 , s a 2 ), differentiation of which leads to Eq.(24).
Martinoli for interesting discussions and useful comments. P , and P. Martinoli for interesting discussions and use- ful comments.

. G Blatter, M V Feigel&apos;man, V B Geshkenbein, A I Larkin, V M Vinokur, Rev. Mod. Phys. 661125G. Blatter, M. V. Feigel'man, V. B. Geshkenbein, A. I. Larkin and V. M. Vinokur, Rev. Mod. Phys. 66, 1125 (1994).

. D S Fisher, M P A Fisher, D A Huse, Phys. Rev. B. 43130D. S. Fisher, M. P. A. Fisher and D. A. Huse, Phys. Rev. B 43, 130 (1991).

. K H Fischer, T Nattermann, Phys. Rev. B. 4310372K. H. Fischer and T. Nattermann, Phys. Rev. B 43, 10372 (1991).

. A E Koshelev, V M Vinokur, Physica C. 173465A. E. Koshelev and V. M. Vinokur, Physica C 173, 465 (1991).

. D S Fisher, D A Huse, Phys. Rev. Lett. 561601D. S. Fisher and D. A. Huse, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 1601 (1986);

. Phys. Rev. B. 38386Phys. Rev. B 38, 386 (1988).

. L B Ioffe, V M Vinokur, J. Phys. C. 206149L. B. Ioffe and V. M. Vinokur, J. Phys. C 20, 6149 (1987).

. U Schulz, J Villain, E Brézin, H Orland, J. Stat. Phys. 511U. Schulz, J. Villain, E. Brézin and H. Orland, J. Stat. Phys. 51, 1 (1988).

. M Calame, S Blaser, Ch Leemann, P Martinoli, Physica B. 891M. Calame, S. Blaser, Ch. Leemann and P. Martinoli, Physica B 284-288, 891 (2000).

. M Calame, S E Korshunov, Ch Leemann, P Martinoli, Phys. Rev. Lett. 863630M. Calame, S. E. Korshunov, Ch. Leemann and P. Mar- tinoli, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3630 (2001).

. M P A Fisher, Phys. Rev. Lett. 621415M. P. A. Fisher, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 1415 (1989).

. M V Feigel&apos;man, V B Geshkenbein, A I Larkin, V M Vinokur, Phys. Rev. Lett. 632303M. V. Feigel'man, V. B. Geshkenbein, A. I. Larkin and V. M. Vinokur, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 2303 (1989).

. M V Feigel&apos;man, V B Geshkenbein, A I Larkin, Physica C. 167177M. V. Feigel'man, V. B. Geshkenbein and A. I. Larkin, Physica C 167, 177 (1990).

. V M Vinokur, P H Kes, A E Koshelev, Physica C. 16829V. M. Vinokur, P. H. Kes and A. E. Koshelev, Physica C 168, 29 (1990).

. V M Vinokur, P H Kes, A E Koshelev, Physica C. 248179V. M. Vinokur, P. H. Kes and A. E. Koshelev, Physica C 248, 179 (1995).

. A I Larkin, Zh. Eksp. i Teor. Fiz. 581466Sov. Phys. -JETPA. I. Larkin, Zh. Eksp. i Teor. Fiz. 58, 1466 (1970) [Sov. Phys. -JETP 31, 784 (1970)].

. L Lundgren, P Svedlindh, O Beckman, J. Magn. Magn. Mat. 2533L. Lundgren, P. Svedlindh and O. Beckman, J. Magn. Magn. Mat. 25, 33 (1981).

. E Pytte, Y Imry, Phys. Rev. B. 351465E. Pytte and Y. Imry, Phys. Rev. B 35, 1465 (1987).

Feigel'man. S Vik, M V Dotsenko, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 861544Sov. Phys. -JETPVik. S. Dotsenko and M. V. Feigel'man, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 86, 1544 (1984) [Sov. Phys. -JETP 59, 904 (1984)].

J Pearl, Low Temperature Physics -LT9. J. D. Daunt, D. O. Edwards, F. J. Milford and M. YacubNew YorkPlenum Press566J. Pearl, in Low Temperature Physics -LT9, edited by J. D. Daunt, D. O. Edwards, F. J. Milford and M. Yacub (Plenum Press, New York, 1965), p. 566.

14] differs from Eq. (30) by the additional logarithmic factor, which we believe to be unjustified. If the size of a moving bundle is small in comparison with the screening length of the logarithmic vortex-vortex interaction, the compression energy associated with the displacement can not depend on this length. This can be shown, for example. The analogous estimate for Ecom in Ref. by integration by parts in Eq. (4) of Ref. [14The analogous estimate for Ecom in Ref. [14] differs from Eq. (30) by the additional logarithmic factor, which we believe to be unjustified. If the size of a moving bun- dle is small in comparison with the screening length of the logarithmic vortex-vortex interaction, the compres- sion energy associated with the displacement can not de- pend on this length. This can be shown, for example, by integration by parts in Eq. (4) of Ref. [14].

. M Kardar, J. Appl. Phys. 613601M. Kardar, J. Appl. Phys. 61, 3601 (1987).

. D S Fisher, Phys. Rev. Lett. 561964D. S. Fisher, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 1964 (1986);

. L Balentz, D S Fisher, Phys. Rev. B. 485959L. Balentz and D. S. Fisher, Phys. Rev. B 48, 5959 (1993).

. T Halpin-Healy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62442T. Halpin-Healy, Phys. Rev. Lett 62, 442 (1989);

. Phys. Rev. A. 42711Phys. Rev. A 42, 711 (1990).

. M Mézard, G Parisi, J. Phys. A. 231229M. Mézard and G. Parisi, J. Phys. A 23, L1229 (1990);

. J. Phys. (France) I. 1809J. Phys. (France) I 1, 809 (1991).