RSSB | November 2022
1
TN2301 issue 1
Standard the technical note is related to
GMRT2131 issue one Audibility and Visibility of Trains.
Who is this technical note aimed at?
This technical note is aimed to support all of the following:
•
Project entities making a change to the front-end colour or lamp arrangement of rolling stock or
building new rolling stock.
•
Railway undertakings (RUs) intending to introduce different (new or cascaded) rolling stock to a route
or to operate rolling stock on a route following a change to its front-end colour or lamp arrangement.
•
Infrastructure managers (IMs) and other consultees affected by the process of integrating different or
new rolling stock or rolling stock that has undergone a change to its front-end colour or lamp
arrangement, with the operations of a route.
© Copyright 2022 Rail Safety and Standards Board Limited
Disclaimer:
This technical note has been produced by, and represents the view of, the Rail Safety and Standards Board. It
provides interpretation and explanation of existing requirements, guidance or related legislation and does not
change existing content or alter its application. It is a non-binding document which has been developed
outside of the scope of the Railway Group Standards Code and the Standards Manual.
Users of documents published by the Rail Safety and Standards Board are reminded of the need to consider
their own responsibilities to ensure health and safety at work and their own duties under health and safety
legislation. The Rail Safety and Standards Board does not warrant that compliance with all or any documents
published by the Rail Safety and Standards Board is sufficient in itself to ensure safe systems of work or
operation or to satisfy such responsibilities to duties.









RSSB | November 2022
2
TN2301 issue 1
Why has this technical note been issued?
Since publication of GMRT2131 issue one in 2015, RUs have reported difficulty following the guidance on
introducing rail vehicles without front-end yellow warning panels onto the GB mainline railway, and IMs have
reported concerns about the approach taken by RUs when introducing rail vehicles without front-end yellow
warning panels.
When new, modified or existing vehicles have been introduced and integrated into the operational
environment at a route level, questions have been raised about whether demonstrating compliance with
standards is sufficient and what else is needed to assess whether integration into the operational
environment is safe. Whilst these vehicles may be compliant with relevant industry standards and authorised
to be placed into service by the Office of Rail and Road (ORR) under the Railways (Interoperability)
Regulations (RIR) 2011 (as amended), gaining such an authorisation only demonstrates that the vehicles can
be integrated and operated from a technical perspective but does not demonstrate that they have been
safely integrated, or that associated assessments have been conducted.
Requirements for safely integrating rolling stock with the operational and route specific characteristics apply
to all vehicles whether new or existing. Operators retain the obligation of managing the safety of their
operations whilst cooperating with other affected parties such as IMs in line with their obligations under the
Railways and Other Guided Transport Systems (Safety) Regulations (ROGS) 2006 (as amended) and their
Safety Management System (SMS). The guidance in this technical note aims to provide useful context as well
as an approach to assessments to aid common, effective and efficient assessments and discussions across
interfaces between RUs and IMs.
This technical note sets out additional guidance to complement the content of GMRT2131 issue one on the
process of both demonstrating legal compliance and undertaking safe integration of rolling stock within the
railway system, with regard to train visibility and vehicle front-end colour. In support of this role, the
technical note also includes appendices to:
•
Detail the history and development of requirements for train front-end visibility (the front-end
yellow warning panel and headlamps); and
•
Analyse the role of train front-end visibility in hazard mitigation on the railway.
Throughout this technical note the term ‘yellow’ is used; unless stated otherwise this is intended to refer
only to the specific colours listed in Appendix D of GMRT2131 issue one.
What is the industry agreed guidance?
The following text provides guidance on the process for selecting and safely integrating a front-end livery for
rolling stock. This is presented as a flowchart, that has been separated into three phases:
Phase 1: Establishment of rolling stock compliance with legal technical requirements for visibility
This considers what standards must be complied with as a minimum to meet legal technical requirements for
front-end visibility.



RSSB | November 2022
3
TN2301 issue 1
Phase 2: Safe integration – visibility of the train with the operating environment
This considers whether, given that the rolling stock meets its legal requirements for visibility through Phase
1, there are any remaining hazards arising from a train’s visibility not giving sufficient warning time of its
approach to individuals at any particular location.
Phase 3: Safe integration – front-end livery of the train with the operating environment
This considers whether, given hazards associated with a train’s visibility (or lack of) have been addressed
through Phase 2, there are any additional hazards that are introduced by the specific choice of front-end
livery.
The two phases of safe integration are presented separately in this technical note for ease of presentation
and clarity, but in reality there is one overarching obligation to undertake a process of safe integration. This
includes both safe integration phases presented here and possibly others, depending on the nature of the
overall change.



RSSB | November 2022
4
TN2301 issue 1
Phase 1: Establishment of rolling stock compliance with legal technical requirements for visibility
Stage 1: Assessment of the type of change
Boxes 1a), 1b) and 1c) describe the three possibilities for the relationship between a change to a vehicle /
unit’s front-end livery and a change to the rest of the vehicle / unit. It is for the project entity to determine
which scenario applies.



RSSB | November 2022
5
TN2301 issue 1
Stage 1a)
(Responsibility: project entity)
For new rolling stock, or for an upgrade or renewal (as defined in RIR 2011) affecting front-end visibility of
existing rolling stock, an authorisation to place into service from the ORR is required. In this case the
requirements in the Rolling Stock – Locomotive & Passenger National Technical Specification Notice
(LOC&PAS NTSN) concerning rolling stock front-end visibility must be complied with to achieve authorisation.
Stage 1b)
(Responsibility: project entity)
Existing rolling stock may undergo a change to the front-end livery, either in isolation or in combination with
some other minor change, which does not require a new authorisation to place into service from the ORR.
Irrespective of whether the change is in isolation or in combination with another minor change, the
requirements for the assessment of compliance with visibility requirements are the same (that is, stage 2b).
Such a livery change could be performed to support a change in operation, for example due to a cascade to a
different operator.
Stage 1c)
(Responsibility: project entity or RU)
This describes the situation where either:
•
Existing authorised or previously operated rolling stock is to be moved to a new route of operation,
with no other change taking place; or
•
Existing authorised or previously operated rolling stock is to undergo a change to the front-end
lamps that is determined not to be an upgrade or renewal.
In both cases there is no change to the front-end colour scheme, and no work needs to be done to establish
compliance with the legal technical requirements, as the appropriate requirements must have already been
met for the rolling stock to have been authorised (or deemed as such).
There is no further assessment of such units within this Phase 1. Note also that if there is no change taking
place to the rolling stock, just its operation, there will be no project entity involved in this pathway, and
responsibility therefore will lie with the RU that will be introducing the rolling stock onto a different route.
Stage 2: Assessment of compliance of front lamps with NTSN requirements
(Responsibility: project entity)
The compliance of the existing unit’s front-end lamps against the requirements of the LOC&PAS NTSN are
assessed.



RSSB | November 2022
6
TN2301 issue 1
Stage 2a)
For new rolling stock, or that which undergoes an upgrade or renewal (as defined in RIR 2011) affecting
front-end visibility, front-end lamps are required to satisfy the requirements set out in the LOC&PAS NTSN.
The requirements in the NTSN concerning front-end visibility only set out technical requirements for the
front-end lamps (head and marker lamps). Demonstration of compliance with these technical requirements
is enough to demonstrate that the rolling stock satisfies the requirements of the NTSN for front-end visibility.
Nothing further is necessary for the front-end visibility of the rolling stock to satisfy the requirements
necessary for authorisation.
Stage 2b)
For existing rolling stock undergoing a change to the front-end livery, then depending on the rolling stock’s
age and modification history, the front-end lamps may or may not already satisfy the requirements set out in
the LOC&PAS NTSN.
If the lamps do already comply with the LOC&PAS NTSN requirements, then as for a new, upgraded or
renewed vehicle, the rolling stock satisfies the legal requirements for front-end visibility, and no further
actions are required.
If the lamps do not already comply with the LOC&PAS NTSN requirements there is no requirement to make
any change to the front-end lamps to bring them into compliance with the LOC&PAS NTSN, although the
project entity may choose to do so, in which case the change most likely would be considered under Stage
1a). If the project entity does not choose to upgrade the headlamps to be NTSN-compliant, alternative
measures are required to satisfy legal requirements for rolling stock visibility if the lamps remain
non-compliant with the LOC&PAS NTSN requirements. More guidance on these further measures is set out in
Stage 3b).
Stage 3: Front-end livery selection
(Responsibility: project entity)
All rolling stock will have some livery (that is, a colour scheme) applied to a unit’s front-end. Requirements
for any livery are dependent on whether the rolling stock’s front-end lamps comply with the requirements
set out in the LOC&PAS NTSN or not.
Stage 3a): Front-end livery selection for rolling stock with NTSN-compliant front-end lamps
At this stage, the rolling stock meets the legal requirements for front-end visibility by virtue of the front-end
lamps satisfying the requirements of the LOC&PAS NTSN. There are no further legal requirements for the
unit’s visibility. The Operation and Traffic Management NTSN (OPE NTSN) clarifies that train visibility and
recognisability relies on front-end lamps and layout and does not specify any supplementary role for the
front-end colour to achieve that function.
A project entity may therefore choose, at its own discretion, the livery to apply to the front of the rolling
stock. Guidance on selecting a colour (or colours) other than yellow is set out in GMRT2131 issue one,
Appendix E. The project entity may also choose to include the colour yellow on the unit’s front-end. In this



RSSB | November 2022
7
TN2301 issue 1
case, the yellow area may or may not comply with the requirements set out in GMRT2131 issue one,
Appendix D, again at the project entity’s own discretion.
Note that whilst the project entity has the responsibility for the application of the front-end livery, in most
cases selection of the front-end livery is likely to be done in consultation with the RU that will operate the
rolling stock after it is introduced or returned to the route, and which has responsibility for safe integration
of the trains with the route of operation.
Stage 3b): Front-end livery selection for rolling stock with non NTSN-compliant front-end lamps
If, in Stage 2, it has been determined that the rolling stock’s front-end lamps do not satisfy the requirements
set out in the LOC&PAS NTSN, then an additional measure is required to comply with legal requirements for
visibility.
The additional measure required is to apply a yellow warning panel to the front-end, as set out in GMRT2131
issue one Appendix D.
This additional measure is only required for rolling stock that pre-dates the introduction of the LOC&PAS
NTSN requirements via the predecessor Technical Specifications for Interoperability (TSIs), though other new
or existing vehicles that satisfy the TSI / NTSN requirements may have this measure applied voluntarily at the
discretion of the project entity (or RU).
The project entity is free to choose at its own discretion the remainder of the livery applied to the unit’s
front-end, beyond the minimum requirements for the yellow warning panel. If the project entity does not
choose to colour the whole of the front-end yellow, GMRT2131 issue one, Appendix E provides guidance on
selecting other colours.
Stage 4: Satisfaction of legal requirements for front-end visibility
(Responsibility: project entity)
On reaching this Stage, the vehicle meets the legal requirements for front-end visibility. This means that the
vehicle can be permitted to operate on the GB mainline railway, but still requires to be safely integrated onto
the parts of the network where it will operate (see next section).



RSSB | November 2022
8
TN2301 issue 1
Phase 2: Safe integration: Visibility of the train with the operating environment



RSSB | November 2022
9
TN2301 issue 1
Introduction to Phase 2
At this stage, the rolling stock has met the legal technical requirement for front-end visibility, either by the
front-end lamps or by the front-end warning panel, so is permitted to be operated on the GB mainline
railway, as far as front-end visibility is concerned.
However, before the different (new or cascaded), or modified, rolling stock can be used on any particular
route, it is required to be safely integrated with that route.
The purpose of the safe integration process is to ensure that the rolling stock can be used safely on the
particular route of operation, accounting for that route’s specific characteristics and affected parties, and, if
necessary, to identify appropriate mitigation measures to ensure that the rolling stock can be used safely.
This covers more than just the technical compatibility of the rolling stock with the other structural
subsystems (infrastructure, energy etc.), it also includes its ‘suitability’ for the operational procedures
employed on the route. Requirements and guidance for the technical compatibility element of safe
integration are set out in RIS-8270-RST. Technical compatibility is not considered further in this technical
note.
As the specific characteristics and affected parties are local to the route of use, any rolling stock’s
compatibility with the particular route of operation, cannot be checked as part of the determination of
compliance with the legal technical requirements for rolling stock performed by the project entity. The
responsibility for the safe integration of the rolling stock falls to the RU. This is required by ROGS and applies
to all rolling stock. Whilst the RU may contract out the work involved with these Stages 5 - 10 to another
organisation (which may be the project entity from Phase 1), the RU remains responsible for their
completion.
As part of the safe integration process the RU is required to consult with IMs and other RUs for whom risk
levels might be impacted, or by whom changes might be required to ensure risks are managed to an
acceptable level.
The steps in the safe integration process are presented separately here under Phase 2 and Phase 3 for
front-end visibility and colour, although in practice they are likely to be undertaken at the same time.
The process of safe integration is supported by a suitable and sufficient risk assessment, such as the
Common Safety Method on Risk Evaluation and Assessment (CSM RA). Guidance on application of the
CSM RA is available in GEGN8646.
Stage 5: Identification of hazards relevant to train visibility and associated locations
(Responsibility: RUs in consultation with other affected parties)
Train visibility is one means of addressing hazards associated with individuals (be they railway staff or
members of the public) being on the railway without protection, by providing a means for the individuals to
become aware of the approach or presence of a train in sufficient time to move to a place of safety. Further
detail is provided in the bowtie analysis in Appendix B of this technical note, which identifies four classes of
individuals that may be on the railway: level crossing users, trackworkers, passengers and staff on trains and
platforms, and trespassers.



RSSB | November 2022
10
TN2301 issue 1
For level crossing users and trackworkers the train visibility can be an element of the system of protection in
place, as well as an element of mitigation for failure of any protection. Further guidance on the safe
integration of vehicles with those protection systems is given in Stages 6 and 7 below.
For trespassers and uncontrolled detrainment of passengers or staff (which is a form of trespass) train
visibility is not identified as a part of the protection system, and so no specific guidance is provided on the
safe integration of train visibility with protection systems for those threats. However, there may be specific
locations on the route with a greater risk of these threats resulting in a top event, for example trespass
hotspots, and these locations should be identified for assessment of the effectiveness of train visibility as a
recovery measure.
A list of hazard events for which front-end visibility is relevant as protection or mitigation is given in
GMRT2131 issue one, Appendix F (Table 9), and these hazard events are likely to be appropriate for
consideration. Other hazards besides those listed might also be relevant. The risk associated with these
events is likely to vary at different locations along the route. GMRT2131 issue one, Appendix F contains, in
clause F.1.2.1, a non-exhaustive list of types of location and location-specific factors that could be relevant
for identification of locations at which hazard events are at risk of occurring.
Stage 6: Guidance regarding trackwork warning times
The legal requirements for visibility and the minimum warning times for trackworkers are intended to be
compatible, in that front-end lamps meeting the requirements of the LOC&PAS NTSN for full (in daylight) and
dimmed (in darkness) beams can provide the minimum required warning times to trackworkers (that is,
45 seconds warning time for a train travelling at 200 km/h (125 mph) in daylight, or 15 seconds warning time
for a train travelling at 200 km/h (125 mph) in darkness1), accounting for accepted levels of atmospheric
visibility. However, the yellow warning panel was only intended to provide, in conjunction with the
requirements for headlamps of the Railway Group Standards in force over time, 25 seconds warning of an
approaching train travelling at 200 km/h (125 mph). The equivalent sighting distances for these times are set
out in Table 1 below:
Table 1 Overview of specified minimum warning times and equivalent sighting distances
Daylight
Darkness
Specific warning
time / s
Equivalent sighting
distance at 200 km/h
(125 mph) / m
Specified warning
time / s
Equivalent sighting
distance at 200 km/h
(125 mph) / m
NTSN-compliant
headlamps
45
2,600
15
900
Yellow warning
panel and non
NTSN-compliant
headlamps
25
1,400
25
1,400
1 T530 – Review of train headlamps optical requirements (2009). The difference in required warning times in daylight
and darkness is due to the different activities that can be performed in each.



RSSB | November 2022
11
TN2301 issue 1
The specified warning time / viewing distance using the yellow warning panel with non-NTSN-compliant
headlamps is therefore not the same as that of the NTSN-compliant headlamps, being 20 seconds / 1200 m
less in daylight and 10 seconds / 500 m more in darkness (when the warning will be achieved by the
headlamps only). However, for some rolling stock with yellow warning panel and non-NTSN-compliant
headlamps the necessary sighting distance is anyway lower, as the maximum permitted operating speed is
below 200 km/h (125 mph), and for other rolling stock the yellow warning panel and non-NTSN-compliant
headlamps might have been specified to provide the warning time at speeds above 200 km/h (125 mph). For
such rolling stock the specified warning time for NTSN-compliant headlamps might anyway be achieved, but
no analysis of this has been performed during the production of this technical note. Further detail on the
development of the requirements for the yellow warning panel is given in Appendix A of this technical note.
If the local conditions mean that the required warning times cannot be achieved at a site where trackworkers
are on the track (for example if the view of an approaching train is obstructed due to track curvature,
buildings or vegetation), the method statement and system of work for the trackworkers is required to put in
place mitigations to ensure that sufficient warning time is achieved, or other means of protection to obviate
the need to provide warning. These mitigations could be measures such as additional remote lookouts, line
blockages etc.
The safe integration assessment by the RU does not therefore have to consider the management of
trackworker safety so long as the legal requirements for train visibility are met. However, as part of the
process of safe integration, the RU is required to consult with those organisations responsible for the
presence of trackworkers (most likely IMs) about their proposed train visibility arrangements, so that
trackworkers can be informed of the visibility cues to look for (that is, NTSN-compliant headlights or the
combination of non-NTSN-compliant headlamps and front-end warning panel).
Stage 7: Guidance regarding level crossing user warning times
There are a variety of designs of level crossings on the GB rail network, some are operated or protected
automatically by the signalling system, some by members of railway staff, and there are others which require
the level crossing user to participate in their own protection by contacting the signaller or by observing
whether it is safe for them to cross. In the last case observation may be of warning devices at the crossing
itself, or to confirm the absence of an approaching train. Similarly, the level crossings may be designed for
use by different types of users such as users of road vehicles, pedestrians, railway staff, members of the
public or private individuals (such as farmers).
The ORR has published guidance on the design of level crossings which sets out recommended maximum
speeds for trains passing over certain types of crossing, including those where users are required to look for
an approaching train, or where there are no barriers protecting users from an approaching train so users
might choose to ignore local warnings. The maximum recommended speed is 160 km/h (100 mph), but for
some types of crossing the recommended speed is lower.
Where users must make a decision whether or not to cross a level crossing based on observation of whether
or not a train is approaching, the design of the level crossing should ensure that the user has sufficient time
to cross safely from the location at which the decision is made. The amount of warning time required is
therefore dependent on the distance from the decision point to the place of safety after crossing the tracks.
The amount of warning time that can be provided by the visibility of an approaching train will depend on the



RSSB | November 2022
12
TN2301 issue 1
maximum permissible speed on the approach to the crossing location as well as the means of providing
visibility, and specific factors at and on the approach to the location in question.
RIS-0792-CCS issue one Level Crossing Operational Interfaces with Trains sets out that level crossings
provided for the use of railway staff shall provide a minimum warning time of at least 20 seconds. This is the
minimum warning time that train visibility is required to provide to level crossing users, and at 160 km/h
(100 mph) equates to a distance of approximately 950 m.
Depending on the characteristics of the level crossing in question and the assessed length of time required to
use the crossing safely, the warning time required may be greater than can be provided by train visibility
alone or may be greater than can be provided by train visibility at that particular location. Alternative
solutions to provide a longer warning time would be required in such situations (see Stages 8 and 9).
In isolation, a change to the front-end of any rolling stock would not in most circumstances be expected to
reduce the warning time provided, as a change would either increase the rolling stock’s visibility (if modifying
to equip with NTSN-compliant lights) or have no effect (if retaining NTSN-compliant lamps or retaining
non-NTSN-compliant lamps with a yellow warning panel). However, in darkness NTSN-compliant headlamps
are specified to provide at least 15 seconds of warning at 200 km/h (125 mph), whereas previous headlamps
were intended to provide 25 seconds warning at 200 km/h (125 mph), albeit some previous standards
specified night-time luminosity levels that were lower than those now required of NTSN-compliant
headlamps (note that in darkness the yellow warning panel cannot be assumed to make any contribution to
visibility).
Other changes to rolling stock may alter the available warning time, for example if the train speed or
acceleration profile is changed. This could be the case if introducing new rolling stock, cascading rolling stock
to a new route of operation or if other changes are made to rolling stock at the same time as the front-end
change. If the warning time that can be provided by the train visibility becomes insufficient, then as above,
alternative solutions to provide a longer warning time would be required in such situations (see Stages 8 and
9).
In some locations, users may have become conditioned to look for certain cues which they use to identify an
approaching train, so if changing those cues, a campaign to inform users might be appropriate. This could be
the case for example if introducing rolling stock with non-NTSN-compliant front-end lamps and a yellow
warning panel onto a route where the existing rolling stock had NTSN-compliant front-end lamps, or
vice-versa.
Similarly, users might have become habituated to the amount of warning time provided by existing trains
operating at speeds below the maximum permissible speed, particularly where this warning is greater than
the time needed to use the crossing, and introduction of different rolling stock that operates closer to the
maximum speed could reduce the actual amount of warning provided. This could happen for example if
passenger trains are introduced on a route that previously was only used for freight services.



RSSB | November 2022
13
TN2301 issue 1
Stage 8: Location specific assessment
(Responsibility: RU)
A train equipped with NTSN-compliant headlamps can provide warning of its approach at up to the distances
described in Table 1 above. Although non-NTSN-compliant front-end lamps and a yellow warning panel in
accordance with the specification in GMRT2131 issue one, Appendix D were specified to provide a different
warning time and be visible from a different distance, these are also assumed to provide sufficient warning.
However, this does not mean that a train will always be visible at those distances by an observer at each
location on the route.
For the hazards and locations identified in Stage 6, visibility may not be the only means of mitigating these
hazards, and in some cases, visibility alone will not be an effective mitigation. Possible situations or locations
where the provision of train visibility alone might not provide sufficient mitigation include:
•
Where track geometry or lineside obstructions such as vegetation or buildings prevent an individual
on the track from being able to see the front-end of an approaching train until it is less than the
required warning time away;
•
In adverse ambient lighting conditions, such as when the sun is low in the sky or there are other
light sources;
•
In darkness or low ambient lighting conditions (if a yellow warning panel is being used to support
the provision of visibility by non-NTSN-compliant headlamps);
•
In adverse climatic conditions such as fog or snow; or
•
Where there are multiple running lines, so that whilst a train may be visible it may not be apparent
which line it is on.
Stage 9: Identify and enact mitigations for risks associated with a train not being visible
(Responsibility: RU, with co-operation from IM and other affected parties as necessary)
The legal requirements for compliant headlamps, or front-end colour where non-compliant headlamps are
installed, ensure the train is sufficiently visible for situations where visibility provides an effective hazard
mitigation. Stage 8 will have identified locations on the route of operation where compliance with the
requirements for train visibility is not by itself sufficient to manage risk to an acceptable level, and hence
further mitigations at those locations are required to achieve this.
Note that as the train already complies with the legal requirements for visibility, it is unlikely to be
appropriate or effective to attempt to mitigate this risk by measures to make the train ‘more visible’ such as
by increasing the brightness of the headlamps (noting that there are maximum brightness limits for
front-end lamps specified in the LOC&PAS NTSN), adding additional headlamps or increasing the size of the
yellow warning panel. An exception to this is where it is chosen to upgrade front-end lamps that do not
already meet the requirements of the LOC&PAS NTSN. Other mitigations to increase visibility could also be
appropriate in locations away from the operational railway, such as in depots, or, for freight locomotives, on
worksites or in industrial locations.



RSSB | November 2022
14
TN2301 issue 1
The bowtie analysis in Appendix B of this technical note provides an overview of the types of measures that
can either: i) protect against an individual being on the track without protection in place, or ii) support the
recovery of the situation if an individual is on the track without protection in place.
For trains and locations on the operational railway, examples of possible mitigations include:
•
Alternative, non-visual, means of indicating the presence or approach of a train with sufficient
warning, such as the use of an audible warning. This could be local, such as a local alarm, or remote,
such as the use of the train horn (protection / recovery);
•
Local visual indications giving sufficient warning of the presence or approach of a train, such as local
warning lights (protection / recovery);
•
Physical barriers to prevent access to the railway, either permanently or when a train is
approaching / the track is in use (protection); or
•
Reducing the permitted train speed at a location or under certain conditions, to provide users with
sufficient warning time of the approaching train, or to provide the train driver with sufficient space
to bring the train to a stand (protection / recovery).
The effectiveness of such mitigations will depend on the characteristics of the location in question, and of
the people exposed to the hazard – for example an audible warning may be less effective in situations where
members of the public may be wearing earphones, or where members of the public are within insulated
cabs / cabins of road, industrial or agricultural vehicles.
Mitigations might also be necessary for scenarios where train visibility is deemed sufficient to maintain an
acceptable risk level, to ensure that the visibility is maintained at the required level, for example:
•
Routine verification and correction of headlamp functionality, alignment and luminous intensity;
•
Routine inspection and cleaning of headlamps and of a front-end yellow warning panel, where
used;
•
Operational measures in case of the loss or obstruction of a headlamp or front-end yellow warning
panel (note that measures to support the scenario of a defective headlamp are set out in the Rule
Book and in RIS-3437-TOM issue three Defective On-Train Equipment); or
•
Means to notify the driver of loss or obstruction of a headlamps or front-end yellow warning panel.
Stage 10: Completion of safe integration – train visibility
(Responsibility: RU)
On successful completion of this stage, sufficient mitigation will be in place to provide adequate protection
against hazards associated with lack of visibility of the train, the final Stage considers the colour of the front
of the train.



RSSB | November 2022
15
TN2301 issue 1
Phase 3: Safe integration – Front-end livery of the train with the operating environment



RSSB | November 2022
16
TN2301 issue 1
Stage 11: Identification of hazards relevant to the front-end livery
(Responsibility: RU in consultation with other affected parties)
Safe integration will consider whether the livery introduces any new hazards not associated with train
visibility. If new hazards are introduced, the assessment will consider whether there are measures available
to make the risk of these acceptable.
Some examples of areas to consider are given in GMRT2131 issue one, Appendix E, clause E.1.9.
When considering hazards regarding front-end liveries, it may also be relevant to consider situations where
the vehicle is not acting as the front-end of a train, such as when it is at the rear of a train, when it is in the
middle of a train (for example, when two units are coupled together) or when it is stationary and stabled.
Note that this Stage applies to all rolling stock, irrespective of the means used to comply with the legal
requirements for train visibility (as is the case for all Stages in Phases 2 and 3). This is because even where
the front-end warning panel is relied on to achieve visibility (together with non-NTSN-compliant headlamps),
it is not required to cover the full front-end. The area surrounding the warning panel must also have some
livery, and it is therefore necessary to consider whether that livery introduces any hazards.
Stage 12a), 12b), 12c): Identify and enact mitigations for risks associated with front-end livery
(Responsibility: RU)
If the result of Stage 11 is that hazards relevant to front-end colour are identified, it will be necessary to
identify and enact means of mitigation. This could be achieved by changing the front-end livery or, possibly,
by other means. It will be for the RU together with the consultees to determine the most appropriate path.
If it is decided to mitigate the identified risk by changing the front-end livery, the contribution of front-end
colour to train visibility will not be changed by this, and so this path does not loop back to Phase 2 on safe
integration for visibility. This is because either:
•
The rolling stock relies on headlamps rather than a combination of front-end colour and headlamps
to achieve visibility; or
•
The element of front-end colour that is relied on to achieve visibility (the yellow warning panel) is
required to be compliant with the minimum requirements set out in GMRT2131 issue one,
Appendix D and therefore cannot be reduced.
Stage 13: Completion of safe integration – front-end colour
(Responsibility: RU)
On completion of this stage, sufficient mitigation will be in place to provide adequate protection against any
hazards associated with the livery of the train front-end.



RSSB | November 2022
17
TN2301 issue 1
Appendix A
Evolution of the front-end visibility requirements and their purpose
The first reference that could be found to yellow warning panels on the front-ends of rail vehicles dates from
1961, and arose following complaints received that modern (at the time) traction was quieter than that
employed previously whilst its green livery made it difficult to see against a rural background. Following
initial testing of various options, it was recommended that extended trials be undertaken which involved
painting yellow panels on the front of rolling stock. The panels were to be ‘broad’; ‘rectangular’ and ‘bright
yellow (BSO 0030)’, although the orientation (horizontal or vertical) and location (below or between the
‘windows’ – assumed to mean the windscreen) would differ according to vehicle type.
No further records have been found until a 1986 letter from the British Railways Board Director of
Operations, although this makes reference to ‘Design Panel Minutes of 18/11/66’ and states that traction
units have had ‘full yellow fronts’ for 20 years in accordance with those minutes, before noting that recent
liveries have been introduced that have ‘reduced the yellow area’, and in some cases this is associated with
the ‘provision of headlights’. The letter goes on to state that ‘because of the introduction of headlights, it is
necessary to re-define the Board’s policy’. From this it is now concluded that yellow front-ends were
originally intended for use on rolling stock that was not equipped with headlights. As a result of the
introduction of headlights, the letter set out differing requirements depending on whether or not traction
units had a (single) headlight. Those which did have a headlight were required to have the ‘whole
forward-facing area’ between the windscreen and buffer beam painted yellow, and wrapped around the
sides if necessary, so that ‘the whole width appears yellow’. Traction units with no headlight were required
to have ‘all non-glazed forward-facing areas above the buffer beam’ coloured yellow, and ‘where necessary’
this was to be continued around the sides. The requirements for traction units with no headlight also applied
to units with a headlight but no indication in the cab of whether or not it was lit.
The next record found is the Group Standard GMTT0163 issue one Visibility and Audibility of Trains on the
Track which dates from January 1994. It is assumed that the requirements from 1986 applied throughout the
intervening time. GMTT0163 links the visibility of the train to a requirement to provide sufficient warning
time (set at 25 seconds) to move to a place of safety. It notes that the associated distances travelled in
25 seconds vary with speed, and provides these distances, indicating that a train travelling at 200 km/h
(125 mph) would need to be visible at 1.4 km, up to a maximum required visible distance of 1.6 km for a train
travelling at 225 km/h (140 mph). Visibility is to be achieved ‘using headlamps supplemented by marker
lamps and the front-end colour’. Visibility must be achieved in daylight and darkness, and in fog, rain and
falling snow. GMTT0163 issue one goes on to specify the front-end colour (yellow) and dimensions, requiring
a ‘continuous area of … 1m2 with a minimum dimension of 0.6 m’, with an extension of the area required if
the front-end is sloping or rounded. Head and marker lamp specifications were also defined in terms of
number of lamps, their nominal positions and luminous intensities. It is assumed that the luminous
intensities specified were considered sufficient to enable a train to be visible at the maximum required
distance of 1.6 km.
GMTT0163 issue one was superseded by Railway Group Standard GMRT2180 issue one Visibility and
Audibility Requirements for Trains in January 1995. This stated that the required visibility (unchanged at
25 seconds warning) was to be achieved using the front-end lamps and colour. It retained the requirements



RSSB | November 2022
18
TN2301 issue 1
of GMTT0163 issue one on the minimum area of yellow area and dimension, but also advised that where the
requirements could not be met it was acceptable to paint ‘all forward-facing surfaces’ yellow. GMRT2180
issue one also gave guidance in a ‘Code of Practice – Front-end colour’ including a section ‘assuring visibility’
that gave guidance, beyond the minimum requirements for a yellow warning area, to make ‘as much as
possible’ of the front-end yellow or to introduce contrast between the yellow area and a black area,
depending on vehicle operating speed. For headlamps, the same luminous intensities as in GMTT0163 issue
one were included, but for information only, to support the requirement for the headlamps to provide ’25
seconds warning to a person on or near the line when the train is approaching at its maximum design speed’.
The requirements of GMRT2180 issue one were retained in GMRT2180 issue two (February 1999) for the
yellow warning panel, however the specifications for headlamp intensity were adjusted (generally increased)
and reinstated as mandatory requirements rather than guidance.
GMRT2180 issue three (February 2000) retained the same yellow warning panel requirements for vehicles
with maximum speeds of up to 200 km/h, but introduced progressive increases in the area and minimum
dimensions for speeds above 200 km/h up to 300 km/h. A similar approach was taken for headlamp
intensities.
GMRT2483 issue one Visibility Requirements for Trains (June 2004) reverted to a single minimum area and
minimum dimension for the yellow warning panel, independent of vehicle maximum speed, and the same for
headlamp intensities, but added a reduced headlamp intensity requirement for trains with speeds of up to
97 km/h (60 mph). As with the predecessor documents, both the front-end colour and lamps were required
to provide 25 seconds warning time at the rolling stock’s maximum design speed.
Between publication of GMRT2180 issue three and of GMRT2483 issue one, two issues of GMRT2481
Alignment of Train Headlights - Rapid Response were also published in 2002. These did not contain
requirements for a yellow warning or headlamp intensity, but instead requirements for realignment of
headlamps to account for reports of glare from headlamps compliant to GMRT2180 issue three.
GMRT2131 issue one (December 2015) differs from the predecessor documents in that:
•
Headlamps to standards requirements are stated as the sole means of providing visible warning to
persons on the line.
•
The warning time considered necessary has increased from 25 seconds to 45 seconds for staff
working under lookout protection during daylight. For staff working alone at night, the warning time
necessary has reduced to 15 seconds.
•
Headlamps conforming to the requirements of the LOC&PAS TSI (now NTSN following the UK’s
departure from the EU) are stated to provide the required warning times at speeds up to 200 km/h
(125 mph). These requirements are set out in EN 15153-1:2013 Railway applications. External visible
and audible warning devices. Head, marker and tail lamps for heavy rail.
•
Yellow front-ends are required for vehicles which are not equipped with front-end lamps that
conform to the requirements of the LOC&PAS TSI / NTSN. If yellow front-ends are required, the
previous requirements for minimum area and dimension are retained from GMRT2483 issue one.
There is no statement of how much warning time this provides.



RSSB | November 2022
19
TN2301 issue 1
Conclusions
Yellow warning panels were introduced from 1961 on trains that had no headlamps, with unspecified
dimensions and based on subjective tests at up to 90 km/h (55 mph).
The specification of yellow warning panels has developed over the years to define a minimum size and
dimensions, and what to do if unable to meet these.
That specification was intended, as of 1994, to supplement headlamps to provide at least 25 seconds
warning of a train approaching at 225 km/h (140 mph) (that is, to be visible from 1,600 m).
The current objective of the train front-end visibility requirements is to provide 45 seconds warning in
daylight (equivalent to 2,600 m at 200 km/h (125 mph) and 15 seconds at night (equivalent to 900 m at
200 km/h (125 mph), to be able to provide sufficient warning to trackworkers working in accordance with the
Rule Book.
Alongside the changes relating to the front-end yellow warning panel, headlamp requirements have
developed in standards since 1986, notably in GMRT2180 issue two (February 1999) when the minimum on-
axis intensity increased to 50,000 cd from a previously permitted range of 18,000 – 25,000 cd in GMRT2180
issue one. The current requirement is for 40,000 – 70,000 cd. More details are contained in RSSB research
project T530.



RSSB | November 2022
20
TN2301 issue 1
Appendix B
Bowtie risk modelling
Bowtie is one of may risk models available to assist the identification and management of risk. Bowtie is used
in this technical note as a visual and problem structuring tool which effectively depicts risk, providing an
opportunity to identify and assess the key safety barriers either in place or the ones lacking, between a
safety event and an unsafe outcome. This approach has been used to contextualise the purpose of the
various technical requirements in standards relevant to the GB mainline, and their operational assumptions –
see Figure B1.
The modelling has been used to illustrate the key risk that is being controlled by relevant technical
requirements and how this is being controlled. The aim is to focus industry discussions and assessments at
the risk when safely integrating new, modified, or existing rolling stock into the route level operational
environment. This is critical for the industry assessments and agreements to move away from focussing on
narrow assessments of the validity, or not, of specific technical requirements but focus on the risk being
controlled and how that assessment is established.
Each element of the bowtie and its specific application in Figure B1 is set out below, followed by key
conclusions which support the guidance on how to approach any assessment contained in this technical
note.
1.
Hazard (anything that has the potential to cause harm to people or assets)
Approaching trains is the hazard that can cause harm to people and assets.
2.
Top event (the point at which there is loss of control over a hazard and its potential to cause harm,
also known as the undesired system state)
The presence of a person on the track outside engineering and operational protection is the point at which
there is a potential loss of control in terms of preventative safety measures / systems.
3.
Threats (a possible direct cause for the top event)
These are scenarios which can lead to the top event. For this model, the threats are different groups of
people that could be present on the track. Four threats have been identified:
•
Users of level crossings
•
Trackworkers
•
Passengers and staff on trains
•
Trespassers (including uncontrolled detraining passengers)
Note that people mentioned in bullets 1 to 3 could have a legitimate reason to be present on the track.
4.
Preventative measures (which can eliminate the threat entirely or prevent the threat from causing
the top event recovery)
These are measures that can prevent the identified threats progressing to become the top event. For threats
in bullets 1 to 3 above, these are controls on the groups’ legitimate access to the track so that they remain



RSSB | November 2022
21
TN2301 issue 1
under operational and / or engineering protection and measures to prevent them gaining access to the track
when not under protection. For threat to trespassers (mentioned in bullet 4 above) these are measures to
prevent access to the track or to impose protection if the group does gain access to the track.
5.
Consequences (a result of the top event directly ending in loss or damage)
The consequence is the potential outcome of the hazard coinciding with the top event. In this case, it is the
outcome of an approaching train striking a person on the track without protection, resulting in injury or a
fatality of the person struck.
6.
Recovery measures (measures which reduce the likelihood of the consequence or mitigate the
severity of the consequence)
Recovery measures are possible means of preventing the consequence from occurring when the top event
has occurred. In this model, these are means of identifying the hazard (approaching train) to the person(s) on
the track in order for them to leave the track before the hazard arrives, or of stopping the hazard
(approaching train) before it reaches the person, or a combination of both. This paper only considers the first
of these measures – identifying the hazard to the person to provide them with adequate time to leave the
track.
There are two primary means of identifying an approaching train to a person on the track: provision of a
visible warning and provision of an audible warning. There can also be other means applicable in specific
situations, for example the use of body-worn vibration alert systems by staff.
An audible warning can be provided by an on-train device, or by an infrastructure (fixed subsystem) based
device, in both cases supported by appropriate processes to use it.
Similarly, a visible warning can be provided by an on-train device or by an infrastructure-based device.
As for body-worn vibration alert systems, an audible or visible warning could also theoretically be provided
by body-worn devices for railway staff. However for the purposes of this paper these, and also body-worn
vibration systems, are assumed to be infrastructure-based, as it is anticipated that any such devices would
need to be supported by infrastructure-based equipment.
An on-train visible warning device can provide sufficient warning where local conditions, as well as its own
condition, enable it to. The body of this technical note provides guidance on conditions to consider in
determining whether an on-train visible warning device is able to provide sufficient warning, as well as
potential actions to support this. Audible warning devices and infrastructure mounted visible warning
devices are not considered in detail in this technical note, but any of these could be employed as an
alternative measure in specific locations where the on-train visible warning device is unable to provide the
warning time necessary for the person to leave the track (see Stage 10 of Phase 2).
Previous RSSB research has identified that an on-train visible warning device needs to provide:
•
45 seconds warning time to trackworkers during daylight;
•
15 seconds warning time to trackworkers during darkness;
•
At least 20 seconds warning time to users of level crossings provided for use by railway staff, if no
other warning mechanism is in place.



RSSB | November 2022
22
TN2301 issue 1
The warning times to trackworkers apply for trains operating at speeds up to 200 km/h (125 mph), and
equate to distances of 2,600 m and 900 m (with rounding) respectively. Although there is currently no
mandatory speed limit associated with level crossings provided for use by railway staff, guidance published
by the ORR recommends a maximum speed of 160 km/h (100 mph) over different types of pedestrian-only
crossings, which equates to a distance of 950 m. A night-time headlamp alone may therefore not provide
sufficient warning time, in darkness, of an approaching train on these level crossings.
NTSN-compliant front-end lamps have been specified to provide the necessary warning times for
trackworkers.
Historically yellow warning panels supported by headlamps of varying specifications have been used to
provide warning, though in darkness only the headlamp would provide any warning. However Appendix A of
this technical note details that the original requirements for this equipment were to provide a shorter
warning time than 45 seconds (25 seconds) during daylight but a longer warning time than 15 seconds (25
seconds) during darkness.
The use of NTSN-compliant front-end lamps, and of a yellow warning panel supported by
non-NTSN-compliant front-end lamps, is supported by operational rules in case of the failure of the
headlamps, which require an alternative device (a portable headlamp) to be used and trains to travel at
reduced speed to ensure sufficient warning time is maintained. No rules are contained in industry standards
in case of failure of a yellow warning panel (such as its obscuration or loss), although individual RUs might
have developed their own rules.
Analysis undertaken for the preparation of this technical note has highlighted an inconsistency between the
requirements for the portable headlamps, the required speed reduction during its use and the expected
warning time implicit in its use in operation. Further work will be required to investigate this issue and
propose a solution.



| |
. EY | THIN mm RAIL
Technical inna) = ) 二 3 m= jy SAFETY AND
Note EE | STANDARDS
| HH | BOARD
三 Lo gE PEE
F igu re Bl
Bow Tie Ana lysis of the hazard of an approaching train and the potential to strike a person on track
outside engineering and operational protection
HAZARD
PREVENTATIVE Approaching
THREATS MEASURES Train
- I RECOVERY
Users of level MEASURES
crossings
| = J Gates, signals Procedures for TOP EVENT CONSEQUENCE
and warning crossing the Person on the
devices at the line safely J ———_————— track outside Person hit bya
level crossing | engineering and train resulting in
( ] TE I ; injury or fatali
} operational . y ty
| | P 2 Adequate time Adequate time
protection : 2
Trackworkers | for person to fortrain to avoid
| 可 生生 tk | leave track and person by slowing
L J a warning J she Jews nin avoid train or stopping
|
system of work |
y | | MITIGATIQN DETAILS
a | 1
| | | | | 1
Passengers and staff | i i
Gains 人 Audible warning of
! Procedures for Procedures for per EE
when to closing lines to
detrain safely traffic Audible warning device | | Audible warning device
, jj ontrain and operational on the track and
Visible warning device on the train Visible warning device on the track procedures and. operational procedures
Trespassers | equipment to sound it to sound it
| | Security Procedures for
barriers and closing lines to NTSN and NTR
protection traffic Understanding by the person of the Understanding by the person of the compliant
visible warning device on the train as a visible warning device on the track as a train horn
warning of an approaching train warning of an approaching train
Trainborne measures where " 了 了
conditions (local geography, condition, Tratksive Meares Ji speed 3 gah
track characteristics) enable adequate Istance for 2 ou RS worn bE tne
sighting distance for train speed EE
A device that can be seen by a A device that can be seen at A device that can be seen in
level crossing user from the night by a trackworker from the daylight by a trackworker from
distance a train can travel at 100 distance a train can travel at 125 the distance a train can travel at
mph in the minimum required mph in the minimum required 125 mph in the minimum
warning time (20 secs) warning time (15 secs) required warning time (45 secs)
a NTSN compliant
Key Failed train front end
headlamps 更
Mitigation details A device that complies with
discussed in this paper Appendix B of GMRT2131 and
is used in accordance with
Section 14 of GERT8000 TW5
Mitigation details
mentioned but not TTT TET,
discussed in this paper NTR liant 7 mits on operational speed \
oii oto a ir ps
RSSB | November 2022 23 TN2301 issue 1