NON-PERTURBATIVE ASPECTS OF SCALAR FIELD THEORY *


Y Meurice 
Department of Physics
Astronomy University of Iowa
52246Iowa CityIowaUSA

S Niermann 
Department of Physics
Astronomy University of Iowa
52246Iowa CityIowaUSA

G Ordaz 
Department of Physics
Astronomy University of Iowa
52246Iowa CityIowaUSA

NON-PERTURBATIVE ASPECTS OF SCALAR FIELD THEORY *
arXiv:hep-th/9609057v1 6 Sep 1996 U. of Iowa preprint 96-13 * Talk given by Y. Meurice at DPF 96, Minneapolis, August 1996 1
Using the hierarchical approximation, we discuss the cut-off dependence of the renormalized quantities of a scalar field theory. The naturalness problem and questions related to triviality bounds are briefly discussed. We discuss unphysical features associated with the hierarchical approximation such as the recently observed oscillatory corrections to the scaling laws. We mention a two-parameter family of recursion formulas which allows one to continuously extrapolate between Wilson's approximate recursion formula and the recursion formula of Dyson's hierarchical model. The parameters are the dimension D and 2 ζ , the number of sites integrated in one RG transformation. We show numerically that at fixed D, the critical exponent γ depends continuously on ζ. We suggest the requirement of ζ−independence as a guide for constructing improved recursion formulas.

One important unsolved problem of the electroweak interactions is the mechanism responsible for the symmetry breaking. With a single scalar doublet (Higgs), the standard model provides an economical candidate solution. There are two issues related to scalar field theory which are relevant to restrict and understand better the symmetry breaking mechanism. The first one is the so-called naturalness (or fine-tuning, or hierarchy) problem [1]. The second is that arbitrarily large values of M H /M W are forbidden [2] 
when Λ > M H ,
where M H is the mass of the Higgs, M W the mass of the W boson and Λ a UV cutoff.

One possible method to address these questions non-perturbatively consists in using Wilson's approximate recursion formula [3]. In this approximation the renormalization group transformation reduces to a simple integral equation closely related to the one associated with Dyson's hierarchical model. This method allows exact large volume calculations [4] which can be used to test numerical approximations. On the other hand, the improvement [5] of this type of approximation is difficult.

The so-called naturalness problem of scalar field theory arises when one tries to take the limit of large UV cutoff Λ keeping the renormalized mass m R of the order of a fixed cut-off of reference Λ R . This can be done explicitly using the approximate recursion formula with an initial potential Q 0 (φ). Applying L times the renormalization group transformation, one obtains a theory with Λ R = 2 −L Λ and a local potential Q L . Maintaining m R at a fixed not too large value in Λ R units requires a fine tuning [3] of the rφ 2 term in Q 0 . Namely, to check the semi-classical formulas used in these calculations without any reference to any perturbative expansion. In the symmetric phase, we obtained an agreement within 1 percent. A similar check in the broken phase involves more subtle aspects and is presently in progress [6].
r = r c + A2 −BL ,
The main source of errors in the triviality bounds mentioned above is probably the use of the hierarchical approximation. In particular, one needs to be aware of the unphysical features associated with it. We calculated [9] 800 coefficients of the high-temperature expansion of the magnetic susceptibility of Dyson's hierarchical model with a Landau-Ginzburg measure and a Ising measure in D = 3. Log-periodic corrections to the scaling laws appear in both cases. The period of oscillation is given in good approximation by the logarithm of the largest eigenvalue of the linearized RG transformation in agreement with a possibility suggested by K. Wilson [3]. We estimated γ to be 1.300 (with a systematic error of the order of 0.002) in good agreement with the results obtained with other methods such as the ǫ-expansion [8]. The oscillations reflects a discrete scale invariance of the hierarchical model rather than a physical property of the model approximated. The period would change if we could continuously change the largest eigenvalue. This is the topic of the next paragraph.

We found [10] a two-parameter family of recursion formulas for scalar field theory. The first parameter is the dimension D. The second parameter is ζ, where 2 ζ is the number of sites integrated by one renormalization group transformation. Changing ζ allows one to continuously extrapolate between Wilson's approximate recursion formula and the recursion formula of Dyson's hierarchical model. We showed numerically that at fixed D, the critical exponent γ depends continuously on ζ. We would like to modify the recursion formula in order to get ζ-independent physical quantities. Under some assumptions discussed in Ref.

[10], one can construct systematically "counterterms" that cancel the ζ-dependence. This procedure might be somehow analogous to the µ-independence used in perturbative field theory [11].

Finally, we would like to say a few words about the large N limit of scalar field theory.

The recursion formula of Ref. [9] can be easily extended to N components. The leading term in the 1/N expansion of the initial probability for O(N) sigma models is Gaussian, however the high-temperature expansion has non-gaussian features which are presently under study [12]. 4 


where A depends on the choice of m R and A takes the approximate values 1.6 in D = 3 and 2.0 in D = 4. Note that for D = 3, this result is not what would have guessed using perturbation theory. The fine-tuning implies practical restrictions. To fix the ideas, if the calculation are done in double precision and if Λ R = 100 GeV in D = 4, one can only reach the value Λ = 10 10 GeV . Is this a serious problem which could force a physical solution such as supersymmetry or technicolor? There is no clear answer to this question, however one should bear in mind that this might be an artifact of our calculational approach. An inspiring example might the fine-tuning of the energy in a calculation [7] of the wave functions of the anharmonic oscillator far away from the origin. A question which can be answered is the question of the stability of the renormalized quantities under the fine-tuning. When Λ R < m R , one can use Q L , to calculate [6] the renormalized coupling constant at zero momentum nonperturbatively. The numerical value of the renormalized quantities stabilizes well when L becomes large. Consequently, the fine-tuning is not incompatible with predictability. Another important non-perturbative question is to find the forbidden region in the (M H /M W , Λ/M H ) plane. Numerical calculations [2] using the hierarchical approximation or related approximations indicate an upper limit M H < 10M W (triviality bound). In addition, if this bound is reached, Λ and M H must be of the same order. One might want

FERMILAB-CONF-95-391-T and refs. therein. W Bardeen, W. Bardeen, FERMILAB-CONF-95-391-T and refs. therein.

. P Hazenfratz, J Nager, Z. Phys. C. 37477P. Hazenfratz and J. Nager, Z. Phys. C 37 477 1988;

. T E Clark, B Heari, S T Love, Nucl. Phys. B4026281993. T. E. Clark, B. Heari and S. T. Love, Nucl. Phys. B4026281993.

. K Wilson, Phys. Rev. 43185K. Wilson, Phys. Rev. B4 3185 (1971) ;

. K Wilson, Phys. Rev. D64191972. K. Wilson, Phys. Rev. D64191972.

. Y Meurice, G Ordaz, V G J Rodgers, J. Stat. Phys. 77607Y. Meurice, G. Ordaz and V. G. J. Rodgers, J. Stat. Phys. 77, 607 (1994).

Y Meurice, Proceedings of the EPS Conference. J. Carr and M. Perrottet Eds.the EPS ConferenceEditions Frontieres89Y. Meurice, Proceedings of the EPS Conference 1993, p. 89, J. Carr and M. Perrottet Eds. (Editions Frontieres, 1994).

. Y Meurice, G Ordaz, work in progressY. Meurice and G. Ordaz, work in progress.

. B Bacus, Y Meurice, A Soemadi, J. Phys. A. 28381B. Bacus, Y. Meurice and A. Soemadi, J. Phys. A 28, L381 (1995).

. P Collet, J.-P Eckmann, B Hirsbrunner, Phys. Lett. B71. 3851977P. Collet, J.-P. Eckmann, and B. Hirsbrunner, Phys. Lett. B71 385 1977.

. Y Meurice, G Ordaz, V G J Rodgers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 7545551995Y. Meurice, G. Ordaz and V. G. J. Rodgers, Phys. Rev. Lett.7545551995;

Y Meurice, S Niermann, G Ordaz, U. of Iowa preprint 96-10. 9608025Y. Meurice, S. Niermann and G. Ordaz, U. of Iowa preprint 96-10, hep-lat 9608025.

U. of Iowa preprint 96-11. Y Meurice, G Ordaz, 9608023Y. Meurice and G. Ordaz, U. of Iowa preprint 96-11, hep-lat 9608023.

D Gross, Methods in Field Theory. R. Ballian and J. Zinn-Justin Eds., (North HollandAmsterdamand references thereinD. Gross, Methods in Field Theory, R. Ballian and J. Zinn-Justin Eds., (North Holland, Amsterdam, 1976) and references therein.

. Y Meurice, S Niermann, work in progressY. Meurice and S. Niermann, work in progress.