= Don 't Wake Me Up ( song ) = 
 
 " Don 't Wake Me Up " is a song by American recording artist Chris Brown , taken from his fifth studio album , Fortune ( 2012 ) . It was written by Brown , Alain Whyte , Allessandro Benassi , Brian Kennedy , Jean @-@ Baptiste , Marco Benassi , Michael McHenry , Nick Marsh , Priscilla Hamilton , Ryan Buendia and William Orbit . The song was produced by Benny and Alle Benassi , Free School , Orbit and Kennedy , and was released digitally on May 18 , 2012 , as the fourth single from the album . " Don 't Wake Me Up " is an EDM song that features heavy bass and a repetitive chorus . The lyrics of the song describe a lost loved one who exists only in a dream . 
 " Don 't Wake Me Up " received generally positive reviews from critics , who complimented its production . The song was commercially successful , peaking at number ten on the Billboard Hot 100 . Internationally , the single peaked within the top ten of the charts in Australia , Austria , Hungary , Ireland , Japan , New Zealand , Norway and the United Kingdom , and the top twenty of the charts in Denmark , France , Germany , Sweden , Switzerland and Belgium . The accompanying music video was directed by Colin Tilley and depicts Brown in three different dreams , all of which involve a mysterious woman , played by model Araya Nicks . The video received a positive reception from critics for its visuals . Brown promoted the song with live performances on televised shows , including Today and the 2012 BET Awards . 
 
 = = Background and release = = 
 
 " Don 't Wake Me Up " was written by Alain Whyte , Allessandro Benassi , Brian Kennedy , Chris Brown , Jean @-@ Baptiste , Marco Benassi , Michael McHenry , Nick Marsh , Priscilla Hamilton , Ryan Buendia and William Orbit . It was produced by Benny and Alle Benassi , Free School , Orbit and Kennedy . " Don 't Wake Me Up " was originally intended for American pop singer Madonna 's twelfth studio album MDNA ( 2012 ) ; however , she could not record the song because of her tight schedule , and Orbit gave the song to Brown . After an unofficial version of " Don 't Wake Me Up " was leaked online in January 2012 , websites reported that the song was produced by David Guetta . However , Guetta said on his Facebook and Twitter accounts , " I 'm credited for ' Don 't Wake Me Up ' ... but I did not produce this record . Best to CB ! " . 
 On May 12 , 2012 , Brown announced on his Twitter account that he would release " Don 't Wake Me Up " as the next single from his fourth studio album Fortune . It was made available for download via iTunes Stores worldwide on May 18 , 2012 . The Free School / William Orbit remix of the song was released in some European countries on May 22 , 2012 . In the United States , " Don 't Wake Me Up " was sent to contemporary hit radio and rhythmic contemporary radio playlists on June 12 , 2012 . On June 22 , 2012 , it was released as a CD single in Germany and as a Digital EP in the United Kingdom . The EP contains the album version , remix and Brown 's previous singles " Till I Die " and " Sweet Love " . 
 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 
 " Don 't Wake Me Up " is an EDM song that features heavy bass ; it lasts for 3 minutes and 42 seconds . The instrumentation is provided by an acoustic guitar and synthesizers . Brown uses auto @-@ tune on the hook and breakdown . " Don 't Wake Me Up " is written in the key of B ♭ major and is set in common time with a tempo of 128 beats per minute . Brown 's vocal range spans from the note of G4 to the note of C6 . The song contains lyrics about a lost loved one who exists only in a dream , as stated by Brittany R. Villalva of The Christian Post . " Don 't Wake Me Up " begins with a spoken introduction by an unidentified woman saying , " Dearly Beloved , if this love only exists in my dreams , don 't wake me up " . Robbie Daw of Idolator compared her voice to that of Rihanna . The song 's chorus consists of the hook " Don 't wake me up " . Lewis Corner of Digital Spy wrote that the chorus " flourishes into a pulse @-@ racing mix of thundering beats and squiggly electronic swizzles " . HitFix 's Melinda Newman noted that the song " resembles the sweet bounciness of ' Forever ' " . 
 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 
 " Don 't Wake Me Up " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Lewis Corner of Digital Spy called it " this summer 's biggest anthem " , awarding the song five stars out of five and writing that Brown delivers it " with effortless swagger " . JusMusic of Singersroom described " Don 't Wake Me Up " as a " fun and bubbly track " , while a writer for Rap @-@ Up labeled it as an " electrifying Top 40 record " . Robbie Daw of Idolator complimented the song 's production as a " strobe light thumper " and wrote that if listeners enjoy Brown 's auto @-@ tuned tracks , " then you won 't be disappointed " . Time 's Melissa Locker viewed " Don 't Wake Me Up " and " Turn Up the Music " as the only potential hits from Fortune . 
 Nick Levine of BBC Music called the song " a smash " . AOL Radio 's Phil Kukawinski noted that " Don 't Wake Me Up " has " a nice juxtaposition of calm and energetic " and that it " seems to be one of those songs that merges the two sounds in a perfect way " . James Reed of The Boston Globe called the song " a thumping club cut that 's irresistible " . Trent Fitzgerald of PopCrush described " Don 't Wake Me Up " as a " fist @-@ pumping club jam " but felt that it is " not as catchy as ' Beautiful People ' " . In a review of Fortune , Barry Walters of Spin magazine wrote that " Don 't Wake Me Up " , along with " Sweet Love " and " Till I Die " , contain " thin melodies and stock shock lyrics " that make Brown 's previous singles sound better . " Don 't Wake Me Up " was nominated for World 's Best Song at the 2013 World Music Awards . 
 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 
 In New Zealand , " Don 't Wake Me Up " debuted at number 34 on May 28 , 2012 , and peaked at number two in its eighth week on the chart . It was certified platinum by RIANZ , denoting sales of 15 @,@ 000 copies . On June 4 , 2012 , the song entered the Australian ARIA Singles Chart at number five , becoming the highest new entry that week and Brown 's tenth top @-@ ten single in that country . " Don 't Wake Me Up " peaked at number two in its fifth week on the chart , and number one in its eighth week on the ARIA Urban Singles Chart . The song was certified triple platinum by ARIA , denoting sales of 210 @,@ 000 copies . " Don 't Wake Me Up " reached the top ten in Hungary , Ireland , Japan and Norway , and the top twenty in Denmark , France , Germany , Sweden , Switzerland and both regions of Belgium . In the United States , the song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 89 in the issue dated June 9 , 2012 . " Don 't Wake Me Up " entered the top ten in the issue dated November 10 , 2012 at number 10 , where it peaked . It became Brown 's twelfth top @-@ ten single on the chart , and his second top @-@ ten single from Fortune , following " Turn Up the Music " . On the UK Singles Chart , " Don 't Wake Me Up " debuted at number three in the issue dated July 7 , 2012 , with sales of 89 @,@ 223 copies . The following week , the song peaked at number two with sales of 70 @,@ 702 copies . As of January 2013 , " Don 't Wake Me Up " has sold 416 @,@ 684 copies in the UK . In Austria , " Don 't Wake Me Up " reached number one on August 17 , 2012 , where it remained for one week , becoming Brown 's first number @-@ one single in that country . 
 
 = = Music video = = 
 
 
 = = = Background = = = 
 
 The accompanying music video for " Don 't Wake Me Up " was directed by Colin Tilley and filmed in a desert on May 14 , 2012 . Several images from the shoot , showing Brown posing shirtless against a vintage car , and images of Brown posing with model Araya Nicks , who plays his love interest in the video , were posted on the Internet the following day . The video premiered online on June 11 , 2012 . Later that day , Brown made a guest appearance on 106 & Park and discussed the video 's concept : 
 With this video , we wanted to go completely into the dream world . A lot of my videos from ' Turn Up the Music ' and other videos I 'm doing now are in a dream state of believing what you want to believe . So that 's what Fortune kinda encompasses . So it 's basically dreaming and accomplishing your dreams . This video is me dreaming and being taken into this whole kind of maze . I keep waking up within a dream within a dream , almost on some Inception type ... but I don 't want to bite that . 
 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 
 The video begins with Brown singing alone in a desert in front of a sunset backdrop . It then cuts to Brown waking up in a bedroom as he notices a mysterious woman ( played by Araya Nicks ) walking through the first of three doors behind him . Each door is labeled with hieroglyphics in gold . During the first chorus , Brown follows the woman through the door and enters a garden maze . This scene is intercut with scenes of Brown singing in the desert . He then returns to bed as the woman walks through the second door . Brown follows her again and appears in a city in the sky . This scene is also intercut with scenes of him in the desert . During the second chorus , Brown is hit by a tidal wave which sends him back to bed . He then enters the third door and appears driving a vintage car in the desert . Brown drives after the woman until he hits a sign that reads " Road Closed " , which causes him to drive off a cliff . The video then cuts to Brown and the woman lying in bed with electrodes attached to their heads . 
 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 
 Nicole Sia of Idolator called the clip Brown 's " Video of the Year " and complimented its " stunning dream imagery " . A writer for The Edge called it " another visually tantalising music video " from Brown , while Rap @-@ Up described it as surreal . Trent Fitzgerald of PopCrush described the video as " good visual fun " and wrote that it reminded him of the television series Day Break . He compared the ending to the 1999 film The Matrix . The video was nominated for World 's Best Video at the 2012 World Music Awards . 
 
 = = Live performances = = 
 
 On June 8 , 2012 , Brown performed " Don 't Wake Me Up " on Today as part of its Summer Concert Series , for which he wore a New York Yankees cap , a multicolored Snow Beach Polo jacket , black jeans and white sneakers . The set list also included " Turn Up the Music " , " Yeah 3x " and " Forever " . At the 2012 BET Awards ceremony on July 1 , 2012 , Brown performed " Don 't Wake Me Up " and " Turn Up the Music " , for which he appeared shirtless with half his body painted gray . Brown performed acrobatic moves with six backup dancers under triangle @-@ shaped beams as green and red flashing lights appeared throughout the stage . Georgette Cline of The Boombox wrote that Brown " put on an energetic show " and described his dance routines during the performance as " eye @-@ catching " . 
 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 
 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes for Fortune 
 
 = = Charts = = 
 
 
 = = Certifications = = 
 
 
 = = Radio and release history = =
