= Won 't Get Fooled Again = 
 
 " Won 't Get Fooled Again " is a song by the English rock band The Who , written by Pete Townshend . It was released as a single in June 1971 , reaching the top 10 in the UK , while the full eight @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ minute version appears as the final track on the band 's 1971 album Who 's Next , released that August . 
 Townshend wrote the song as a closing number of the Lifehouse project , and the lyrics criticise revolution and power . To symbolise the spiritual connection he had found in music via the works of Meher Baba and Inayat Khan , he programmed a mixture of human traits into a synthesizer and used it as the main backing instrument throughout the song . The Who tried recording the song in New York in March 1971 , but re @-@ recorded a superior take at Stargroves the next month using the synthesizer from Townshend 's original demo . Ultimately , Lifehouse as a project was abandoned in favour of Who 's Next , a straightforward album , where it also became the closing track . The song has been performed as a staple of the band 's setlist since 1971 , often as the set closer , and was the last track drummer Keith Moon played live with the band . 
 As well as a hit , the song has achieved critical praise , appearing as one of Rolling Stone 's The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time . It has been covered by several artists , such as Van Halen who took their version to No. 1 on the Billboard Album Rock Tracks chart . It has been used for several TV shows and films , and in some political campaigns . 
 
 = = Background = = 
 
 The song was originally intended for a rock opera Townshend had been working on , Lifehouse , which was a multi @-@ media exercise based on his followings of the Indian religious avatar Meher Baba , showing how spiritual enlightenment could be obtained via a combination of band and audience . The song was written for the end of the opera , after the main character , Bobby , is killed and the " universal chord " is sounded . The main characters disappear , leaving behind the government and army , who are left to bully each other . Townshend described the song as one " that screams defiance at those who feel any cause is better than no cause " . He later said that the song was not strictly anti @-@ revolution despite the lyric " We 'll be fighting in the streets " , but stressed that revolution could be unpredictable , adding , " Don 't expect to see what you expect to see . Expect nothing and you might gain everything . " Bassist John Entwistle later said that the song showed Townshend " saying things that really mattered to him , and saying them for the first time . " 
 Townshend had been reading Universal Sufism founder Inayat Khan 's The Mysticism of Sound and Music , which referred to spiritual harmony and the universal chord , which would restore harmony to humanity when sounded . Townshend realised that the newly emerging synthesizers would allow him to communicate these ideas to a mass audience . He had met the BBC Radiophonic Workshop which gave him ideas for capturing human personality within music . Townshend interviewed several people with general practitioner @-@ style questions , and captured their heartbeat , brainwaves and astrological charts , converting the result into a series of audio pulses . For the demo of " Won 't Get Fooled Again " , he linked a Lowrey organ into a EMS VCS 3 filter that played back the pulse @-@ coded modulations from his experiments . He subsequently upgraded to an ARP 2500 . The synthesizer did not play any sounds directly as it was monophonic ; instead it modified the block chords on the organ as an input signal . The demo was completed by Townshend overdubbing drums , bass , electric guitar , vocals and handclaps . Overall , the song ran at a slower pace to the version later recorded by the Who . 
 
 = = Recording = = 
 
 The Who 's first attempt to record the song was at the Record Plant on W 44 Street , New York City , on 16 March 1971 . Manager Kit Lambert had recommended the studio to the group , which led to his producer credit , though the de facto work was done by Felix Pappalardi . This take featured Pappalardi 's Mountain band mate , Leslie West , on lead guitar . 
 Lambert proved to be unable to mix the track , and a fresh attempt at recording was made at the start of April at Mick Jagger 's house , Stargroves , using the Rolling Stones Mobile Studio . Glyn Johns was invited to help with production , and he decided to re @-@ use the synthesized organ track from Townshend 's original demo , as the re @-@ recording of the part in New York was felt to be inferior to the original . Keith Moon had to carefully synchronise his drum playing with the synthesizer , while Townshend and Entwistle played electric guitar and bass . Townshend played a 1959 Gretsch 6120 Chet Atkins hollow body guitar fed through an Edwards volume pedal to a Fender Bandmaster amp , all of which he had been given by Joe Walsh while in New York . This combination became his main electric guitar recording setup for subsequent albums . Although intended as a demo recording , the end result sounded so good to the band and Johns , they decided to use it as the final take . Overdubs , including an acoustic guitar part played by Townshend , were recorded at Olympic Studios at the end of April . The track was mixed at Island Studios by Johns on 28 May . After Lifehouse was abandoned as a project , Johns felt " Won 't Get Fooled Again " , along with other songs , were so good that they could simply be released as a standalone single album , which became Who 's Next . 
 
 = = Release = = 
 
 " Won 't Get Fooled Again " was first released as a single A @-@ side on 25 June 1971 , edited down to 3 : 35 . It replaced " Behind Blue Eyes " as the choice of single as the group felt it didn 't fit the Who 's established musical style . It was released on 17 July in the US . The B @-@ side , " I Don 't Even Know Myself " was recorded at Eel Pie Studios in 1970 for a planned EP that was never released . The single reached No. 9 in the UK charts and No. 15 in the US . Initial publicity material showed an abandoned cover of Who 's Next featuring Moon dressed in drag and brandishing a whip . 
 The full @-@ length version of the song appeared as the closing track of Who 's Next , released on 14 August in the US and 27 August in the UK , where it topped the album charts . " Won 't Get Fooled Again " drew strong praise from critics , who were impressed that a synthesizer had managed to be integrated so successfully within a rock song . Who author Dave Marsh described singer Roger Daltrey 's scream near the end of the track as " the greatest scream of a career filled with screams " . In 2011 , the song was ranked number 134 on Rolling Stone 's The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time . 
 
 = = Live performances = = 
 
 The Who first performed the song live at the opening date of a series of Lifehouse related concerts in the Young Vic theatre , London on 14 February 1971 . It has subsequently been part of every Who concert since , often as the set closer and sometimes extended slightly to allow Townshend to smash his guitar or Moon to kick over his drumkit . The group performed live over the synthesizer part being played on a backing tape , which required Moon to wear headphones to play in sync with it . It was the last track Moon played live in front of a paying audience on 21 October 1976 and the last song he ever played with the Who at Shepperton Studios on 25 May 1978 , which was captured on the documentary film The Kids Are Alright . The song was part of the Who 's set at Live Aid in 1985 , Live 8 in 2005 , T4 on the Beach in 2008 and Capital FM 's Summertime Ball concert in 2009 , 2010 and 2015 and the radio station 's Jingle Bell Ball concerts in 2009 and 2015 . 
 In October 2001 , The Who performed the song at The Concert for New York City to help raise funds for the families of firemen and police officers killed during the 9 / 11 attacks . They finished their set with ' Won 't Get Fooled Again ' to a responsive and emotional audience , with close @-@ up aerial video footage of the World Trade Center buildings playing behind them on a huge digital screen . In February 2010 , the group closed their set during the halftime show of Super Bowl XLIV with this song . While the Who have continued to play the song live , Townshend has expressed mixed feelings for it , alternating between pride and embarrassment in interviews . Who biographer John Atkins described the track as " the quintessential Who 's Next track but not necessarily the best . " 
 Several live and alternative versions of the song have been released on CD or DVD . In 2003 , a deluxe version of Who 's Next was reissued to include the Record Plant recording of the track from March 1971 and a live version recorded at the Young Vic on 26 April 1971 . The song is also included on the album Live at the Royal Albert Hall , from a 2000 show with Noel Gallagher guesting . 
 Daltrey , Entwistle and Townshend have each performed the song at solo concerts . Townshend has re @-@ arranged the song for solo performance on acoustic guitar . On 30 June 1979 , he performed a duet of the song with classical guitarist John Williams for the 1979 Amnesty International benefit The Secret Policeman 's Ball . 
 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 
 The song was first covered in a distinctive soul style by Labelle on their 1972 album Moon Shadow . Van Halen began covering the song in concert in 1993 . Eddie Van Halen re @-@ arranged the track so that the synthesizer part was played on the guitar . A live recording was released on Live : Right Here , Right Now , and made it to number one on the Billboard Album Rock Tracks chart . 
 Both Axel Rudi Pell ( on Diamonds Unlocked ) and Hayseed Dixie ( on Killer Grass ) covered the song in their established styles of metal and bluegrass respectively . Richie Havens covered the track on his 2008 album , " Nobody Left to Crown " , playing the song at a slower tempo to the original . 
 
 = = Other uses = = 
 
 The original Who recording has been used in politics on several occasions . In an April 2006 editorial for Time magazine , retired United States Marine Corps Lieutenant General Greg Newbold referenced the song , labeling it an " antiwar anthem " that " conveyed a sense of betrayal by the nation 's leaders , who had led our country into a costly and unnecessary war in Vietnam . " In 2014 , the British Government ran an advertisement for superfast broadband using the song as its theme music . 
 Townshend has taken an interest in licensing the Who 's work to media and advertising , and " Won 't Get Fooled Again " has made several appearances on TV and film . A portion of the song has been used as the opening theme for the CBS series CSI : Miami , while a cover version of the track was played on The Simpsons ' " A Tale of Two Springfields " which featured the Who as special guests . However , Townshend refused permission for director Michael Moore to play the song over the closing credits of Fahrenheit 9 / 11 , as he was suspicious of Moore 's journalistic credentials and did not want his work to be associated with a possibly inaccurate film . Townshend later said " [ o ] nce I had an idea what the film was about , I was 90 % certain my song was not right for them . " In response Moore accused Townshend of supporting the Iraq War , which Townshend denied . 
 The Tampa Bay Lightning use the song as their entrance music . 
 
 = = Charts = = 
 
 
 = = Personnel = = 
 
 Roger Daltrey : vocals 
 Pete Townshend : acoustic and electric guitars , synthesized organ ( ARP 2500 , EMS VCS 3 ) and backing vocals 
 John Entwistle : bass guitar 
 Keith Moon : drums
