= Elizabeth Rona = 
 
 Elizabeth Rona ( 20 March 1890 – 27 July 1981 ) was a Hungarian nuclear chemist , known for her work with radioactive isotopes . After developing an enhanced method of preparing polonium samples , she was internationally recognized as the leading expert in isotope separation and polonium preparation . Between 1914 and 1918 , during her postdoctoral study with George de Hevesy , she developed a theory that the velocity of diffusion depended on the mass of the nuclides . As only a few atomic elements had been identified , her confirmation of the existence of Uranium @-@ Y was a major contribution to nuclear chemistry . She was awarded the Haitinger Prize by the Austrian Academy of Sciences in 1933 . 
 After emigrating to the United States in 1941 , she was granted a Carnegie Fellowship to continue her research and provided technical information on her polonium extraction methods to the Manhattan Project . Later in her career , she became a nuclear chemistry professor at the Oak Ridge Institute of Nuclear Studies and after 15 years there transferred to the Institute of Marine Sciences at the University of Miami . At both Oak Ridge and Miami , she continued her work on the geochronology of seabed elements and radiometric dating . She was posthumously inducted into the Tennessee Women 's Hall of Fame in 2015 . 
 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 
 Elizabeth Rona was born on 20 March 1890 in Budapest , Hungary , to Ida , ( née Mahler ) and Samuel Róna . Her father was a prosperous Jewish physician who worked with Louis Wickham and Henri @-@ August Dominici , founders of radium therapy , to introduce the techniques to Budapest , and installed one of the first x @-@ ray machines there . Elizabeth wanted to become a physician like her father , but Samuel believed that it would be too difficult for a woman to attain . Though he died when she was in her second year of university , Rona 's father had encouraged her and spurred her interest in science from a young age . She enrolled in the Philosophy Faculty at the University of Budapest , studying chemistry , geochemistry , and physics , receiving her PhD in 1912 . 
 
 = = Early career = = 
 
 Rona began her postdoctoral training in 1912 at the Animal Physiology Institute in Berlin and the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute , studying yeast as a reagent . In 1913 she transferred to Karlsruhe University , working under the direction of Kasimir Fajans , the discoverer of isotopes , for the next eight months . During the summer of 1914 , she studied at University College London , but returned to Budapest at the outbreak of World War I. Taking a position at Budapest 's Chemical Institute , she completed a scientific paper on the " diffusion constant of radon in water " . Working with George de Hevesy , she was asked to verify a new element — at the time was termed Uranium @-@ Y , now known as Th @-@ 231 . Though others had failed to confirm the element , Rona was able to separate the Uranium @-@ Y from interfering elements , proving it was a beta emitter ( β @-@ emission ) with a half @-@ life of 25 hours . The Hungarian Academy of Sciences published her findings . Rona first coined the terms " isotope labels " and " tracers " during this study , noting that the velocity of diffusion depended on the mass of the nuclides . Though contained in a footnote , this was the basis for the development of the mass spectrographic and heavy water studies later performed by other scientists . In addition to her scientific proficiency , Rona spoke English , French , German , and Hungarian . 
 When Hevesy left Budapest , in 1918 Franz Tangl , a noted biochemist and physiologist of the University of Budapest , offered Rona a teaching position . She taught chemistry to selected students whom Tangl felt had insufficient knowledge to complete the course work , becoming the first woman to teach chemistry at university level in Hungary . 
 The apartment in which Rona and her mother were living was seized when the communists invaded Hungary in 1919 . Owing to political instability and the persecution of those with communist sympathies during the countering White Terror , an increasing amount of work at the Institute fell to Rona . When offered a position in 1921 to return to Dahlem and the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute , by Otto Hahn , Rona resigned . She joined Hahn 's staff in Berlin to separate ionium ( now known as Th @-@ 230 ) from uranium . Hyperinflation in the Weimar Republic forced her transfer to the Textile Fiber Institute of Kaiser Wilhelm , as practical research was the only work permitted at the time . Theoretical research with no essential application was not a priority . Her training allowed her to return to a more stable Hungary and accept a position in a textile factory there in 1923 . She did not care for the work and soon left , joining the staff of the Institute for Radium Research of Vienna in 1924 at the request of Stefan Meyer . Her research there focused on measuring the absorption and range of hydrogen rays , as well as on developing polonium as an alternative radioactive material to radium . 
 
 = = Austria = = 
 
 As early as 1926 , Meyer had written to Irène Joliot @-@ Curie suggesting that Rona work with her to learn how his laboratory could make their own polonium samples . Once Hans Pettersson was able to secure funds to pay Rona 's expenses , Joliot @-@ Curie allowed her to come and study polonium separation at the Curie Institute in Paris . Rona developed an enhanced method of preparing polonium sources and producing alpha @-@ emissions . ( α @-@ emission ) . Gaining recognition as an expert in the field , she took those skills back to the Radium Institute along with a small disc of polonium . This disc allowed Rona to create lab specimens of polonium , which were used in much of the Institute 's subsequent research . 
 Her skills were in high demand and she formed many collaborations in Vienna , working with Ewald Schmidt on the modification of Paul Bonét @-@ Maury 's method of vaporizing polonium ; with Marietta Blau on photographic emulsions of hydrogen rays ; and with Hans Pettersson . In 1928 , Pettersson asked her to analyze a sample of sea bottom sediment to determine its radium content . Because the lab she was working in was contaminated , she took the samples to the oceanographic laboratory at Bornö Marine Research Station on Stora Bornö in Gullmarsfjorden , Sweden , which would become her summer research destination for the next 12 years . Her analyses with Berta Karlik on the half @-@ lives of uranium , thorium , and actinium decay identified radiometric dating and elemental alpha particle ranges . In 1933 , Rona and Karlik won the Austrian Academy of Sciences Haitinger Prize . 
 In 1934 , Rona was back in Paris studying with Joliot @-@ Curie , who had discovered artificial radioactivity . Soon after , Curie died and Rona became ill , but she was able to return to Vienna late the following year to share what had been learned with a group of researchers made up of Pettersson , Elizabeth Kara @-@ Michailova , and Ernst Føyn , who was serving as an assistant to Ellen Gleditsch at that time . Their studies centered on research of the effect caused by bombarding radionuclides with neutrons . In 1935 Rona consolidated some of these relationships , working on Stora Bornö , then visiting Gleditsch in Oslo , then traveling to Copenhagen to see Hevesy , and later to Kålhuvudet , Sweden to meet with Karlik and Pettersson . One of the projects the group had been working on for several years was to determine if there was any correlation between water depth and radium content , and their seawater research evaluated the concentration of elements in seawater collected from different locations . 
 After the 1938 Anschluss , Rona and Marietta Blau left the Radium Institute because of their Jewish heritage and the antisemitic persecution they experienced in the laboratory . Rona first returned to Budapest and worked in an industrial laboratory , but within a few months , the position was eliminated . She worked from October to December 1938 in Sweden , and then accepted a temporary position for one year at the University of Oslo , which had been offered by Gleditsch . Reluctant to leave her home , at the end of her year in Oslo , Rona returned to Hungary . She was appointed to a position at the Radium @-@ Cancer Hospital in Budapest , preparing radium for medicinal purposes . 
 
 = = Emigration = = 
 
 Faced with encroaching Russians on one side and the Nazi involvement in Hungary during World War II on the other , in early 1941 Rona obtained a visitor 's visa and fled to the United States . For three months she was unemployed and suspected of being a spy , though she sought help from scientists she had worked with in Europe to find employment . At a meeting of the American Physical Society , she met Austrian physicist Karl Herzfeld , who helped her secure a teaching post at Trinity College in Washington , D.C. During this period , she was awarded a Carnegie Fellowship to research at the Geophysical Laboratory of the Carnegie Institute , working on analysis of seawater and sediments . Between 1941 and 1942 , she conducted work at Carnegie in conjunction with the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution , measuring the amount of radium in seawater and river water . Her study , completed in 1942 , showed that the ratio of radium to uranium was lower in seawater and higher in river water . 
 After returning from a summer visit to Los Altos , California , Rona received a vague telegram from the Institute of Optics at the University of Rochester referencing war work and polonium , but no details of an assignment . When Rona responded that she would be interested in helping with the war effort but had immigration issues , a man identifying himself as Brian O 'Bryen appeared in her office and explained the nature of the confidential work for the Manhattan Project . They proposed buying her method of polonium extraction and gave specific instructions for the type of assistants she might use — someone unfamiliar with chemistry or physics . Her non @-@ citizen status did not preclude her from working for the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) , to which she gave her methods without compensation . Before the Manhattan Project , polonium had been used only in small samples , but the project proposed to use both polonium and beryllium to create a reaction forcing neutrons to be ejected and ignite the fission reaction required for the atom bomb . Plutonium plants , based on her specifications for what was needed to process element , were built in the New Mexico desert at Los Alamos National Laboratory , but Rona was given no details . 
 Rona 's methods were also used as part of the experiments conducted by the Office of Human Radiation Experiments to determine the effects of human exposure to radiation . Early in her career , she had been exposed to the dangers of radium . Rona 's requests for protective gas masks were denied , as Stefan Meyer downplayed the hazards of exposure . She purchased protective gear with her own money , not believing there was no danger . When vials of radioactive material exploded and the laboratory became contaminated , Rona was convinced her mask had saved her . Gleditsch had also warned her of the dangers the year Rona was sick and living in Paris , when Joliot @-@ Curie died , emphasizing the risk of radium @-@ related anemia . In her 1978 book about her experiences , Rona wrote about the damage to bones , hands , and lungs of the scientists studying radioactivity . Since they wore no gloves and frequently poured substances between vials without protection , she noted that their thumbs , forefingers , and ring fingers were often damaged . The secrecy surrounding the project makes it difficult to know if any of the scientists not directly working on any project knew specifically what their contributions were being used for . 
 
 = = Later career = = 
 
 Rona continued teaching until 1946 at Trinity . In 1947 , she began working at the Argonne National Laboratory . Her work there focused on ion exchange reactions and she published several works for the United States Atomic Energy Commission . In 1948 , she became a naturalized U.S. citizen . In 1950 , she began research work at the Oak Ridge Institute of Nuclear Studies as a chemist and senior scientist in nuclear studies . During this period , she collaborated with Texas A & M University on the geochronology of seabed sediments , dating core samples by estimating their radioactive decay . She retired from Oak Ridge in 1965 and then went to work at the University of Miami , teaching at the Institute of Marine Sciences where she worked for a decade . Rona retired for a second time in 1976 and returned to Tennessee in the late 1970s , publishing a book in 1978 on her radioactive tracer methods . 
 Rona died on 27 July 1981 in Oak Ridge , Tennessee . She was posthumously inducted into the Tennessee Women 's Hall of Fame in 2015 . 
 
 = = Selected works = = 
 
 Róna , Erzsébet ( 1912 ) . A bróm és az egyértékű aliphás alkoholok ( PhD ) ( in Hungarian ) . Budapest , Hungary : Budapesti Tudományegyetem . 
 Róna , E. ( 1914 ) . " Az urán átalakulásairól " . Mathematikai és Természettudományi Értesítő ( in Hungarian ) ( Budapest , Hungary ) 35 : 350 . 
 Róna , E. ( 1914 ) . " I. Über die Reduktion des Zimtaldehyds durch Hefe . II . Vergärung von Benzylbrenztraubensäure " . Biochemische Zeirschrift ( in German ) 67 : 137 – 142 . 
 Róna , E. ( 1917 ) . " A rádium @-@ emanáczió diffúzióállandója és atomátmérője " . Magyar Chemiai Folyóirat ( in Hungarian ) ( Budapest , Hungary ) 23 : 156 . 
 Róna , Elisabeth ( 11 February 1922 ) . " Über den Ionium @-@ Gehalt in Radium @-@ Rückständen " . Berichte der deutschen chemischen Gesellschaft ( A and B Series ) ( in German ) 55 ( 2 ) : 294 – 301 . 
 Róna , Elisabeth ( 1926 ) . Absorptions- und Reichweitenbestimmungen an " natürlichen " H @-@ Strahlen ( in German ) . Vienna , Austria : Hölder @-@ Pichler @-@ Tempsky A.G. OCLC 72698422 . 
 Róna , Elisabeth ; Schmidt , Ewald A W ( 1927 ) . Untersuchungen über das Eindringen des Poloniums in Metalle ( in German ) . Vienna , Austria : Hölder @-@ Pichler @-@ Tempsky A.G. OCLC 72698433 . 
 Róna , Elisabeth ; Schmidt , Ewald A. W. ( 1928 ) . " Eine Methode zur Herstellung von hochkonzentrierten Poloniumpräparaten " . Sitzungsberichte Akademie der Wissenschaften ( in German ) ( Vienna , Austria : Math @-@ naturwissenschaften ) 2A ( 137 ) : 103 – 115 . 
 Róna , Elisabeth ( 1928 ) . " Zur Herstellung von Polonium aus Radiumverbindungen und aktiven Bleisalzen ( Mitteilungen des Institutes für Radiumforschung 217 " . Sitzungsberichte Akademie der Wissenschaften ( in German ) ( Vienna , Austria : Math @-@ naturwissenschaften ) 2A ( 137 ) : 227 – 234 . 
 Blau , Marietta ; Róna , Elisabeth ( 1930 ) . " Anwendung der Chamié ’ schen photographischen Methode zur Prüfung des chemischen Verhaltens von Polonium " . Sitzungsberichte Akademie der Wissenschaften ( in German ) ( Vienna , Austria : Math @-@ naturwissenschaften ) 2A ( 139 ) : 276 – 279 . 
 Rona , Elizabeth ; Rieder , Fritz ( 1932 ) . Untersuchungen über Reichweiten von Alpha @-@ Strahlen der Actinium @-@ Folgeprodukte ( in German ) . Vienna , Austria : Hölder @-@ Pichler @-@ Tempsky . OCLC 457925762 . 
 Róna , Elisabeth ; Hoffer , Margarete ( 1935 ) . Verdampfungsversuche an Polonium in Sauerstoff und Stickstoff ( in German ) . Vienna , Austria : Hölder @-@ Pichler @-@ Tempsky A.G. OCLC 72698437 . 
 Róna , Elisabeth ; Neuninger , Elisabeth ( 1936 ) . Beiträge zur Frage der künstlichen Aktivität des Thoriums ( in German ) . Vienna , Austria : Hölder @-@ Pichler @-@ Tempsky A.G. OCLC 72698423 . 
 Róna , Elisabeth ; Scheichenberger , Herta ; Stangl , Robert ( 1938 ) . Weitere Beiträge zur Frage der künstlichen Aktivität des Thoriums ( in German ) . Vienna , Austria : Hölder @-@ Pichler @-@ Tempsky A.G. OCLC 72698425 . 
 Rona , Elizabeth ; Föyn , Ernst ; Karlik , Berta ; Pettersson , Hans ( 1939 ) . The Radioactivity of seawater . Göteborg , Sweden : Elanders boktryck . OCLC 459915451 . 
 Rona , Elizabeth ( 1948 ) . Argonne National Laboratory , ed . Exchange reactions of uranium ions in solution . Oak Ridge , Tennessee : U.S. Atomic Energy Commission . OCLC 702211487 . 
 Rona , Elizabeth ( 1949 ) . Argonne National Laboratory , ed . Some aspects of isotopic exchange reactions . Oak Ridge , Tennessee : U.S. Atomic Energy Commission . OCLC 794877518 . 
 Rona , Elizabeth ; Gilpatrick , L O ; Jeffrey , Lela M , et. al . ( December 1956 ) . " Uranium determination in sea water " . Eos : Transactions American Geophysical Union ( Washington , D.C. : American Geophysical Union ) 37 ( 6 ) : 697 – 701 . ISSN 0002 @-@ 8606 . 
 Rona , Elizabeth ( October 1957 ) . " A method to determine the isotopic ratio of Thorium @-@ 232 to Thorium @-@ 230 in minerals " . Eos : Transactions American Geophysical Union ( Washington , D.C. : American Geophysical Union ) 38 ( 5 ) : 754 – 759 . ISSN 0002 @-@ 8606 . 
 Rona , Elizabeth ; Hood , Donald W ; Muse , Lowell ; Buglio , Benjamin ( April 1962 ) . " Activation Analysis of Manganese and Zinc in Sea Water " . Limnology and Oceanography ( Washington , D.C. : Association for the Sciences of Limnology and Oceanography , Inc . ) 7 ( 2 ) : 201 – 206 . ISSN 1939 @-@ 5590 . 
 Rona , Elizabeth ; Akers , L K ; Noakes , John E ; Supernaw , Irwin ( 1963 ) . " Geochronology in the Gulf of Mexico . Part I " . Progress in Oceanography ( Philadelphia , Pennsylvania : Elsevier ) 3 : 289 – 295 . ISSN 0079 @-@ 6611 . 
 Rona , Elizabeth ( 26 June 1964 ) . " Geochronology of Marine and Fluvial Sediments " . Science ( Washington , D.C. : American Association for the Advancement of Science ) 144 ( 3626 ) : 1595 – 1597 . ISSN 0036 @-@ 8075 . 
 Rona , Elizabeth ( July 1967 ) . Natural radioactive elements in marine environment ( Report ) . Miami , Florida : Atomic Energy Commission . 
 Rona , Elizabeth ( 1978 ) . How it came about : radioactivity , nuclear physics , atomic energy . Oak Ridge , Tennessee : Oak Ridge Associated Universities . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 930 @-@ 78003 @-@ 6 .
