= Red Rackham 's Treasure = 
 
 Red Rackham 's Treasure ( French : Le Trésor de Rackham le Rouge ) is the twelfth volume of The Adventures of Tintin , the comics series by Belgian cartoonist Hergé . The story was serialised daily in Le Soir , Belgium 's leading francophone newspaper , from February to September 1943 amidst the German occupation of Belgium during World War II . Completing an arc begun in The Secret of the Unicorn , the story tells of young reporter Tintin and his friend Captain Haddock as they launch an expedition to the Caribbean to locate the treasure of the pirate Red Rackham . 
 Red Rackham 's Treasure was a commercial success and was published in book form by Casterman the year following its conclusion . Hergé continued The Adventures of Tintin with The Seven Crystal Balls , while the series itself became a defining part of the Franco @-@ Belgian comics tradition . Red Rackham 's Treasure has been cited as one of the most important installments in the series for marking the first appearance of eccentric scientist Cuthbert Calculus , who subsequently became a core character . The story has been variously adapted for both the 1957 Belvision animated series , Hergé 's Adventures of Tintin , and for the 1991 animated series The Adventures of Tintin by Ellipse and Nelvana , as well as for the feature film The Adventures of Tintin : The Secret of the Unicorn ( 2011 ) . 
 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 
 The synopsis continues a plot begun in The Secret of the Unicorn . 
 Tintin and his friend Captain Haddock plan an expedition to the West Indies aboard a fishing trawler , the Sirius , to search for the treasure of the pirate Red Rackham . Having previously read three parchments authored by Haddock 's ancestor , Sir Francis Haddock , the duo had discovered the coordinates to what they believe is the treasure aboard the sunken 17th century vessel , the Unicorn . An eccentric , hard @-@ of @-@ hearing inventor named Professor Cuthbert Calculus offers to aid them with the use of his shark @-@ shaped one @-@ man submarine , but they decline his assistance . Setting sail , they are joined by the police detectives Thomson and Thompson and soon discover that Calculus has stowed away on board , bringing his submarine with him . 
 When they reach the coordinates shown on the parchments , there is no wreckage in sight . Frustrated , Haddock ponders turning back , but Tintin soon realizes the problem : If Sir Francis had used a French instead of an English chart to calculate the position , the coordinates would have been measured on the Paris Meridian rather than the Greenwich Meridian . As they have been using the Greenwich Meridian , they realise that they are too far west . 
 After traveling to the correct position , they discover an unknown island . There , they find a statue of Sir Francis Haddock and other evidence ; Tintin deduces that Francis Haddock had taken refuge on the island and that the wreck of the Unicorn must be nearby . They locate the wreck using Calculus ' submarine and recover various artefacts from it , but do not find the treasure . Among the artefacts is a strongbox containing old documents revealing that Sir Francis Haddock had been the owner of the country estate Marlinspike Hall . Back in Belgium , Calculus purchases the Hall using funds from the sale of his submarine design , and gives it to Haddock . Tintin and Haddock search the house 's cellars , where Tintin spots a statue of Saint John the Evangelist holding a cross with a globe and eagle at its feet . Tintin suddenly remembers that Francis Haddock 's original three parchments said , " For ' tis from the light that light will dawn , and then shines forth the Eagle 's cross " and realises that this message referred , not to the location of the Unicorn , but to Saint John " the eagle " : his traditional symbol . Tintin locates the island on the globe , presses a secret button he finds there , and discovers Red Rackham 's treasure hidden inside . 
 
 = = History = = 
 
 
 = = = Background = = = 
 
 Amidst the German occupation of Belgium during World War II , Hergé had accepted a position working for Le Soir , Belgian 's largest French @-@ language daily newspaper . Confiscated from its original owners , Le Soir was permitted by the German authorities to reopen under the directorship of Belgian editor Raymond de Becker , although it remained firmly under Nazi control , supporting the German war effort and espousing anti @-@ Semitism . After joining Le Soir on 15 October 1940 , Hergé became editor of its new children 's supplement Le Soir Jeunesse , with the help of an old friend , Paul Jamin , and the cartoonist Jacques Van Melkebeke , before paper shortages forced Tintin to be serialised daily in the main pages of Le Soir . Some Belgians were upset that Hergé was willing to work for a newspaper controlled by the occupying Nazi administration , although he was heavily enticed by the size of Le Soir 's readership , which numbered some 600 @,@ 000 . Faced with the reality of Nazi oversight , Hergé abandoned the overt political themes that had pervaded much of his earlier work , instead adopting a policy of neutrality . Entertainment producer and author Harry Thompson observed that , without the need to satirise political types , " Hergé was now concentrating more on plot and on developing a new style of character comedy . The public reacted positively . " 
 Red Rackham 's Treasure was to be the second half of a series of connected events in two parts which had begun with the previous adventure , The Secret of the Unicorn . This two @-@ part series was the first that Hergé had produced since Cigars of the Pharaoh and The Blue Lotus ( 1934 – 36 ) . However , as Tintin expert Michael Farr related , whereas Cigars of the Pharaoh and The Blue Lotus had been largely " self @-@ sufficient and self @-@ contained " , the connection between The Secret of the Unicorn and Red Rackham 's Treasure was to be far closer . 
 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 
 Red Rackham 's Treasure introduced Professor Cuthbert Calculus to The Adventures of Tintin , who became a recurring character . Hergé had made use of various eccentric professors in earlier volumes of the series , such as Sophocles Sarcophagus in Cigars of the Pharaoh , Hector Alembick in King Ottokar 's Sceptre , and Decimus Phostle in The Shooting Star , all of whom prefigure the arrival of Calculus . The character 's deafness had been inspired by a colleague whom Hergé had worked with years earlier at Le Vingtième Siècle . Visually , Calculus was based on a real scientist , the Swiss inventor Auguste Piccard , who had been the first man to explore the stratosphere in a hot air balloon in 1931 . Hergé had observed Piccard walking about Brussels on a number of occasions , however the character of Calculus would be notably much shorter than Piccard . Hergé named this character Tryphon Tournesol ; while the surname meant " sunflower " , the forename was adopted from a carpenter named Tryphon Beckaert whom Hergé had encountered in Boitsfort . Tryphon Tournesol was later renamed Cuthbert Calculus in the English translation and Balduin Bienlein ( meaning " Little Bee " ) for the German translation . 
 Calculus ' shark @-@ shaped submarine was visually based on a real American submarine ; Hergé had seen a picture of this in a German newspaper . The diving suit worn in the story was also based on clippings that Hergé had accumulated . Similarly , the dockside bar depicted by the cartoonist was based on an illustration that he had collected . The shop where Haddock and Tintin buy the diving equipment , including the suit , was inspired from a picture of a bar which was featured in the German magazine , Berliner Illustrirte Zeitung . The tribal effigy found on a Caribbean island by Sir Francis Haddock was based on a Bamileke tribal statue from Cameroon that Hergé saw in a museum . The Sirius , which had appeared before in The Shooting Star , was named after the SS Sirius , the first ship to cross the Atlantic Ocean solely under steam power , but was visually based upon the design of a trawler , the John @-@ O.88. Hergé had sketched this ship in Ostend docks before obtaining both detailed plans of the trawler from the builders , Jos Boel & Son , and a small @-@ scale model of it from a collector . The undersea wreck of the Unicorn was loosely inspired by images of the wreck of a 17th @-@ century Swedish vessel , the Vasa , which Hergé had collected . The instance in the story in which a shark swallows a large box ( that the characters hope contains the treasure ) is based on a real account of a shark that swallowed a camera from the American underwater photographer Otis Barton , which Hergé had encountered in a French illustrated magazine . 
 The brief appearance of Dr. Daumière , who warns Haddock to cease drinking alcohol , was an allusion to Hergé 's own physician , Dr. Daumerie . Hergé made a comical reference to the French comedian Sacha Guitry in the story by advertising a play by Guitry titled Me in which Guitry himself plays every role . The adventure was the first to depict Tintin wearing a white shirt under a blue sweater ; this would go on to become the character 's iconic costume . 
 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 
 Le Trésor De Rackham Le Rouge began serialisation as a daily strip in Le Soir from 19 February 1943 . The title of the new adventure had been announced in an advertisement in the newspaper two days previously . In Belgium , it was then published in a 62 @-@ page book format by Editions Casterman in 1944 . Red Rackham 's Treasure contained one of Hergé 's two favourite illustrations from The Adventures of Tintin . It combines three actions encapsulating a sequence of events into one drawing : Haddock striding up the beach in the foreground , the rowboat being brought ashore in the middle ground , and the Sirius weighing anchor in the background . 
 Rather than immediately embark on the creation of a new Tintin adventure , Hergé agreed to a proposal that Le Soir 's crime writer , Paul Kinnet , would author a detective story featuring Thomson and Thompson . The story was titled Dupont et Dupond , détectives ( Thomson and Thompson , Detectives ) , and was illustrated by Hergé . 
 The Secret of the Unicorn and Red Rackham 's Treasure were the first two Adventures of Tintin to be published in English @-@ language translations for the British market . Published by Casterman , these two editions did not sell well , and have since become rare collector 's items . They would be republished for the British market seven years later , this time by Methuen with translations provided by Michael Turner and Leslie Lonsdale @-@ Cooper . Farr reported that Red Rackham 's Treasure is the best @-@ selling story in The Adventures of Tintin , while Harry Thompson referred to The Secret of the Unicorn @-@ Red Rackham 's Treasure arc as " the most successful of all Tintin 's adventures " . 
 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 
 Harry Thompson stated that the Secrets of the Unicorn @-@ Red Rackham 's Treasure arc marked the beginning of the third and central stage of " Tintin 's career " . He furthermore stated that in these two stories , Tintin has been converted from a reporter into an explorer to cope with the new political climate . He stated that in this story , Hergé " abandons the complex plotting of The Secret of the Unicorn in favour of an episodic style of adventure not seen since the early books " . Thompson further draws attention to the arrival of Calculus in the story , describing him as the " third and final member " of Tintin 's " family " . Thompson was critical of the use of colour in the story , stating that much of it looks better in black @-@ and @-@ white , as it was originally printed in Le Soir . 
 Hergé biographer Benoît Peeters observed that both The Secret of the Unicorn and Red Rackham 's Treasure " hold a crucial position " in The Adventures of Tintin as it establishes the " Tintin universe " with its core set of characters . He felt that while religious elements had been present in previous stories , they were even stronger in The Secret of the Unicorn and its sequel , something which he attributed to Van Melkebeke 's influence . Peeters believed that Red Rackham 's Treasure was " an unforgettable book " because it is the volume in which the " family " — meaning Tintin , Snowy , Haddock , and Calculus — all come together . Fellow biographer Pierre Assouline echoed this idea , noting that Hergé had " settled " the three characters in their new home . Focusing on the character of Calculus , he noted that the idea of the eccentric professor was " so universal that it would be inaccurate to point to any one source " , suggesting possible influences from Charlie Chaplin and Hergé 's own father . For Assouline , the professor embodies " the gentle madness and subtle humour in comic strips " . He added that both Red Rackham 's Treasure and its predecessor " reveal Hergé at a new level in his art " , and suggested that the reason for their popularity lay in the fact that they were " the visual continuation of a literary universe that stretches from Jules Verne to Pierre Benoit " . 
 Jean @-@ Marc Lofficier and Randy Lofficier opined that The Secret of the Unicorn @-@ Red Rackham 's Treasure arc represents " a turning point " for the series as it shifts the reader 's attention from Tintin to Haddock , who has become " by far , the most interesting character " . They claim that the introduction of Calculus " completes the indispensable triangle that imbues Tintin with its mythic quality . " Asserting that here , Hergé 's " art has reached a degree of near @-@ perfection " , they awarded it five stars out of five . 
 Michael Farr said that the scene introducing Calculus was " a comic tour de force " marking the start of the " rich vein of humour " that the character brought to the series . Noting that unlike The Shooting Star , this two @-@ book story arc contains " scarcely an allusion to occupation and war " , he praised the arc 's narrative as " perfectly paced , without that feeling of haste " present in some of Hergé 's earlier work . 
 In his psychoanalytical study of the Adventures of Tintin , the academic Jean @-@ Marie Apostolidès characterised the Secret of the Unicorn @-@ Red Rackham 's Treasure arc as being about the characters going on a " treasure hunt that turns out to be at the same time a search for their roots . " He stated that the arc revolves around Haddock 's ancestry , and in doing so " deals with the meanings of symbolic relations within personal life " . Highlighting that Calculus was one of many eccentric scientists to have appeared in the series , he nonetheless emphasises his difference by noting that Calculus approaches Tintin , rather than Tintin approaching him , as the young reporter had done with previous scientists . Commenting on the introduction of Calculus ' shark submarine , he states that it " allows them to cross a boundary previously restricting human beings and to penetrate into another universe , the one beneath the seas that holds secrets hitherto unknown . " Ultimately , he believes that by the end of the story , " the family structure is in place " , with Calculus representing a father figure with financial control , and Haddock and Tintin , who have become brothers through their joint adventure , adding that with the aid of Francis Haddock , " the ancestor " , they are given a home at Marlinspike Hall . 
 Literary critic Tom McCarthy highlighted what he perceived as scenes in Red Rackham 's Treasure which reflected common themes in The Adventures of Tintin . He pointed out that in being a stowaway aboard the ship , Calculus was one of many stowaways in the series , and that the treasure represented the theme of jewels and precious stones which also cropped up in The Broken Ear , Tintin in the Congo , and The Castafiore Emerald . He noted Tintin 's misreading of the parchments and stated this was one of a number of calculation mistakes that the character makes in the series . He suggested that a scene in which the shark submarine pushes between Haddock 's buttocks was a form of sexual innuendo referencing anal sex , highlighting similar innuendo in The Broken Ear and The Crab with the Golden Claws . 
 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 
 In 1957 , the animation company Belvision Studios produced Hergé 's Adventures of Tintin , a series of daily five @-@ minute colour adaptations based upon Hergé 's original comics . Red Rackham 's Treasure was the fifth story to be adapted in the second series ( and the eighth to be adapted overall ) , being directed by Ray Goossens and written by the cartoonist Greg . In later years , Greg would become editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Tintin magazine . 
 In 1991 , a collaboration between the French studio Ellipse and the Canadian animation company Nelvana adapted 21 of the stories into a series of episodes , each 42 minutes long . Red Rackham 's Treasure was the tenth episode of The Adventures of Tintin to be produced , although it ran half as long as most of the others . Directed by Stéphane Bernasconi , the series has been praised for being " generally faithful " , with compositions having been actually directly taken from the panels in the original comic book . 
 The Adventures of Tintin : The Secret of the Unicorn , a motion capture feature film directed by Steven Spielberg and produced by Peter Jackson , was released in most of the world October – November 2011 , and in the US on 21 December 2011 . The film is based partly upon The Secret of the Unicorn and partly on both Red Rackham 's Treasure and The Crab with the Golden Claws . A video @-@ game tie @-@ in to the movie was released October 2011 .
