= Lilioid monocots = 
 
 Lilioid monocots ( lilioids , liliid monocots , petaloid monocots , petaloid lilioid monocots ) is an informal name used for a grade ( grouping of taxa with common characteristics ) of five monocot orders ( Petrosaviales , Dioscoreales , Pandanales , Liliales and Asparagales ) in which the majority of species have flowers with relatively large , coloured tepals . This characteristic is similar to that found in lilies ( " lily @-@ like " ) . Petaloid monocots refers to the flowers having tepals which all resemble petals ( petaloid ) . The taxonomic terms Lilianae or Liliiflorae have also been applied to this assemblage at various times . From the early nineteenth century many of the species in this group of plants were put into a very broadly defined family , Liliaceae sensu lato or s.l. ( lily family ) . These classification systems are still found in many books and other sources . Within the monocots the Liliaceae s.l. were distinguished from the Glumaceae . 
 The development of molecular phylogenetics , cladistic theory and phylogenetic methods in the 1990s resulted in a dismemberment of the Liliaceae and its subsequent redistribution across three lilioid orders ( Liliales , Asparagales and Dioscoreales ) . Subsequent work has shown that two other more recently recognized orders , Petrosaviales and Pandanales also segregate with this group , resulting in the modern concept of five constituent orders within the lilioid monocot assemblage . This has resulted in treating monocots as three informal groups , alismatid , lilioid and commelinid monocots . The lilioids are paraphyletic in the sense that commelinids form a sister group to Asparagales . 
 
 = = Description = = 
 
 
 = = = True lilioids = = = 
 
 The descriptive term " petaloid lilioid monocot " relates to the conspicuous petal @-@ like ( petaloid ) tepals which superficially resemble true lilies ( Lilium ) . Morphologically , the petaloid or lilioid monocots can be considered to possess five groups ( pentacyclic ) of three @-@ fold ( trimerous ) whorls . Lilioid monocots all have flowers which can be considered to have been derived from a lily @-@ like flower with six relatively similar tepals , and six stamens . The typical lilioid gynoecium has three carpels fused into a superior trilocular ( three @-@ chambered ) superior ovary , axile placentation , a single hollow style , and several ovules with anatropous orientation in one or two rows per locule and nectaries at the base . 
 However , floral synapomorphy ( shared characteristics ) is rare since most conform to the general monocot pattern . This pattern is ancestral ( plesiomorphic ) for the lilioid monocots . Structural monosymmetry is rare , except for Orchidaceae . 
 Various trends are apparent among the lilioids , notably a change to an inferior ovary and a reduction of the number of stamens to three . In some groups ( such as the genus Trillium in the Liliaceae ) , the tepals have become clearly differentiated , so that the flower has three coloured petals and three smaller green sepals . Almost all lilioid monocots retain at least three petal @-@ like tepals . Since some commelinids ( e.g. Tradescantia ) have petaloid flowers , the term ' lilioid ' is a more accurate one for the group which excludes them , since the term petaloid monocot is still occasionally used in describing commelinids . The morphological concept of petaloid monocots has been equated with " animal @-@ attracting " ( that is , for pollination ) as opposed to wind @-@ pollinating plants ( such as grasses ) that have evolved very different floral structures . Pollen structure shows that of the two main tapetum types , secretory and plasmodial , the lilioid monocots are nearly all secretory . 
 
 = = = Comparison with other monocot orders = = = 
 
 In the orders that branched off before the lilioid monocots , the Acorales and Alismatales , flowers differ in several ways . In some cases , like Acorus ( Acorales ) , they have become insignificant . In others , like Butomus ( Alismatales ) , they have six coloured tepals , and so could be called ' petaloid ' , but stamens and carpels are more numerous than in the lilioid monocots . 
 The later evolved commelinids have various kinds of flower , few of which are ' lily @-@ like ' . In the order Poales , comprising grasses , rushes and sedges , flowers are either petal @-@ less or have small , unshowy petals . Many Zingiberales species have brightly coloured and showy flowers . However , their apparent structure is misleading . For example , the six tepals of cannas are small and hidden under expanded and brightly coloured stamens or staminodes which resemble petals and may be mistaken for them . 
 
 = = History = = 
 
 
 = = = Morphological definitions = = = 
 
 In one of the earliest monocot taxonomies , that of John Lindley ( 1830 ) , the grouping corresponding to the lilioid monocots was the " tribe " Petaloideae . In Lindley 's system the monocots consisted of two tribes , the Petaloideae , and the Glumaceae ( the grasses and sedges ) . Lindley divided the Petaloideae into 32 " orders " ( roughly corresponding to families ) and the Glumaceae into two further orders . Various successive taxonomies of the monocots also emphasized the grouping of species with petaloid ( undifferentiated ) perianths , such as Bentham and Hooker 's Coronarieæ and Hutchinson 's Corolliferae ( " Corolla bearing " ) ( 1936 ) . Hence the concept that there was a natural grouping of monocots whose flowers were predominantly petaloid , gave notion to the term " petaloid monocots " . The core group of petaloids were the Liliaceae , hence " lilioid monocots " . 
 The term " lilioid monocot " or lilioid " has had widely varying interpretations . One of the narrower applications is " lily @-@ like " monocots , meaning the two orders Asparagales and Liliales , but the term has also been applied to Takhtajan 's superorder Lilianae , the whole of Liliales , or restricted to Cronquist 's broadly defined Liliaceae . Although " petaloid " and " lilioid " have often been used interchangeably , as Heywood points out , some usages of " petaloid monocot " , particularly in horticulture , are so broad as to be almost meaningless in that it had been used to refer to all species with conspicuous petals or perianth segments ( tepals ) , which would cover a broad swathe of families ( he estimated three dozen across many orders ) . Other authors have defined it equally broadly as " having two whorls of tepals ( sepals and petals ) that are petal @-@ like " . 
 As Kron and Chase stated in 1995 , this taxonomic unit had been in a considerable state of flux , with significant variation between the systems of Cronquist ( 1981 ) , Thorne ( 1983 , 1992 ) , and Dahlgren ( 1985 ) . When classification systems were based on morphological characters alone , lilioid species which clearly departed from the " lily " pattern were easily placed into separate families . For example , the Amaryllidaceae contained species whose flowers had six stamens and an inferior ovary . The Iridaceae contained those with three stamens and an inferior ovary . The remaining taxa were put together in a very broadly defined Liliaceae , usually refereed to as Liliaceae sensu lato ( s.l. ) . The Cronquist system 's definition , for example , is the broadest of all . Rolf Dahlgren and colleagues were responsible for one of the most radical reorganisation of families , and in their 1985 monocot monograph defined the two orders ( Asparagales and Liliales ) which contain the bulk of monocot geophytes , as constituting the lilioid monocots . 
 The development of DNA sequencing and the use of genetic data in determining relationships between species of monocots confirmed what many taxonomists had long suspected : Liliaceae s.l. was highly polyphyletic . The family was demonstrated to include a significant number of unrelated groups , which belonged to quite separate families and even orders . For instance some genera such as Hyacinthus , previously placed in Liliaceae s.l. , were reclassified in families within Asparagales ( in this case Asparagaceae ) . In 1995 Chase et al. reviewed the understanding of the lilioids and equated them to Dahlgreen 's Liliiflorae , which they designated as superorder Lilianae . They pointed out that the understanding of the phylogenetics of this group was critical for the establishment of a monocot classification . They also noted that while many authors treated this group as monophyletic ( having a common ancestor ) , a closer reading of their texts revealed evidence of paraphyly ( excluding some descendants of a common ancestor ) . For instance , Dahlgren had based monophyly on a single synapomorphy , that of a petaloid perianth , yet in discussing his Lilliflorae admitted it was undoubtedly paraphyletic . Dahlgren treated the monocots as split between ten superorders and placed five orders ( Dioscoreales , Asparagales , Liliales , Melanthiales , Burmanniales and Orchidales ) in his Liliiflorae . 
 
 = = = Phylogenetic era = = = 
 
 In the 1995 study by Chase et al. referred to above , which was the largest yet to use purely molecular data , the results demonstrated paraphyly of the lilioids . However , because their data contradicted purely morphological phylogenies they were reluctant to draw definite conclusions as to the monophyly of this group . They identified four major clades of monocots . They named these alismatids , aroids , stemonoids and dioscoreoids , in addition to Acorus , and a core group of Asparagales , Liliales and commelinoids . They based the names of these groups on the closest corresponding superorders and orders of Dahlgren , with the exception of stemonoids ( based on Stemonaceae for which there was no obvious equivalent ) . 
 There was no clear clade corresponding to Dahlgren 's Liliiflorae , whose families were distributed amongst the aroids and dioscoreoids . Of Dahlgren 's Liliiflorae , the Dioscoreales largely grouped into dioscoreoids , with the exception of Stemonaceae . The Asparagales formed two major groupings , which they labelled " higher " and " lower asparagoids " , and included both the Iridaceae and Orchidaceae from Dahlgren 's Liliales . On the other hand , a number of families from three other orders ( Asparagales , Dioscoreales , Melanthiales ) segregated together with the remaining Liliales families . Genera from Dahlgren 's Melanthiales were found in both dioscoreoids and the redefined Liliales . Finally Dahlgren 's Burmanniales were found to belong with the dioscoreoids . Some Asparagales taxa were also found amongst the commelinoids . The stemonoids were formed from Stemonaceae and other families from a variety of orders , including Pandanaceae ( which alone formed Dahlgren 's Pandaniflorae ) . 
 In an attempt to resolve the apparent differences between morphological and molecularly defined trees , a combined analysis was undertaken which confirmed superorder Liliiflorae as monophyletic , provided that a few modifications were undertaken . These included the removal of two tribes of Melanthiaceae ( Melanthiales ) and the inclusion of three additional families ( Cyclanthaceae , Pandanaceae and Velloziaceae ) from other superorders . This newly and more narrowly redefined Lilianae / Liliiflorae contained three orders , Aparagales , Liliales and Dioscoreales ( which now included the stemonoids ) . This analysis also allowed for the establishment of a single synapomorphy , although this time by the presence of an inferior ovary . Significantly , the authors noted that it was no wonder the authors of angiosperm classifications had been exasperated by the Lilianae . 
 
 = = = Angiosperm Phylogeny Group = = = 
 
 These findings , presented at the first Monocot Conference in 1993 , with the addition of several studies that had become available in the interim , formed the basis of the 1998 consensus Angiosperm Phylogeny Group ( APG ) ordinal scheme . Among other things , the Alismatales were expanded and new orders such as Acorales ( a placement for Acorus ) and Pandanales ( which now represented the stemonoids as well as new families ) added . While not formally assigning any supraordinal ranks , the classification did recognize an informal grouping of monocot orders as the commelinoids . Otherwise the APG recognized only six monocot orders ( Acorales , Alismatales , Asparagales , Dioscoreales , Liliales and Pandanales ) . The last four were however grouped together in the resulting cladogram and most closely represent the concept of lilioids , although this left some unplaced monocot families , including Corsiaceae and Petrosaviaceae . 
 Simultaneous with the release of the 1998 APG classification were two events : the publication of Kubitzki 's major monograph on the monocots and the Second Monocot Conference . Kubitzki defined superorder Lilianae as all monocots except superorders Commelinae , Alismatanae and the Acoraceae , that is the four orders Asparagales , Liliales , Dioscoreales and Pandanales . The Monocot Conference devoted an entire section to Systematics of the Lilioids and included an update of their previous research by Chase and colleagues . On this occasion the latter felt that there was now enough data to put forward a definitive classification , defining the Lilioids as comprising the four orders placed in Lilianae by Kubitzki . Rudall and colleagues ( 2002 ) followed Chase ( 2000 ) , in using the term " lilioid monocots " and again noting unresolved polytomy between these four orders and the remaining monocot clades ( commelinids and Petrosaviaceae ) , although at that time the Petrosaviaceae were still unplaced . 
 There was now enough new data to justify revising the APG system , and a new classification was issued in 2003 . Although this resulted in changes within the orders , it did not affect the relationship between them . Lilioid monocots were discussed but not formally recognized ( commelinids , renamed from commelinoids , being the only supraordinal grouping in the monocots to be named ) and Petrosaviaceae remained unplaced . The second version of the APG coincided with the third Monocot Conference ( 2003 ) , the findings from which , using additional molecular markers , helped to resolve some of the remaining questions regarding relationships within this assemblage . Petrosaviaceae was shown to be included in what Chase refers to as " liliids " and placed in order Petrosaviales , while Dioscoreales and Pandanales were demonstrated to be sister clades . Rapid advances in understanding monocot relationships necessitated the release of another revision of the APG classification ( 2009 ) , which incorporated these advances . Further definition of the relationships between lineages using multiple markers is continuing . 
 Textbooks and other sources produced in the last century are inevitably based on older classifications . Publications using versions of the APG system are now appearing and the World Checklist of Selected Plant Families from the Royal Botanic Gardens , Kew now uses the APG III system , as does the Angiosperm Phylogeny Website and hence the classification of the lilioid monocots shown in the cladogram below . The Kew botanists treat the monocots as falling into three major groupings : alismatid monocots ( Acorales , Alismatales ) , lilioid monocots ( the five other non @-@ commelinid monocots ) and commelinid monocots . They also organize their monocot research into two teams I : Alismatids and Lilioids and II : Commelinids . A similar approach is taken by Judd in his Plant systematics . 
 
 = = Phylogeny and evolution = = 
 
 The cladogram shown below displays the orders of Lilianae sensu Chase & Reveal ( monocots ) based on molecular phylogenetic evidence . Lilioid monocot orders are bracketed , namely Petrosaviales , Dioscoreales , Pandanales , Liliales and Asparagales . These constitute a paraphyletic assemblage , that is groups with a common ancestor that do not include all direct descendants ( in this case commelinids which are a sister group to Asparagales ) ; to form a clade , all the groups joined by thick lines would need to be included . While Acorales and Alismatales have been collectively referred to as " alismatid monocots " , the remaining clades ( lilioid and commelinid monocots ) have been referred to as the " core monocots " . The relationship between the orders ( with the exception of the two sister orders ) is pectinate , that is diverging in succession from the line that leads to the commelinids . Numbers indicate crown group ( most recent common ancestor of the sampled species of the clade of interest ) divergence times in mya ( million years ago ) . 
 While this is the most commonly understood relationship , Davis et al . ( 2013 ) using a combination of plastid genomes have suggested that if Asparagales is treated sensu stricto by excluding its largest and most atypical family , Orchidaceae then Aparagales sensu APG may not be monophyletic and that Orchidaceae and Liliales may be sister groups , and in turn are the sister of Asparagales . However , their data produced conflicting models . Zeng et al . ( 2014 ) using nuclear genes also found evidence for a sister relationship between Asparagales and Liliales . Although divergence time estimates within the lilioids have varied considerably , they were also able to obtain molecular clock estimates for the origin of the lilioids at approximately 125 mya ( Cretaceous period ) . On the other hand , a large data set using a combined analysis of nuclear , mitochondrial and plastid genes together with nuclear phytochrome C was in agreement with the earlier APG relationships . 
 
 = = Subdivision = = 
 
 Five orders make up the lilioid monocots . 
 Petrosaviales Takht . ( 1997 ) 
 Dioscoreales R.Br. ( 1835 ) 
 Pandanales R.Br. ex Bercht . & J.Presl ( 1820 ) 
 Liliales Perleb ( 1826 ) 
 Asparagales Link 1829
