= Icelanders = 
 
 Icelanders are a Germanic ethnic group and nation , native to Iceland . 
 On 17 June 1944 , when the Icelandic republic was founded , the Icelanders became independent from the Danish monarchy . The language spoken is Icelandic , a North Germanic language , and Lutheranism is the predominant religion . Historical and DNA records indicate that around 60 to 80 percent of the settlers were of Norse origin ( primarily from Western Norway ) and the rest were of Celtic stock from Ireland and peripheral Scotland . 
 
 = = Iceland = = 
 
 Icelanders have had a tumultuous history . Development of the island was slow due to a lack of interest from the countries controlling it for most of its history : Norway , Denmark – Norway , and ultimately Denmark . Through this time , Iceland had relatively little contact with the outside world . The island became independent in union with Denmark in 1918 . Since 1944 , Iceland has been a republic , and Icelandic society has undergone a rapid modernisation process in the post @-@ independence era . 
 
 = = History = = 
 
 Iceland is a geologically young land mass , having formed an estimated 20 million years ago due to volcanic eruptions on the Mid @-@ Atlantic ridge . One of the last larger islands to remain uninhabited , the first human settlement date is generally accepted to be 874 , although there is some evidence to suggest human activity prior to the Norse arrival . 
 
 = = = Initial migration and settlement = = = 
 
 The first Viking to sight Iceland was Gardar Svavarsson , who went off course due to harsh conditions when sailing from Norway to the Faroe Islands . His reports led to the first efforts to settle the island . Flóki Vilgerðarson ( b . 9th century ) was the first Norseman to sail to Iceland intentionally . His story is documented in the Landnámabók manuscript , and he is said to have named the island Ísland ( Iceland ) . The first permanent settler in Iceland is usually considered to have been a Norwegian chieftain named Ingólfur Arnarson . He settled with his family in around 874 , at a place he named " Bay of Smokes " , or Reykjavík in Icelandic . 
 Following Ingólfur , and also in 874 , another group of Norwegians set sail across the North Atlantic Ocean with their families , livestock , slaves and possessions , escaping the domination of the first King of Norway , Haraldur Harfagri . They traveled 1 @,@ 000 km ( 600 mi ) in their Viking longships to the island of Iceland . These people were primarily of Norwegian , Irish or Gaelic Scottish origin . The Irish and the Scottish Gaels were either slaves or servants of the Norse chiefs , according to the Icelandic sagas , or descendants of a " group of Norsemen who had settled in Scotland and Ireland and intermarried with Gaelic @-@ speaking people " . Genetic evidence suggests that approximately 62 % of the Icelandic maternal gene pool is derived from Ireland and Scotland , which is much higher than other Scandinavian countries , although comparable to the Faroese , while 37 % is of Nordic origin . About 20 @-@ 25 % of the Icelandic paternal gene pool is of Gaelic origin , with the rest being Nordic . 
 The Icelandic Age of Settlement ( Icelandic : Landnámsöld ) is considered to have lasted from 874 to 930 , at which point most of the island had been claimed and the Alþingi ( English : Althing ) , the assembly of the Icelandic Commonwealth , was founded at Þingvellir . 
 
 = = = Hardship and conflict = = = 
 
 In 930 , on the Þingvellir ( English : Thingvellir ) plain near Reykjavík , the chieftains and their families met and established the Alþingi , Iceland 's first national assembly . However , the Alþingi lacked the power to enforce the laws it made . In 1262 , struggles between rival chieftains left Iceland so divided that King Haakon IV of Norway was asked to step in as a final arbitrator for all disputes , as part of the Old Covenant . This is known as the Age of the Sturlungs . 
 Iceland was under Norwegian leadership until 1380 , when the Royal House of Norway died out . At this point , both Iceland and Norway came under the control of the Danish Crown . With the introduction of absolute monarchy in Denmark , the Icelanders relinquished their autonomy to the crown , including the right to initiate and consent to legislation . This meant a loss of independence for Iceland , which led to nearly 300 years of decline : perhaps largely because Denmark and its Crown did not consider Iceland to be a colony to be supported and assisted . In particular , the lack of help in defense led to constant raids by marauding pirates along the Icelandic coasts . 
 Unlike Norway , Denmark did not need Iceland 's fish and homespun wool . This created a dramatic deficit in Iceland 's trade , and no new ships were built as a result . In 1602 Iceland was forbidden to trade with other countries by order of the Danish Government , and in the 18th century climatic conditions had reached an all @-@ time low since Settlement . 
 In 1783 – 84 Laki , a volcanic fissure in the south of the island , erupted . The eruption produced about 15 km ³ ( 3 @.@ 6 mi ³ ) of basalt lava , and the total volume of tephra emitted was 0 @.@ 91 km ³ . The aerosols built up caused a cooling effect in the Northern Hemisphere . The consequences for Iceland were catastrophic , with approximately 25 @-@ 33 % of the population dying in the famine of 1783 and 1784 . Around 80 % of sheep , 50 % of cattle , and 50 % of horses died of fluorosis from the 8 million tons of fluorine that were released . This disaster is known as the Mist Hardship ( Icelandic : Móðuharðindin ) . 
 In 1798 – 99 the Alþingi was discontinued for several decades , eventually being restored in 1844 . It was moved to Reykjavík , the capital , after being held at Þingvellir for over nine centuries . 
 
 = = = Independence and prosperity = = = 
 
 The 19th century brought significant improvement in the Icelanders ' situation . A protest movement was led by Jón Sigurðsson , a statesman , historian , and authority on Icelandic literature . Inspired by the romantic and nationalist currents from mainland Europe , Jón protested strongly , through political journals and self @-@ publications , for ' a return to national consciousness ' and for political and social changes to be made to help speed up Iceland 's development . 
 In 1854 , the Danish government relaxed the trade ban that had been imposed in 1602 , and Iceland gradually began to rejoin Western Europe economically and socially . With this return of contact with other peoples came a reawakening of Iceland 's arts , especially its literature . Twenty years later in 1874 , Iceland was granted a constitution . Icelanders today recognize Jón 's efforts as largely responsible for their economic and social resurgence . 
 Iceland gained near @-@ full independence in 1918 after World War I , and retained only formal ties with the Danish Crown . This move to independence was completed on 17 June 1944 on what would have been Jón Sigurðsson 's 133rd birthday . After a national referendum , Iceland broke all ties with Denmark , after nearly six centuries of Danish rule , and declared itself independent . 
 
 = = Demographics and society = = 
 
 
 = = = Genetics = = = 
 
 Most mitochondrial DNA lineages found today in contemporary Icelanders can be traced to the native populations in Ireland and Scotland and Scandinavia . Another study shows that a tiny proportion of samples of contemporary Icelanders carry a more distant lineage , which belongs to the haplogroup C1 , which can possibly be traced to the settlement of the Americas around 14 @,@ 000 years ago . The same study used preliminary genealogical analyses which revealed that C1 lineage was present in the Icelandic mtDNA pool at least 300 years ago . Due to their small founding population and considerable history of relative isolation , Icelanders have often been considered highly genetically homogeneous as compared to other European populations . For this reason , along with the extensive genealogical records for much of the population that reach back to the settlement of Iceland , Icelanders have been the focus of considerable genomics research by both biotechnology companies and academic and medical researchers . However , one study of mitochondrial DNA , blood groups , and isozymes revealed a more variable population than expected from these genetic standpoints , comparable to the diversity of some other Europeans . Another study shows that quite a big group of Scandinavian males , in particular Norwegians and Icelanders ( up to 31 % of samples ) , carry Haplogroup R1a1a ( Y @-@ DNA ) . 
 Results of the mitochondrial DNA studies have been consistent with the genealogical records that trace the ancestry of most Icelanders to Scandinavia , Ireland and Scotland , though there may have been a minor contribution from other European groups . Founder effects and the effects of genetic drift are more pronounced for the Icelandic gene pool than other nearby populations , supporting the assumed genetic isolation of the population . 
 
 = = = Emigration = = = 
 
 
 = = = = Greenland = = = = 
 
 Greenland was first settled by some 500 Icelanders under the leadership of Erik the Red in the late 10th century , CE . Isolated fjords in this harsh land offered sufficient grazing to support cattle and sheep , though the climate was too cold for cereal crops . Royal trade ships from Norway occasionally went to Greenland to trade for walrus tusks and falcons . The population eventually reached a high point of perhaps 3 @,@ 000 in two communities and developed independent institutions before fading away during the 15th century . A papal legation was sent there as late as 1492 , the year Columbus attempted to find a shorter spice route but instead found the Americas . 
 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 
 According to the Saga of Eric the Red , Icelandic immigration to North America dates back to 1006 , when Icelandic Snorri was born in Vinland . This colony was short @-@ lived though and by the 1020s the Icelanders abandoned it . Icelandic immigration to North America would not resume for some 800 years . 
 One of the first new instances of Icelandic immigration to North America occurred in 1855 , when a small group settled in Spanish Fork , Utah . Another Icelandic colony is Washington Island , Wisconsin . Immigration to the United States and Canada began in earnest in the 1870s , with most migrants initially settling in the Great Lakes area . These settlers were fleeing famine and overcrowding on Iceland . Today , there are sizable communities of Icelandic descent in both the United States and Canada . Gimli , in Manitoba , Canada , is home to the largest population of Icelanders outside of the main island of Iceland . 
 
 = = Culture = = 
 
 
 = = = Language and literature = = = 
 
 Icelandic , a North Germanic language , is the official language of Iceland ( de facto ; the laws are silent about the issue ) . Icelandic has inflectional grammar comparable to Latin , Ancient Greek , more closely to Old English and practically identical to Old Norse . 
 Old Icelandic literature can be divided into several categories , of which three are best known to foreigners : Eddic poetry , skaldic poetry , and saga literature , if saga literature is understood broadly . Eddic poetry is made up of heroic and mythological poems . Poetry that praises someone is considered skaldic poetry or court poetry . Finally Saga literature is prose , ranging from pure fiction to fairly factual history . 
 Written Icelandic has changed little since the 13th century . Because of this , modern readers can understand the Icelanders ' sagas . The sagas tell of events in Iceland in the 10th and early 11th centuries . They are considered to be the best @-@ known pieces of Icelandic literature . 
 The elder or Poetic Edda , the younger or Prose Edda , and the sagas are the major pieces of Icelandic literature . The Poetic Edda is a collection of poems and stories from the late 10th century , whereas the younger or Prose Edda is a manual of poetry that contains many stories of Norse mythology . 
 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 
 Iceland embraced Christianity in c . AD 1000 , in what is called the kristnitaka , and the country , while mostly secular in observance , is still predominantly Christian culturally . The Lutheran church claims some 84 % of the total population . While early Icelandic Christianity was more lax in its observances than traditional Catholicism , Pietism , a religious movement imported from Denmark in the 18th century , had a marked effect on the island . By discouraging all but religious leisure activities , it fostered a certain dourness , which was for a long time considered an Icelandic stereotype . At the same time , it also led to a boom in printing , and Iceland today is one of the most literate societies in the world . 
 While Catholicism was supplanted by Protestantism during the Reformation , most other world religions are now represented on the island : there are small Protestant Free Churches and Catholic communities , and even a nascent Muslim community , composed of both immigrants and local converts . Perhaps unique to Iceland is the fast @-@ growing Ásatrúarfélag , a legally recognized revival of the pre @-@ Christian Nordic religion of the original settlers . According to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Reykjavík , there were only approximately 30 Jews in Iceland as of 2001 . The First Lady of Iceland Dorrit Moussaieff is an Israeli @-@ born Bukharian Jew . 
 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 
 Icelandic cuisine consists mainly of fish , lamb , and dairy . Fish was once the main part of an Icelander 's diet but has recently given way to meats such as beef , pork , and poultry . 
 Iceland has many traditional foods called Þorramatur . These foods include smoked and salted lamb , singed sheep heads , dried fish , smoked and pickled salmon , and cured shark . Andrew Zimmern , a chef who has traveled the world on his show Bizarre Foods with Andrew Zimmern , responded to the question " What 's the most disgusting thing you 've ever eaten ? " with the response " That would have to be the fermented shark fin I had in Iceland . " Fermented shark fin is a form of Þorramatur . 
 
 = = = Performance art = = = 
 
 The earliest indigenous Icelandic music was the rímur , epic tales from the Viking era that were often performed a cappella . Christianity played a major role in the development of Icelandic music , with many hymns being written in the local idiom . Hallgrímur Pétursson , a poet and priest , is noted for writing many of these hymns in the 17th century . The island 's relative isolation ensured that the music maintained its regional flavor . It was only in the 19th century that the first pipe organs , prevalent in European religious music , first appeared on the island . 
 Many singers , groups , and forms of music have come from Iceland . Most Icelandic music contains vibrant folk and pop traditions . Some more recent groups and singers are Voces Thules , The Sugarcubes , Björk , Sigur Rós , and Of Monsters and Men . 
 The national anthem is " Ó Guð vors lands " ( English : " Our Country 's God " ) , written by Matthías Jochumsson , with music by Sveinbjörn Sveinbjörnsson . The song was written in 1874 , when Iceland celebrated its one thousandth anniversary of settlement on the island . It was originally published with the title A Hymn in Commemoration of Iceland 's Thousand Years . 
 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 
 Iceland 's national football team has yet to participate in the FIFA World Cup . However they have qualified for the finals of the 2016 European Championship . Their first Olympic participation was in the 1912 Summer Olympics ; however , they did not participate again until the 1936 Summer Olympics . Their first appearance at the winter games was at the 1948 Winter Olympics . In 1956 , Vilhjálmur Einarsson won the Olympic silver medal for the triple jump . The Icelandic national handball team has enjoyed relative success . The team received a silver medal at the 2008 Olympic Games and a 3rd place at the 2010 European Men 's Handball Championship .
