= points , Rebs = 
 rebounds , Asts = assists 
 The Gliders ' first game was on 30 August in front of a crowd of 3 @,@ 288 at the Basketball Arena in Olympic Park in Stratford , London , also known as " the Marshmallow " . The Gliders had not played Brazil in four years , and what little they knew about them came from watching video tapes . 
 The scores were tied fifteen times , and at no point were the Australians more than five points in front . With six minutes to go in the final quarter , the Gliders were up by only two points , with the score 45 – 43 . Crispin was sent to the free throw line where she extended her team 's lead to 47 – 43 . A technical foul saw her straight back to the free throw line to make it 48 – 43 , the Glider 's biggest lead of the game . Brazil then struck back , scoring five unanswered points to tie the score again at 48 – 48 , but Merritt scored one from the paint to put the Gliders back in front . She followed by taking a defensive rebound and then another shot to make it 52 – 48 . Brazil scored once more , but time ran out , and the Gliders won , 52 – 50 . Leading scorers for the Gliders were Crispin with 18 points and Merritt with 16 . 
 Triscari said that they could have played better . " The chemistry in our team " , he said , " is fantastic . It 's good to get a win under your belt and then we 'll take it from there . But we didn 't play to our maximum today I don 't think . We made some mistakes passing the ball , turning the ball over so we 've got some improvement to do . We can work on a few things . " 
 
 = = = Great Britain = = = 
 
 The Gliders ' next match was against Great Britain , and was held at the North Greenwich Arena , which could accommodate a larger crowd than the Marshmallow . A crowd of 5 @,@ 331 saw a low @-@ scoring affair . The Gliders concentrated on defence , and led by only 11 – 5 at quarter time . By half time , they had extended their lead to 25 – 11 . The third quarter went badly for Team Great Britain , which only scored three more points to Australia 's 14 , making the score 39 – 14 at three @-@ quarter time . The final quarter was Great Britain 's best , but the score was still 51 – 24 . Merritt and Crispin were again the Gliders ' top scorers , with 10 and 8 points respectively , but they shared the ball around , and every Glider except McKenzie scored at least two points . The British coach was scathing about his team 's performance . " They know that 's not the way we play " , he said , " and I 'm disappointed for the crowd and them because they are tons better than that . It was an absolutely disgraceful effort out there . It really was bad . " 
 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 
 The Gliders returned to the Marshmallow the next day for a match against Canada , another team considered a strong chance for a medal , in front of a capacity crowd of 7 @,@ 200 . The Gliders squandered early opportunities , and Canada won the first quarter 20 – 12 . Strong defensive play by Nott and Gauci helped the Gliders reverse this in the second , and left Canada with only a one @-@ point 33 – 32 lead at half time . The second half saw Canada slowly increase their lead , keeping tied with Australia 4 – 4 in the first half of third , 6 – 4 in the last half of the third 6 – 4 in the first half of the fourth , and 8 – 6 in the last half of the fourth . Australia 's top players were Crispin , who had 13 points and 15 rebounds ; Merritt , who earned 16 points ; and Chaplin , with eight points , five rebounds and seven assists . The loss raised the prospect that Australia might not make the finals at all , but Crispin remained confident that they could . 
 Triscari identified the Gliders ' poor shooting as their critical problem . " That was a really tough game , " he said , " and full credit to Canada , but we can 't beat top teams in the world when we only shoot at 34 % , that was the key statistic . " Merritt , in her British accent , said that she had " the utmost respect for Canada . They 're a great team , but we 'll refocus on the game tomorrow and go out and play like we know we can , the Australian way . " 
 
 = = = Netherlands = = = 
 
 The loss to Canada meant that the Gliders needed a win against the Netherlands , considered one of the competition 's best teams , and one which had beaten Canada . Crispin told the media that " We will go out like we have in every other game and stick to our game plan and hopefully we 'll come out on top " . 
 The Netherlands scored first , but Kean soon equalised , assisted by Stewart . The Dutch team responded , but Gauci took two points with a fast break , and then assisted Crispin in putting Australia in the lead , one which the Gliders would not relinquish . Stewart made the next two scores , from outside the paint , and assisted Crispin to bring the score to 6 – 16 . The Dutch team fought back , but there was a six @-@ point 12 – 18 deficit at quarter time . The Australian defence shut down their opportunities in the second quarter , and the score was 20 – 30 in Australia 's favour at half time , and 29 – 40 by the end of the third quarter . The Dutch team redoubled their efforts in the final quarter , and won the quarter 20 – 18 , but the Gliders won the game , 39 – 58 . 
 Once again Merritt led Australia 's scoring , with 19 points , with a considerably improved accuracy of 9 shots from 14 attempts , while Crispin had ten points and seven rebounds . The rest of the team performed equally well . Stewart scored six points and five rebounds . Chaplin 's reputation as a play maker was burnished with four rebounds and seven assists . Gauci had eight points and six assists . Nott had played all 40 minutes of the game against Canada the night before , then over 32 minutes in this game , and was particularly active in the final quarter . Triscari praised both the Gliders and their opponents : 
 We wanted to get on top early and have them chasing us , so , in that respect , I suppose it did . We focused on stopping a lot of their big players , particularly Beijer [ Mariska Beijer ] , from getting into the keyway , and the girls did a sensational job . Gert [ Gertjan van der Linden ] is very hard to coach against because he throws a lot of stuff at you . Tonight , he was the one having to make the changes . Another day , it will probably be me . 
 
 = = Finals = = 
 
 
 = = = Quarterfinal – Mexico = = = 
 
 The loss to Canada meant that the Gliders had won three out of four games , the same number as Canada and the Netherlands , but they were placed ahead of the Netherlands based on defeating them . Canada failed to defeat Great Britain by a sufficient margin , and therefore finished third . As a result , the Gliders topped their pool , and received a quarterfinal berth against Mexico , which had managed to qualify despite only winning one game . Triscari was confident , but was not taking the match lightly . He warned the media : 
 No game 's easy , you know . We finished on top , so the crossover with the other side is in our favour . But they are by no means easy . We only beat Brazil by two points and Brazil only beat Mexico by two in the PanAm ( Parapan championships ) play @-@ offs for third and fourth , so it 's going to be tough . " 
 The Gliders planned to dominate Mexico early , playing as aggressively against them as they had played against the Netherlands . Stewart took the tap , and lost . Australia 's first shots at goal were taken by Kean from the free throw line , but she missed both . Mexico 's Lucia Vazquez Delgadillo then opened the scoring to give Mexico a two @-@ point lead , which turned out to be their biggest of the game . Gauci then put points on the scoreboard for the Gliders . Mexico turned the ball over , and Crispin got her first from the paint , assisted by Gauci , which was repeated on the next play , with Stewart providing the assist this time . Mexico scored , but the Gliders responded with another shot from Crispin . On the next play , Gauci stole the ball and charged down the court , but failed to make the shot . Nott then took a defensive rebound , leading to Crispin scoring again . She was also fouled , but missed the resulting free throw . Shortly thereafter , Stewart drew another foul , and made both shots to bring the score to 14 – 4 . 
 The Gliders put Mexico under intense defensive pressure . Mexico had six team turnovers to the Gliders ' one , and wound up with 19 turnovers in total to Australia 's 6 . Australia scored 18 points from turnovers , compared to 6 for Mexico . Gauci , a two @-@ point player , took a three @-@ pointer to take the score to 17 – 8 . Mexico was unable to recover from Australia 's high scoring from Merritt , who ultimately scored 14 points with 70 per cent shooting , and Crispin , who scored twelve points with 67 per cent shooting . The two teams went into the quarter time break with the score 21 points to 10 . Mexico fell further behind in the second quarter . Amanda Carter immediately stole the ball from Mexico , which let Merritt score two points . A few minutes later , Carter , assisted by Chaplin , scored a basket from the paint , and was fouled in the process . A successful free throw made the score 36 – 16 . Another steal by Merritt led to a runaway break , bringing her contribution to ten points , and the score to 38 – 16 . At the half @-@ time break , the score was 44 – 20 . 
 In the third quarter , a team turnover and a series of missed shots by Hill , Kean and Crispin , allowed Mexico to outscore Australia by one point , leaving the score at 50 – 27 at the end of the quarter . The final quarter saw Australia 's Del Toso miss a shot at one end , and Mexico 's Floralia Estrada Bernal miss one at the other . Stewart also missed , before a Mexican turnover led to the first score of the quarter , by Stewart . Mexico 's Rocio Torres Lopez scored in response . Another shot by Stewart missed , but Carter took an offensive rebound , and scored . Turnovers by Kean and Del Toso allowed Mexico put four points on the board , but successive fouls sent Kean to the free throw line to score three points in response . 
 Merritt brought the score to 59 – 35 with her seventh scoring shot . As the game drew to a close , there were several missed shots by Sarah Vinci and Hill , but Mexico was unable to capitalise on the opportunities , continuing to miss shots and turn over the ball . With nineteen seconds of play remaining , Hill took a two @-@ point shot from inside the paint ; attracting a foul , she scored another point from a free throw . Although Mexico 's Wendy Garcia Amador scored the last two points of the game , her team lost to Australia 62 – 37 . 
 
 = = = Semifinal – United States = = = 
 
 In the semifinal , the Gliders had to beat the reigning champions , Team USA , in front of a small crowd of 4 @,@ 428 at the North Greenwich Arena . Stewart took the tap , and lost . Team USA had first possession and earned the first points of the game , but Gauci responded quickly . Then Team USA turned the ball over , but Nott lost it . Chaplin stole it back , but Kylie Gauci put the ball out of bounds . Nott stole it back again , but Gauci turned it over again . Team USA took a shot at the basket inside the paint , and missed , but took a rebound and scored . A Team USA free throw extended their lead to 2 – 6 . Thereafter both teams ' shooting was poor , and the score was only 10 – 12 at quarter time . 
 The second quarter started with Merritt scoring twice to give Australia the lead 14 – 12 . Team USA turned the ball over the Gliders several times , but they were unable to capitalise on their strong defence , leaving the score tied at 26 – 26 at half time . In the third quarter , an early goal by Gauci from outside the paint gave the Gliders the lead . A series of steals gave the Gliders additional shots , most of which they missed , but Team USA gave over a series of turnovers , and their shooting was worse than their rivals , resulting in a 10 – 0 run by the Gliders . Team USA were unable to score at all until the last minute of the quarter . A hurried goal with seconds to go by Hill saw the Gliders leading 38 – 28 . Team USA would ultimately post 28 turnovers to Australia 's 17 , and the Gliders would score 12 points from turnovers to Team USA 's three . 
 In the fourth quarter , the Australian defence remained strong , but their shooting did not improve . For the entire game , Crispin made only 3 out of 10 attempts , and Merritt just 4 out of 16 . Nott , who played the entire game , ended up being the team 's most accurate player , with four out of five attempts . Meanwhile , Team USA fought back to 40 – 39 . Three timeouts were taken in the last minute . Merritt was fouled twice , which sent her to the free throw line , but she missed both shots . The game went down to the last second , with Team USA 's Rose Hollermann missing one from inside the paint just before the shot clock ran out . 
 
 = = = Gold medal match – Germany = = = 
 
 The Gliders had to defeat Germany in front of a capacity crowd of 12 @,@ 985 at the North Greenwich Arena to win the gold medal . Australia had narrowly defeated the German team 48 – 46 in the Gliders World Challenge in Sydney a few months earlier , and at that point had beaten them three of the previous four times they had played . 
 Once again , Stewart took the tap , and lost . A defensive rebound by Kean after Germany missed two free throw shots resulted in the Gliders scoring first , with Gauci assisting Crispin . The Gliders played Germany like they had played against and defeated the United States , with a strong defence against a normally high @-@ scoring team . At first , they were successful ; with three minutes to go in the quarter , despite several missed shots , Australia was ahead 10 – 4 . In the last minutes , Germany scored ten points that gave them a 10 – 14 lead at quarter time . 
 In the second quarter , Germany extended their lead to ten points , but Kean scored a point from a free throw , and then , with seconds left on the clock , stole the ball , enabling Crispin to score , so the Gliders were only seven points behind at half time . The Gliders won the third quarter in previous games in London , which happened again against Germany , but only by 9 – 8 . The Gliders had six points to make up , with strong defences from both teams . Gauci scored the most in this game , scoring 15 points , including a three @-@ pointer , with five assists and four rebounds . In the end , the Gliders lost by fourteen points , 44 – 58 . 
 Triscari felt that the Gliders did not put enough pressure on the Germans , and that their shooting was not accurate enough . In Australia , Basketball Australia CEO Kristina Keneally praised the Gliders ' efforts . " The Gliders have been nothing short of brilliant at the Paralympic Games , " she said , " and this Silver Medal is just reward for their outstanding performance . This is the Gliders ' fourth consecutive Paralympic Medal – a remarkable achievement . All of the players , coaches and support staff have done a fantastic job and we can ’ t wait to greet them on their return home . " In 2013 , Keneally announced a four @-@ year development program for the Gliders that included the appointment of a full @-@ time head coach for the first time , based at the National Wheelchair Centre of Excellence at the New South Wales Institute of Sport in Homebush , New South Wales . In May 2013 , Tom Kyle was appointed the Gliders ' new head coach . 
 " We have had the opportunity to play Germany a fair bit in our preparation so our game plan was to have strong defensive pressure and take it from there " , Kean told the media . " It started off really good for us , unfortunately they just got a couple more runs than us and that 's the way it goes sometimes . They played a great game . We stuck together 12 deep from the second the buzzer started , to that end buzzer and no one gave up . I think that we can hold our heads high because of that . I guess the plan is , next four years , Rio we go one more . " 
 It was not to be . The Gliders did not qualify for the 2016 Summer Paralympics after finishing second to China at the 2015 Asia Oceania Qualifying Tournament .
