= The Moth ( Lost ) = 
 
 " The Moth " is the seventh episode of the first season of Lost . The episode was directed by Jack Bender and written by Jennifer Johnson and Paul Dini . It first aired on November 3 , 2004 , on ABC . The character of Charlie Pace ( Dominic Monaghan ) is featured in the episode 's flashbacks . 
 Charlie begins experiencing the effects of heroin withdrawal , while Jack becomes trapped in a cave . Meanwhile , Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) , Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) and Boone Carlyle ( Ian Somerhalder ) attempt to triangulate the signal of the French woman 's broadcast . Charlie 's involvement in his band Drive Shaft is featured in the episode 's flashbacks . 
 " The Moth " was watched by 18 @.@ 73 million people live , almost two million more than the previous episode . This episode marks the first time " You All Everybody " by Drive Shaft was sung in its entirety , as it had not been written yet in previous episodes . The episode received mixed @-@ to @-@ positive reviews , with some reviewers commenting that the episode was not of the same caliber as previous episodes . 
 
 = = Plot = = 
 
 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 
 Charlie ( Dominic Monaghan ) tells a priest that he is going to quit his band because it has a bad influence on him . Soon after , his brother , Liam Pace ( Neil Hopkins ) , tells Charlie that Drive Shaft has gotten a recording contract . Charlie doesn 't want to sign the contract because he has qualms about the sex and drugs the band engages in . Liam talks him into signing , promising that Charlie can quit any time he 's had enough . One evening at a show , Liam , to Charlie 's frustration , starts singing the chorus to " You All Everybody " , which is supposed to be sung by Charlie . Liam assures Charlie it won 't happen again . 
 Later , Charlie finds Liam high on heroin with groupies . Charlie kicks the groupies out , and tells Liam that he 's done with the band . Liam says to Charlie that he , Liam , is Drive Shaft , and that nobody knows who the bass player ( Charlie ) is . He goes on to tell Charlie that without the band , Charlie is nothing , which spurs Charlie to use heroin for the first time . Years later , Charlie visits Liam 's house in Australia and wants Liam to rejoin Drive Shaft for a comeback tour . Liam declines , but the band can 't do the tour without him . He criticizes Charlie for still using drugs , and Charlie blames Liam for getting him started with drugs . Liam asks Charlie to stay with him for a few weeks , saying that Sydney has some good rehab programs and that he can get Charlie help . Charlie angrily leaves , saying he has a plane to catch . 
 
 = = = On the Island = = = 
 
 It is Day 8 , September 29 , 2004 , and Charlie is suffering from heroin withdrawal since he voluntarily gave his heroin to John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) in the previous episode . After finding him , Charlie asks Locke for the heroin back , and Locke says that he 'll give Charlie the drugs the third time he asks , because he wants Charlie to have the choice to quit . 
 Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) , Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) and Boone Carlyle ( Ian Somerhalder ) attempt to find where the French transmission is coming from , so they make a plan to turn on antennas at different points on the island in an attempt to triangulate the signal . At the caves , Charlie searches through Jack Shephard 's ( Matthew Fox ) medicine supply for something to ease his heroin withdrawal . When Jack catches him , Charlie says he has a headache and wants aspirin . 
 When Jack upsets Charlie by telling him to move his guitar , Charlie angrily shouts at him , causing the entrance of the cave they are in to collapse . Charlie manages to escape , but Jack is trapped inside . Using his construction experience , Michael Dawson ( Harold Perrineau ) leads the rescue attempt with Steve Jenkins ( Christian Bowman ) and Scott Jackson ( Dustin Watchman ) . In the jungle , James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) goes to tell Kate ( who is traveling to set up her antenna for the triangulation attempt ) about Jack 's predicament , but decides against it because he doesn 't like Kate 's hostile attitude . Charlie tells Locke about Jack 's situation , but reveals the real reason for his going to Locke is to ask for his drugs a second time . Locke shows Charlie a moth cocoon , and explains that he could help the moth by slitting the cocoon and letting the moth free , but it would not survive because it would be too weak . Instead , the moth needs to struggle to break free . Nature and struggle make people stronger , Locke says , indicating to Charlie that he needs to fight through his suffering . 
 Kate and Sawyer stay at the second triangulation point , while Sayid goes to the third . After learning of Jack 's situation from Sawyer , Kate goes to help , leaving the job of turning on the signal to Sawyer . Charlie squeezes through an opening at the cave and finds Jack , but while doing so , the opening collapses and traps Charlie and Jack inside . Charlie hesitantly pops Jack 's shoulder back into place at Jack 's request . Jack correctly guesses that Charlie is suffering from withdrawal , and Charlie assures Jack he 's okay . Kate desperately tries to dig them out along with the other castaways , while the two worry about losing oxygen . Charlie sees a moth which leads him to an opening and the pair dig out of the cave . 
 Sayid sets off his bottle rocket to signal the antenna power up process . Shannon Rutherford ( Maggie Grace ) sets off Boone 's rocket from the beach , as Boone had gone to help rescue Jack , as does Sawyer from his location . Sayid turns on the transceiver , but before he is able to triangulate the signal , an unseen person knocks Sayid unconscious with a stick . 
 Later Hurley brings Jack and Charlie water , he notes Charlie doesn 't look well but Jack covers for him saying that he has the flu . Hurley tells him to get better and Charlie looks thankful to Jack . He sees Locke and asks him for his heroin and Locke gives it back . Charlie looks at it for a moment before tossing it into the fire , smiling . Locke tells Charlie he 's proud of him and that he always knew he could do it . Charlie and Locke see a moth flying away . 
 
 = = Production = = 
 
 " The Moth " aired on November 3 , 2004 . The episode was directed by Jack Bender and written by Jennifer Johnson and Paul Dini . The church scene with Charlie and Liam at the church in Manchester was actually filmed on Honolulu , where the scenes on the Island are filmed . Monaghan says that he feels Charlie 's black hoodie is a sort of " security blanket " that he hides underneath and uses it when he feels " lost . " The " heroin " that Charlie is supposedly snorting is actually brown sugar . Monaghan revealed this in an interview with Stuff magazine in October 2005 , saying , " [ The heroin is ] brown sugar . You get some really sweet boogers . You have to be careful not to snort too much of it , but it 's happened a few times . You just find dessert up your nose couple of hours later . " 
 According to Monaghan , Drive Shaft is similar to Oasis , in that " [ Charlie 's ] first album was kind of like Oasis 's first album : critically acclaimed , didn 't sell big numbers , but in the industry , people gave it respect . " J.J Abrams and Damon Linelof told Monaghan that if he wanted to write the song that would be Charlie 's " one hit wonder " , they would consider using it in the show . Monaghan wrote a song called " Photos and Plans " with a friend ; Abrams and Lindelof liked the song , but it did not make it into Lost . The lyrics were inspired by an incident on The Phil Donahue Show , where Matt Reeves , who was close friends with producers Bryan Burk and Damon Lindelof , saw a female audience member yell out , " You all everybody , acting like it 's the stupid people wearing expensive clothes . " The producers had an inside joke where they would say this quotation to each other . According to Burk , " At one point , in a delirious stupor , we realized we had said it so many times that that had to be the song . " 
 In the Pilot , Monaghan 's voice when he sang " You All Everybody " was based on " when Prince puts on his female voice " , since the song had not been composed yet . For " The Moth " the producers contacted Los Angeles @-@ based singer Jude to write a full version . The song is sung by Chris Seefried , former lead singer of Gods Child and Joe 90 . 
 
 = = Reception = = 
 
 " The Moth " first aired in the United States on November 3 , 2004 . 18 @.@ 73 million people in America watched the episode live . 
 The episode received generally mixed @-@ to @-@ positive reviews . Ryan McGee of Zap2it wrote that " this episode wasn 't a stinker by any measure , but after the run of early episodes , this is the first that really didn 't hold its own when compared to the others " , adding that " The moth imagery / metaphor just beats you down by episode 's end , making you long for the more subtle writing the show has produced up until this point . " The TV Critic gave the episode a 68 / 100 , writing that it falls between being " obvious and cheesy " and " beautifully paced and structured " . Myles McNutt of The A.V. Club gave the episode a B , and shared his opinion that it is " one of the more intensely metaphorical — and thus writerly — episodes of the series . The eponymous metaphor — delivered by Locke — is one of the series ’ most blatant , and the moth ’ s consistent reappearance in the episode calls a lot of attention to the construction of the narrative . " 
 IGN staff rated " The Moth " as the 36th best episode in all of Lost , explaining , " The moth of the episode 's title appears both as a metaphorical and physical symbol of the struggle to find strength within yourself , as Locke explains to Charlie , and to take charge of your own life without relying on anyone else to do it for you . " In a review focusing solely on " The Moth " , Chris Carabott of IGN gave the episode a 9 / 10 , writing that the episode " does a great job of utilizing screen time for most the major characters on the show " , and that " Locke 's analogy of ' The Moth ' in comparison to Charlie 's situation perfectly encapsulates what many of the characters are going through on the island . " In a ranking of all of Lost 's episodes , Todd VanDerWerff of the Los Angeles Times placed " The Moth " at number 102 , complimenting Monaghan and O 'Quinn 's acting , but criticizing the storyline for containing " nonsensical drug abuse storytelling . " " The Moth " , along with " Pilot " and " House of the Rising Sun " , won a PRISM Award for Charlie 's drug storyline .
