= Station model = 
 
 A station model is a symbolic illustration showing the weather occurring at a given reporting station . Meteorologists created the station model to fit a number of weather elements into a small space on weather maps . This allows map users to analyze patterns in air pressure , temperature , wind , cloud cover , and precipitation . 
 Station model plots use an internationally accepted coding convention that has changed little since August 1 , 1941 . Elements in the plot show the key weather elements , including temperature , dew point , wind , cloud cover , air pressure , pressure tendency , and precipitation . 
 
 = = Measurement location and units = = 
 
 Weather maps primarily use the station model to show surface weather conditions , but the model can also show the weather aloft as reported by a weather balloon 's radiosonde or a pilot 's report . 
 Station model plots use a mixture of metric and Imperial units depending on the map 's location and what is being shown . Surface maps in the United States primarily use Imperial units , such as inches , degrees Fahrenheit , and knots . Most of the world , however , uses metric measurements for everything but wind speed , which is shown in knots . 
 
 = = Plotted winds = = 
 
 The station model uses a wind barb to show both wind direction and speed . The wind barb shows the speed using " flags " on the end . 
 Each half of a flag depicts five knots 
 Each full flag depicts 10 knots 
 Each pennant ( filled triangle ) depicts 50 knots 
 Winds are depicted as blowing from the direction the flags are facing . Therefore , a northeast wind will be depicted with a line extending from the cloud circle to the northeast , with flags indicating wind speed on the northeast end of this line . Once plotted on a map , an analysis of isotachs ( lines of equal wind speeds ) can be accomplished . Isotachs are particularly useful in diagnosing the location of the jet stream on upper level constant pressure charts , usually at or above the 300 hPa level . 
 The flags and pennants point to the low pressure , so it is possible to determine at which hemisphere the station is standing . The barbs in the figure at the right are located at the Northern Hemisphere , because the wind is circling counter clock @-@ wise around a low @-@ pressure area at the Northern Hemisphere ( the wind is blowing in the opposite direction at the Southern Hemisphere , see also Buys Ballot 's law ) . 
 More than a century ago , winds were initially plotted as arrows facing downwind , with feathers on both sides of the staff to indicate wind speed . In the United States , the change to the modern convention of flags shown on one side of the staff to indicate wind speed took effect on August 1 , 1941 . 
 
 = = Cloud cover = = 
 
 Along with wind direction , cloud cover is one of the oldest atmospheric conditions to be coded on a station model . The circle in the middle of the station model represents cloud cover . In the United Kingdom , when the observation is taken from an automated weather observation site , the shape is a triangle . If the shape is completely filled in , it is overcast . If conditions are completely clear , the circle or triangle is empty . If conditions are partly cloudy , the circle or triangle is partially filled in . The cloud cover shape has different looks depending upon how many oktas ( eighths of the sky ) are covered by cloud . A sky half full of clouds would have a circle that was half white and half black . Below the shape indicating sky cover , the station model can indicate the coverage of low clouds , in oktas , and the ceiling height in hundreds of feet . The ceiling height is the height at which more than half the sky is covered by clouds . 
 For pilots , knowledge of the sky cover helps determine if visual flight rules are being met . Knowing the degree of cloud cover can help determine whether or not various weather fronts , such as cold fronts or warm fronts , have passed by a location . A nephanalysis , contouring areas that are cloudy with scalloped lines , can be performed to indicate a system 's cloud and precipitation pattern . This technique is rarely performed nowadays , due to the prevalence of satellite imagery worldwide . 
 
 = = Cloud types = = 
 
 Above or below the circle for manned stations ( automatic stations do not report cloud types ) that indicates sky cover can lie one or more symbols indicating cloud types in any of the low , middle and high @-@ étages for tropospheric clouds . One predominant cloud type may be depicted for each of three étages , if known . The middle and high @-@ étage types are depicted above the sky cover circle of the station model , while the main low @-@ étage cloud type is indicated below the circle . Since the station model has limited room , it makes no special provision for vertical or multi @-@ level clouds that can occupy more than one étage at a particular time . Consequently , cloud genera with significant vertical development may be coded and plotted as low or middle depending on the altitude at which they normally form . Cumulus and cumulonimbus usually form in the low étage of the troposphere and achieve vertical extent by growing upward into the middle or high étage . Conversely , nimbostratus usually forms in the middle étage of the troposphere and becomes vertically developed by growing downward into the low étage . Although the SYNOP code has no separate formal group classification for vertical or multi @-@ level clouds , the observer procedure for selecting numerical codes is designed to give high reporting priority to those genera or species that show significant vertical development . 
 The symbols used for clouds emulate the cloud shape . Cirrus is indicated by a couple hooks , cumulus are indicated by a mound shape , with cumulonimbus indicated with an upside down trapezoid on top of the cumulus symbol to indicate its anvil . When there is more than one cloud type present per level , the cloud type with the highest priority is included . Knowing the cloud type at various locations can help determine whether or not a weather front has passed by a particular location . A low deck of stratus could indicate a station is still north of a warm front , while thunderstorms can indicate the approach of a squall line or cold front . 
 
 = = Present weather and visibility = = 
 
 To the left of the cloud shape in the center of the station model is the symbol depicting present weather . The present weather symbol depicts the current weather which normally is obstructing the visibility at the time of observation . The visibility itself is shown as a number , in statute miles in the United States and meters elsewhere , describing how far the observer can see at that time . This number is located to the left of the present weather symbol . For pilots , knowledge of the horizontal visibility helps determine if they are flying through instrument meteorological conditions , such as foggy or smokey conditions , as well as areas of intense precipitation . Present weather depicted with the station model can include : 
 Dust 
 Fog 
 Haze 
 Ocean spray 
 Precipitation 
 Sand 
 Smoke 
 Thunderstorms 
 Volcanic ash 
 
 = = Temperature and dew point = = 
 
 To left of center in the station model , the temperature and dew point are plotted . Within the United States on surface weather maps , they are still plotted in degrees Fahrenheit . Otherwise , they will be in units of degrees Celsius . This knowledge is important to meteorologists because when this data is plotted on a map , isotherms and isodrosotherms ( lines of equal dew point ) are easily analyzed , either by man or machine , which can help determine location of weather fronts . 
 
 = = Sea level pressure and height of pressure surface = = 
 
 On the top right corner of the model for a surface weather map is the pressure , showing the last two integer digits of the pressure in millibars , or hectopascals , along with the first decimal . For instance , if the pressure at a certain location is 999 @.@ 7 hPa , the pressure portion of the station model will read 997 . Although the first digit or two of the pressure is left off , other nearby stations give away whether the pressure starts with a 10 or a 9 . Most of the time , choosing first digits that would lead to a value nearest to 1000 works out best . The plotting of this value within the station model allows for the analysis of isobars on weather maps . Within maps which plot data on constant pressure surfaces , the pressure is replaced with the height of the pressure surface . 
 
 = = Pressure tendency = = 
 
 Below the pressure will lie the pressure tendency figure , which indicates the pressure change over the past three hours . The number depicting the pressure change will usually have two digits and indicate the pressure change in 0 @.@ 1 millibar increments . There are nine different figures which represent the pressure change . A slant angled up and right indicates a steady rise , while a downward slant to the lower right indicates a steady fall . Steady rises can indicate improving conditions and approaching high pressure , and normally occur in the wake of a cold front . Steady falls can indicate deteriorating conditions and an approaching low pressure area , with the largest falls occurring in advance of a surface cyclone and its attendant warm front . 
 The time of the day must be considered , as there are two natural rises per day ( locally around 10 am and 10 pm ) and two natural falls per day ( locally around 4 am and 4 pm ) . These daily changes in pressure can mask the movement of pressure systems and fronts past a location . The lowest natural dip in the pressure , in a stagnant weather pattern , occurs around 4 pm while the highest natural peak in pressure occurs around 10 am . Once plotted on a map , the analysis of isallobars ( lines of equal pressure change ) can be plotted on a map , which can indicate the direction of motion of high and low pressures systems across the map domain . 
 
 = = Past weather = = 
 
 Station models can have past weather plotted within them , which would be located just under the pressure tendency . They indicate the type of weather experienced during the past six hours . The weather types are limited to obstructions of visibility and precipitation .
