= Tatuidris = 
 
 Tatuidris , or armadillo ant , is a rare genus of ants consisting of a single species , Tatuidris tatusia . The ants are small in size and inhabit the leaf litter of Neotropical forests in Central and South America , from Mexico to Brazil . Workers are ferruginous @-@ colored to dark red and present a distinctive morphology , consisting of a shield @-@ like head with a broad vertex , ventrally @-@ turned heavy mandibles which do not overlap at full closure , and unique among ants – an antenna socket apparatus sitting upside @-@ down . Little is known about the biology of the ants , but they are likely nocturnal and specialist predators . 
 Tatuidris was first described in 1968 and initially placed in the myrmicine tribe Agroecomyrmecini , together with two fossil genera . Since the original description , the systematic status of the tribe has been the focus of debate . 
 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 
 Tatuidris tatusia is the only species in Tatuidris , a monotypic genus and one of only two extant genera in the subfamily Agroecomyrmecinae . A new species , T. kapasi , was described by Lacau & Groc in 2012 , but has now been relegated to a junior synonym under T. tatusia based on the extent of the morphological variability encountered throughout this broad geographic range . Analysis of DNA barcodes indicated a pattern of genetic isolation by distance , suggesting the presence of a single species undergoing allopatric differentiation . 
 It was first described by Brown & Kempf in 1968 based on two workers collected in a Berlese sample of humus in El Salvador . Due to morphological similarities , they considered it a very primitive ant and placed it in what was then a myrmicine tribe , the Agroecomyrmecini , together with ants known from Early Eocene Baltic amber ( Agroecomyrmex ) and late Eocene Florissant shale ( Eulithomyrmex ) . 
 It bears superficial resemblance to some extant genera ( Strumigenys , Ishakidris , Pilotrochus , and Phalacromyrmex ) but these similarities are considered to be due to convergent evolution . Due to similarities in the habitus , Brown & Kempf ( 1968 ) linked Tatuidris to the Dacetini genus Glamyromyrmex ( currently a junior synonym of Strumigenys ) and Phalacromyrmex . However they concluded : " analysis of these similarities indicates [ ... ] that they are mostly convergent and not based on close phylogenetic relationship " . Further work explored the similarities of Tatuidris with Ishakidris ( Bolton 1984 ) and Pilotrochus ( Brown 1977 ) . While these taxa share some characteristics , including an expanded head vertex , deep antennal scrobes and a compact mesosoma , the similarities were again deemed convergent . 
 Since the original description , the systematic status of the tribe has been the focus of debate . Bolton ( 2003 ) was the first to suggest the taxonomic instability of Tatuidris within Myrmicinae and raised the genus to the level of a new subfamily , the Agroecomyrmecinae , suggesting that Agroecomyrmecinae might be the sister taxon to Myrmicinae . The subfamily rank was re @-@ assessed by Baroni Urbani & de Andrade in 2007 , this was the first attempt to include Tatuidris as a terminal taxon in a morphological cladistic analysis . In their study , Baroni Urbani & de Andrade identified morphological synapomorphies shared between Tatuidris and the dacetines , justifying the inclusion of the genus within Myrmicinae . In addition , two autapomorphies ( a differently shaped petiolar tergum and sternum , and the eyes at or close to the apex of the antennal scrobe ) separated Tatuidris from all other extant ant genera included in their study . 
 Unlike phylogenetic studies based on morphological traits , molecular analyses of the internal phylogeny of the ants have given strong evidence that the armadillo ants are neither closely related to nor nested within the Myrmicinae . Brady et al . ( 2006 ) , Moreau et al . ( 2006 ) and Rabeling et al . ( 2008 ) reconstructed phylogenetic trees with the agroecomyrmecines inside the ' poneroid ' group of subfamilies , close to the Paraponerinae , and gave support for the exclusion of the genus from the Myrmicinae , a subfamily located inside the ' formicoid ' clade . Given the early appearance of the Agroecomyrmecinae in the geologic record , the similarities of armadillo ants to Myrmicinae were hypothesized to represent convergence and / or retention of plesiomorphic forms . 
 The name Tatuidris means " armadillo ant " , which is also the common name for this species ; tatu comes from the Tupi and Portuguese word for " armadillo " ; the specific epithet for the single described species , tatusia , is an old generic name for armadillo . 
 
 = = Distribution = = 
 
 Tatuidris is rare but broadly distributed . The ants inhabit the leaf litter of Neotropical forests in Central and South America , from Mexico to French Guiana , central Brazil , and Amazonian Peru . No collections are known from the Caribbean , Galápagos , or other islands . Most specimens and collections are currently known to occur in localities west of the Andes , with more collections tending to occur towards Central America and Mexico . Most collections come from mountainside ( pre @-@ montane ) areas at mid elevations ( usually 800 – 1200 meters of altitude ) . Collections from lowland Amazonia are few . Published records are few , but with the advent of litter sifting and Winkler extraction as a popular method of ant collecting , Tatuidris are not as rare as they used to seem . Although not very abundant , with frequent litter sifting they can be reliably found in Costa Rican wet forests . 
 
 = = Description = = 
 
 Workers of Tatuidris present a distinctive morphology , consisting of a shield @-@ like head with a broad vertex ( upper surface of the head ) , ventrally @-@ turned heavy mandibles which do not overlap at full closure , deep antennal scrobes ( an impression that receives parts of the antenna ) with eyes at or close to their apex , compact and fused mesosoma , 7 @-@ segmented antenna , first gastral segment ventrally directed , and unique among ants – an antenna socket apparatus sitting upside @-@ down on the roof of the expanded frontal lobe . 
 The body of a worker is short and compact , ferruginous @-@ colored to dark red , with thick and rigid integument ( external " skin " ) . The body is covered by hairs , which are variable in length and inclination . The head is pyriform ( pear @-@ shaped ) , broadest behind , with small eyes . Queens are similar to workers , but yellow @-@ colored and paler . Their wings are about 60 % longer than total body length . Males , also similar to workers ( except head ) , are darker and have wings about 50 % longer than the body . The eyes of the queens and males are larger than in workers . 
 
 = = = Size = = = 
 
 Specimens of Tatuidris are small , about 3 @.@ 5 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 14 in ) in total length , but specimens can vary greatly in size , with larger specimens being twice as large as the smaller ones . Size variability within trap catches ( possibly same colonies ) may be considerable . For example , workers from one collection catch in Nicaragua varied 30 % in size . It is still unclear whether intra @-@ colony size variation is due to the presence of morphological worker castes ( e.g. minor and major castes ) or continuous size variability . Principal component analysis ( PCA ) revealed that most variability among specimens is related to size , with shape explaining little of total variation . 
 
 = = = Pilosity variability = = = 
 
 Four pilosity patterns ( patterns of hair @-@ like setae ) are known to occur within Tatuidris collections . Pilosity pattern A consists of a mix of both long flexuous and short appressed setae . This is the most common pilosity pattern and the one that most resembles the type specimens from El Salvador and the gyne from Otongachi , Ecuador . Pilosity pattern B is characterized by very short , fully appressed , and regular spaced setae arrayed homogeneously and equidistantly on the head , mesosoma , petiole , postpetiole and gaster . Pilosity pattern C is characterized by dense lanose @-@ looking setae . Pilosity pattern D consists of short and uniform decumbent ( strongly inclined but not fully appressed ) setae scattered throughout the body . 
 
 = = = Eyes = = = 
 
 The relative position of eyes is highly variable within the species . For example , eye location ranges from being completely within the antennal scrobes to completely outside the scrobes . In some cases the eye itself is located outside the antennal scrobe , but the eye 's fossa is well marked and confluent with the antennal scrobe . In most specimens , the antennal carina ( ridge extending along the dorsal antennal region ) bifurcates from the antennal scrobes and lies straight above the eyes . However , in specimens from Nicaragua , a strongly impressed antennal carina is present . In these specimens about 40 % of the eye 's area lies within the antennal scrobes . In the gyne , only ~ 1 / 6 of the eye lies within the antennal scrobes . A depression sometimes forms in the integument in the sides of the propodeum , below the propodeal spiracle and above the metapleural gland . The depth of this depression varies among specimens and tends to be deepest in larger specimens . 
 
 = = Biology = = 
 
 The biology is poorly known ; the male and female reproductive castes were described for the first time in 2012 . The genus is known mainly from isolated workers found in Winkler or Berlese samples . Tatuidris workers have peculiar mandibular brushes and a powerful sting , which led Brown & Kempf to speculate that Tatuidris might be specialist predators of active or slippery arthropod prey . Until 2011 , no observations of live specimens were registered . Details of a first collection event of a small live colony ( 3 workers and 4 gynes ) by Thibaut Delsinne in a mid @-@ elevation forest in southeastern Ecuador suggest that Tatuidris may well be a highly specialized predator , as colonies kept in captivity did not accept any food item offered to them . Food items rejected by the ants included live and dead termites , millipedes , mites , various insect parts , sugar water , tuna , biscuits , live and dead fruit flies ( Drosophila ) , live springtails , live myriapods ( Chilopoda and Diplopoda ) , live and dead Diplura , small live spiders , small live pseudoscorpions , one small snail , uncooked hen egg ( i.e. piece of cotton wool soaked with fresh whisked hen egg ) , ant larvae ( Gnamptogenys sp . ) , and live ant workers ( Cyphomyrmex sp . , Brachymyrmex sp . ) . Potential food items ( arthropods ) for Tatuidris were taken from soil samples and Winkler samples collected at the site where Tatuidris was a priori determined to be present . 
 Further observations suggest that Tatuidris may be a sit @-@ and @-@ wait predator . Delsinne observed that " both workers and gynes moved very slowly and were very clumsy . They often remained motionless during several tens of seconds or even several minutes when disturbed ( either by my handling or by the contact with another arthropod ) . " These observations were mainly performed at night , suggesting that Tatuidris may be nocturnal , a hypothesis also supported by collection patterns . For example , in the Río Toachi forest of Ecuador Tatuidris specimens tend to fall in pitfall traps , instead of Winkler sacs . Because pitfall traps usually work 24 @-@ h , but Winkler sacs generally uses litter sifted during the day , then ants with nocturnal habits may be underrepresented in Winkler samples . The small eyes of Tatudris species provide further support for this hypothesis .
