= Jekyll ( TV series ) = 
 
 Jekyll is a British television drama serial produced by Hartswood Films and Stagescreen Productions for BBC One . The series also received funding from BBC America . Steven Moffat wrote all six episodes , with Douglas Mackinnon and Matt Lipsey each directing three episodes . 
 The series is described by its creators as a sequel to the novella Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde , rather than an adaptation of it , with the Robert Louis Stevenson tale serving as a backstory within the series . It stars James Nesbitt as Tom Jackman , a modern @-@ day descendant of Dr. Jekyll , who has recently begun transforming into a version of Mr. Hyde ( also played by Nesbitt ) . Jackman is aided by psychiatric nurse Katherine Reimer , played by Michelle Ryan . Gina Bellman also appears as Claire , Tom 's wife . 
 Filming took place at various locations around southern England in late 2006 . The series was first transmitted on BBC One in June and July 2007 , receiving mainly positive reviews . 
 
 = = Plot = = 
 
 Doctor Tom Jackman ( James Nesbitt ) , a married father of two , has abandoned his family without explanation to live in a heavily fortified basement flat . He hires psychiatric nurse Katherine Reimer ( Michelle Ryan ) to help him with his unusual case . After explaining a set of elaborate security procedures to Reimer , he straps himself into a secured metal chair and undergoes a psychological transformation . 
 Reimer observes that Jackman 's alter ego exhibits rage , heightened senses , greatly superior strength and speed , and a more playful and flirtatious manner . She assures this persona she will keep his secrets just as she keeps Jackman 's , but asks for guarantees he will not harm her . After being informed of the novella Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde , Jackman 's alter ego takes Hyde 's name for his own and the two agree to form an uneasy truce . While they share a body , neither remembers what the other did while dominant . They use a micro cassette recorder to leave messages for each other . 
 Jackman began transforming into the violent , lecherous Hyde recently . Fearing for his family 's safety , he chose to isolate himself from them , but he cannot bring himself to cut off all contact , and visits his wife Claire ( Gina Bellman ) . During one such visit , Hyde assumes control and learns about Jackman 's family . 
 Miranda Callendar ( Meera Syal ) , a detective employed by Claire , learns about Hyde and informs Jackman that Jekyll and Hyde was not fiction , but a fictionalized version of actual events . Callendar shows Jackman a picture of the real Doctor Jekyll who lived in Edinburgh , Scotland in the 19th century . Jackman is startled to see that Jekyll looks exactly like him , and that he died at around Jackman 's current age ; and Callendar speculates that he is a descendant of the original Doctor Jekyll , except for the fact that Doctor Jekyll had died without children . 
 Jackman is also being stalked by a private security team led by an American named Benjamin ( Paterson Joseph ) . Unbeknownst to him , the team works for his former employers at the biotechnology firm , Klein and Utterson , and is directed by his friend Peter Syme ( Denis Lawson ) . 
 When Benjamin 's team puts Jackman 's children at risk , Hyde asserts himself , killing Benjamin and several of the men , and hospitalizing others . At the hospital he is approached by Sophia , an elderly woman who claims to be his mother , but before he can question her she disappears . 
 Jackman confronts Peter Syme , who attempts to drug him . This provokes Hyde to appear and take Syme and Claire hostage . Claire argues that they need to find a cure for Jackman 's condition . Syme insists that Klein and Utterson have had a cure for a long time . Jackman is captured and locked inside a metal coffin . 
 Reimer and Callendar confront Syme , claiming they know the truth about Jackman . Callendar theorizes that Klein and Utterson have access to cloning technology and that Jackman is Jekyll 's clone . Syme denies this and orders them taken away to be killed . 
 Syme reveals to Claire that the treatment Jackman is undergoing will stabilize into one persona : If it is Hyde , he will be kept for research in order to synthesize the potion that turned the original Jekyll into Hyde ; If it is Jackman , she is free to take him home . When the box is opened , Hyde is dominant . 
 In a flashback triggered by genetic memory , Hyde has a vision of a meeting between Jekyll and Robert Louis Stevenson , the author of Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde . Stevenson agrees to write a fictional version of Jekyll 's case but reveals that he knows the truth : there is no potion . Instead , Jekyll was transformed into Hyde by his love for Alice , a maid within his household . Flashbacks into Jackman 's own life show his Hyde first manifesting fully during a seaside holiday with Claire , after the pair were accosted by hooligans . 
 Enraged by further threats to Jackman 's family , Hyde escapes from Klein and Utterson . Ms. Utterson , a ruthless redheaded American woman at the head of Klein and Utterson , takes Claire and her sons hostage at a private estate , locking the twins in miniature versions of the same coffin used on their father . 
 Tom 's alleged mother , Sophia , appears on the premises and helps Claire escape her locked bedroom . She tells Claire how Klein and Utterson had indeed tried to clone Doctor Jekyll but had been unsuccessful . Claire meets several of the failed attempts in the lowest basement of the building . They are disfigured and in a near @-@ vegetative state . Sophia explains that Jackman is a descendant of Doctor Jekyll , ( who died a virgin ) , through Mr Hyde , and by chance a perfect natural genetic duplicate , " a perfect throwback , a chance in a million " . Klein and Utterson had discovered this and had him under surveillance for almost his entire life , from when he was six @-@ months @-@ old . In order to trigger his transformation into Hyde , they created a clone of Alice , the maid whom Jekyll had loved . This clone is Claire herself . 
 Hyde tries to rescue Jackman 's family from Klein and Utterson , killing Syme and many other personnel . In the end there is a stand @-@ off , with Jackman and Claire 's sons held hostage and suffocating . The Hyde personality is apparently killed when he is shot with multiple bullets and then manages to avoid ' sharing the damage ' by taking the wounds onto himself while allowing Jackman to assume his undamaged , healthy form , leaving Doctor Jackman as the only personality . 
 Six months later , Jackman has tracked down Sophia , the woman who claimed to be his mother . When he questions her about his father , she reveals that she is the descendant of Hyde , the one through whom he had inherited the family curse from , and that it 's " never over " . As Jackman watches horrified , the powerless , tired , grey @-@ haired Sophia transforms into her own version of the Hyde persona , the feral , red @-@ headed Ms Utterson . 
 
 = = = Episodes = = = 
 
 
 = = Production = = 
 
 
 = = = Development = = = 
 
 Jeffrey Tayor of Stagescreen Productions had the idea of a modern version of Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde in the mid @-@ 1990s . He attempted to get it produced in the United States three times , but all three attempts fell through for various reasons . He returned to England from the west coast of the United States and joined with Hartswood Films when Elaine Cameron was scouting for ideas for a supernatural thriller . Cameron then approached Steven Moffat for a script , and a six @-@ part series was commissioned by the BBC 's Jane Tranter and John Yorke in November 2005 . BBC America signed on to provide co @-@ production funding in March 2006 . The producers regularly met with Moffat for brainstorming sessions . Cameron 's assistant took notes from these conversations , after which they would look over the notes and start the process again . The producers invited Moffat to " write anything " , with the intention of cutting the material back later . However , they were reluctant to cut material once they saw it on the page . The first episode starts with Jackman already knowing about his alter ego . Because the plot of Jekyll begins after the story has developed for the characters , Nesbitt says that the show feels like it is a second series . 
 Moffat explicitly describes the series as a sequel , rather than an adaptation , stating the Jekyll of the original story really existed , and Jackman is his " modern @-@ day descendant dealing with the same problems " . As Jekyll and Hyde is such a well @-@ known phrase , Moffat labored over what to call the series , eventually deciding upon Jekyll because that word " carries the name Hyde " . The final episode replaces the title " Jekyll " with " Hyde " . Producer Elaine Cameron says the one word title gives the series a " very modern feel " . Moffat initially named the character Jekyll rather than Jackman , but found it cumbersome to constantly explain that the book had not been written in this alternate universe . Instead he chose a version where the book exists , but changed the name to Jackman . Otherwise , Cameron felt , the character would appear stupid by not realising what was happening when turning into Hyde . 
 The scene between Tom and Katherine was expanded slightly in the sixth episode to keep their relationship active to facilitate a second series . However , no further episodes were commissioned . In an August 2007 interview , Moffat told Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger that he had a sequel written for the miniseries " should the BBC be interested " . Following Jekyll , Moffat became a co @-@ writer on Sherlock . 
 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 
 James Nesbitt and his agent attended a meeting with Jane Tranter in late 2005 regarding the 2006 series of Murphy 's Law . At the conclusion of the meeting , she offered him a script for Jekyll , suggesting that he might like the role . Nesbitt took the script role as a way of putting a distance between his previous work . The casting of Nesbitt as Tom Jackman and Hyde was publicised on 12 December 2005 , but filming was not scheduled to begin until September 2006 , increasing Nesbitt 's anticipation to play the roles . Writer Steven Moffat said that the dual @-@ role required a very skilled actor , and a well @-@ known actor was necessary because it was such an expensive show to produce . The production team decided Nesbitt 's two characters would be mainly differentiated over a change in performance rather than by extensive make @-@ up because they wanted Hyde to be able to walk around in public without attracting attention . 
 Michelle Ryan , known for her long @-@ running role as Zoe Slater in the soap opera EastEnders , was revealed by tabloid newspaper The Sun to have been cast as " Jekyll 's sultry assistant " ( Katherine Reimer ) in August 2006 . Ryan believed herself to be too young for the part , though that aspect had already been written into the character . To prepare , she consulted the Royal College of Psychiatry . Ryan dyed her hair red for the role to help differentiate her from Tom Jackman 's wife . Denis Lawson was cast as Peter Syme . The actor consulted his post @-@ graduate son for information on Syme 's job . 
 Moffat initially doubted Gina Bellman 's suitability for the role of Claire Jackman because he associated her too much with Jane Christie , the character she had played in his sitcom Coupling . Moffat did not imagine the character to be as beautiful as Bellman , but her audition was so good that he revised his vision of the character . Bellman originally auditioned for the role of Katherine , but the producers wanted someone younger to play that role . However , Bellman said that she talked herself out of the role by arguing that there should be an age gap between Katherine and Claire to avoid Katherine becoming a threat to the wife . Bellman approached her role as if Claire had become caught up in Tom 's mid @-@ life crisis , an angle that impressed the producers . 
 Meera Syal was attracted to her role because Miranda was not a clichéd private detective and she thought the humour was " fresh " . During the second filming block , Mark Gatiss briefly joined the cast , playing the small but important role of Robert Louis Stevenson in flashback scenes in episode five . 
 Other roles included Paterson Joseph as Benjamin Maddox , and Linda Marlowe as Ms Utterson . 
 
 = = = Production = = = 
 
 The series was filmed in two blocks of three episodes . The first three were directed by Douglas Mackinnon and the second three episodes by Matt Lipsey . It took an hour of make @-@ up each day to turn Nesbitt into Hyde ; a hairpiece lowered his hairline and prosthetics were added to his chin , nose and ear lobes . He also wore black contact lenses to make Hyde " soulless " . After many debates , the producers decided that Hyde 's imminent arrival would be indicated by the flash of a black eye . The eye imagery evolved during filming , and did not appear in the script . 
 Filming began in September 2006 with the zoo sequence from the second episode , in which Benjamin 's team have set Tom up to force out Hyde by placing his son , Eddie , in the lion 's den . Writing the sequence at a late stage in the production , Moffat wanted to compare Hyde 's natural instinct to kill to that of a lion . This was shot on location at Heythrop Zoo , a private zoo in Chipping Norton run by Jim Clubb , whose firm Amazing Animals specialises in training animals for cinema and television . The Norman Foster @-@ designed building in Chertsey , Surrey , which then housed the European Headquarters of video game designer and publisher Electronic Arts , was used as The Klein & Utterson Institute . A large country estate near Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames and in Bognor Regis was used for some of the scenes whilst on the run and in flashbacks . A disused Boys ' school in Gloucestershire , and the Hammer House in Wardour Street , Soho were used in episode six . Filming concluded on 20 December 2006 . 
 The schedule was tight for a complex production . The production team had twelve days to shoot each episode , which director Douglas Mackinnon says was the biggest challenge of the project . The required amount of material was shot for most of the episodes . However , an extra twenty minutes of material was filmed for episode six . Director Matt Lipsey recalls that the team struggled to cut the extra material whilst maintaining the integrity of the episode . Lipsey credits Moffat for not " being precious " over his material during the editing process , and points out that his willingness to cut superfluous material means that he is taken seriously when he argues for something to be retained . 
 The music was composed by Debbie Wiseman . The orchestra featured approximately 18 pieces . Some cues featured the vocals of Hayley Westenra to foreshadow the importance of a female voice . 
 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 
 Jekyll was broadcast on BBC One on Saturday nights from 9 p.m. A two @-@ week break occurred between showings of the third and fourth episodes because the Live Earth benefit concert was broadcast during its timeslot on 7 July . The series began airing on BBC America from 4 August , as part of a " Supernatural Saturday " programming strand . In Australia , Jekyll began broadcasting on ABC1 , Sundays at 8 @.@ 30 p.m. from 2 March 2008 with a double episode back @-@ to @-@ back each week . In Canada , Jekyll began broadcasting on Showcase , beginning at the end of August 2007 and on BBC Canada , Wednesdays at 10 : 00 p.m. from 26 March 2008 . Also in Hong Kong , Wednesday at 11 : 55 p.m. from 11 February 2009 on TVB Pearl . In the Netherlands , Jekyll was broadcast in the summer of 2009 on Sci @-@ Fi Channel . 
 Certain edits were made to the United Kingdom broadcasts in order to remove language unsuitable for Saturday night BBC One audiences . For example , a line spoken by Hyde in episode one was changed from " Who the fuck is Mr Hyde ? " to " Who the hell is Mr Hyde ? " 
 James Jackson of The Times rated the first episode four out of five stars , calling Nesbitt 's performance as Hyde " as entertainingly [ over the top ] as a dozen Doctor Who villains , with a palpable sense of menace to boot " . The conspiracy plot is praised as a storyline that distinguishes this series from other adaptations . The Daily Telegraph 's Stephen Pile criticised the script for " veering between Hammer horror and larky humour " and for being " cheesy " . He also criticised Hyde 's gravity @-@ defying hijinks and mistook Michelle Ryan for a model . In the same newspaper , James Walton called the first episode a combination of " a good yarn with several nicely thoughtful touches " . David Cornelius of DVDTalk was full of compliments for the series , summing up its review with the statement " six episodes , 300 minutes , not a single one of them wasted . ' Jekyll ' is this year 's finest television event " . The Australian Broadcasting Corporation , commenting on the series being part of their 2008 line @-@ up , said " This classic horror tale has been given a modern make @-@ over that will leave you on the edge of your seat and begging for more . James Nesbitt is outstanding as the new Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde " . Nesbitt was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Performance by an Actor in a Mini @-@ Series or Motion Picture Made for Television for his roles . Paterson Joseph received a mention in the nominations for the 2008 Screen Nation awards . 
 
 = = Home release = = 
 
 The BBFC rated all episodes as a 15 certificate on 11 June 2007 . Jekyll : Season One was released for region 2 on 30 July 2007 by Contender Home Entertainment . It includes uncut episodes , including restoration of some swearing cut from the BBC broadcasts . As DVD Verdict says about this uncut version , " the language is saucier , the violence a bit more bloody , and the sex more primal . " The disc contains audio commentaries on two episodes : producer Elaine Cameron , writer Steven Moffat and first @-@ block director Douglas Mackinnon comment on episode one , while executive producer Beryl Vertue , second @-@ block director Matt Lipsey and actress Gina Bellman comment upon the sixth episode . The set also contains two documentaries : " Anatomy of a Scene " focuses upon the production of the zoo sequence in episode two , while " The Tale Retold " covers the evolution of the series . The first Region 1 release occurred in the United States on September 18 , 2007 , although the Region 1 Canadian release was delayed until October 9 , following the Canadian broadcast of the series on Showcase , which commenced at the end of August 2007 .
