= Hand in Glove = 
 
 " Hand in Glove " is a song by the British alternative rock band The Smiths , written by singer Morrissey and guitarist Johnny Marr . It was released as the band 's first single in May 1983 on independent record label Rough Trade Records . " Hand in Glove " peaked at number three on the UK Indie Chart . It did not chart ( top 75 ) but made number 124 outside the UK singles chart . A remixed version of the song was featured on the band 's debut album , The Smiths , in 1984 . That same year , a cover version recorded by singer Sandie Shaw featuring Smiths members Marr , Andy Rourke and Mike Joyce as backing musicians reached number 27 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 
 Morrissey and Marr wrote " Hand in Glove " in January 1983 , between the second and third concerts The Smiths ever played . Morrissey claimed that after Marr gave him a demo cassette of the song , he went home and wrote lyrics for it in the span of two hours , conscious of the fact that it would be the group 's first recorded work . Even prior to performing the song live , the group was unanimous in the opinion that " Hand in Glove " was their strongest song to date . 
 The Smiths asked their manager Joe Moss to fund the recording of " Hand in Glove " . In late February , the group booked a one @-@ day recording session at Strawberry Studios in Stockport at the cost of £ 250 , which they produced themselves . Morrissey claimed in later years that he was dissatisfied with his vocal and returned a week later to re @-@ record his part , the day after which the entire group travelled to London and convinced Rough Trade owner Geoff Travis to release the record . However , author Simon Goddard noted that it was not until April 1983 that Marr and bassist Andy Rourke visited the Rough Trade offices . On that occasion , Marr handed Travis a cassette featuring " Hand in Glove " and a live recording of " Handsome Devil " , telling Travis , " [ L ] isten to this , it 's not just another tape " . Impressed , Travis promised he would . The following Monday , Travis called the group and invited them back to London to release " Hand in Glove " as a single . Both parties agreed to release the single as a temporary arrangement before agreeing to any long @-@ term partnership . 
 Two months after the single 's release , The Smiths recorded the song again during aborted sessions for their debut album with producer Troy Tate . This version was recorded a tone lower than the original in the key of F # minor , and features a shorter introduction . The Smiths recorded the song again with producer John Porter in October at Manchester 's Pluto Studios . Morrissey rejected this version of the song . Due to impending deadlines , the version that ultimately appeared on the band 's first album The Smiths was a remix of the original master recording from the Strawberry Studios session . For this version , Porter increased the separation between Marr 's guitar tracks and Morrissey 's vocals , emphasised drummer Mike Joyce 's drum beat , pushed Rourke 's bass back in the mix , and created a more dramatic opening and conclusion to the song . 
 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 
 The original recorded version of " Hand in Glove " is in the key of G minor . The song begins with an overdub of Marr playing a harmonica over the rest of the music . Simon Goddard wrote that Marr 's use of the instrument " purposefully evoked the very same ' blunt vitality of working @-@ class " northernness " that Ian McDonald attributes to The Beatles ' parallel 1962 single ' Love Me Do ' , though infinitely more melancholy . " Of the backing music , Goddard wrote , " Marr 's redolent minor chord wash weeps with a rain @-@ soaked hopelessness while Rourke contributes one of his most inspired bass patterns " . 
 Morrissey explained that the song 's theme was " complete loneliness , " going on to state : " It was important to me that that there 'd be something searingly poetic about it , in a lyrical sense , and yet jubilant at the same time . " Goddard described " Hand in Glove " as " a bleak proclamation of doomed happiness [ . . . ] a shattering left @-@ hook of self @-@ loathing , loss and desperation " . Years later Morrissey considered the song to be the group 's " most special . " The singer said he was particularly proud of the song 's second verse , which included the lines " Though we may be hidden by rags / We have something they 'll never have . " Morrissey explained that the verse described " how I felt when I couldn 't afford clothes and used to dress in rags but I didn 't really feel mentally impoverished . " 
 In the song 's lyrics , Morrissey referenced works by playwright Shelagh Delaney , whom he would reference in several later songs . The song 's line " I 'll probably never see you again " appears in Delaney 's kitchen sink realism play A Taste of Honey and The Lion in Love . Morrissey paraphrased the line " Everything depends upon how near you stand next to me " from the 1974 Leonard Cohen song " Take This Longing " . Goddard conjectures that the song 's title was inspired by the 1947 detective novel Hand in Glove by Ngaio Marsh . 
 The song starts with the lines " Hand in glove / the sun shines out of our behinds " and then states that " No it 's not like any other love / this one 's different / because it 's us . " The lyrics then state that " the people stare " and " the Good People laugh " , " but we have something they 'll never have . " The song ends with the repeated line " I 'll probably never see you again " which is also taken from A Taste of Honey . The intro to the song uses the chords F major ( sus2 ) , Eb major and Bb major . The verse uses the chord G minor 7 , F7 ( sus2 ) and Eb major . ( The transcription cited is transposed to E minor instead of G minor . ) 
 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 
 " Hand in Glove " was released as The Smiths ' debut recording in May 1983 . The single sold consistently for the next 18 months . Although the single failed to reach the UK Singles Chart , it reached number three on the UK Indie Chart . Its relative success earned the group a listing in the Guinness Book of Records in January 1984 when it and the group 's next two singles ' " This Charming Man " and " What Difference Does It Make ? " ' held the top three position on the UK Indie Chart . " It should have been a massive hit " , Morrissey later said , " it was so urgent . To me , it was a complete cry in every direction . It really was a landmark . " The single did raise the band 's profile ; a week after its release the band gained its first major live reviews in the music press , which in turn led to their first radio session with BBC Radio 1 disc jockey John Peel . 
 While reviewing a 1983 concert by The Smiths and The Go @-@ Betweens at The Venue in London , Barney Hoskyns , writing for the NME , described " Hand in Glove " as " one of the year 's few masterpieces , a thing of beauty and a joy forever " . In the 1984 edition of The Rock Yearbook , Hoskyns said the song " swept into my heart " . Bill Black , writing for Sounds , described it as a " daunting " debut . Writing for Allmusic , Ned Raggett calls the song a " stunning , surprising debut " and describes the music as " sparkling " stating that it relied on Marr 's " careful overdubbing of acoustic and electric guitars " . Raggett went on to describe Rourke 's bass and Joyce 's drumming as " sparse but effective " , and claimed that Joyce " especially shone " . 
 Reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine says lyrics to the Smiths single " Hand in Glove " contain " veiled references to homosexuality " . 
 
 = = Packaging = = 
 
 Morrissey had specific instructions on how he wanted the " Hand in Glove " single to be packaged . He told Rough Trade 's art department that the single should have a paper label centre with four vents encircling the middle , in homage to singles from the 1960s . The cover to the single features a photograph of George O 'Mara by Jim French , taken from Margaret Walters ' history The Nude Male . The sleeve 's homoerotic undertones elicited the reaction Morrissey was hoping for of unease and outrage . Rourke noted when he showed the recording to his parents his father was " mortified . He said to me , ' that 's a bloke 's bum ' and I said , ' yeah ' but when he asked me why I just didn 't have an answer for him " . 
 
 = = Track listing = = 
 
 Both songs written by Morrissey and Johnny Marr . 
 " Hand in Glove " – 3 : 16 
 " Handsome Devil " ( live , Manchester Hacienda , 4 / 2 / 83 ) – 2 : 53 
 
 = = Etchings on vinyl = = 
 
 British 7 " : KISS MY SHADES / KISS MY SHADES TOO 
 " Kiss my shades " is a lyric from the title track . 
 
 = = Sandie Shaw collaboration = = 
 
 Despite having established themselves as a group , Morrissey and Marr still harboured ambitions that they would be recognised as songwriters by having their songs covered by others . Their top choice was singer Sandie Shaw , who had scored several hits throughout the 1960s and was one of the most prominent British vocalists of her era . In the summer of 1983 , Marr and Morrissey began asking Shaw to cover their song " I Don 't Owe You Anything " , which they had conceived with her in mind to perform . The pair sent Shaw various letters coupled with song demos . Shaw was sceptical at first ; she was discouraged by the negative media attention that accompanied the Smiths song " Reel Around the Fountain " , and when she received a copy of " Hand in Glove " in the mail , she reportedly exclaimed to her husband " he 's started sending me pictures of naked men with their bums showing ! " 
 Shaw was eventually won over by the intervention of Geoff Travis and by Morrissey 's praise of her in the press . In January 1984 , NME announced that Shaw and The Smiths would release a collaborative recording of " I Don 't Owe You Anything " as a single on Rough Trade . In February , Shaw and The Smiths journeyed to Matrix Studios in London , where Shaw recorded three Smiths songs with Marr , Joyce and Rourke . The version of " Hand in Glove " recorded at Matrix was performed in the key of D minor , while Marr placed the intro riff 's accent on a major scale and Shaw altered some lyrics . Shaw ended up selecting their recording of " Hand in Glove " as the single 's A @-@ side , placing " I Don 't Owe You Anything " as the B @-@ side . The cover features a still of Rita Tushingham from the movie A Taste of Honey , an adaptation of the play of the same name that was written by Shelagh Delaney , who appeared on the covers of the single " Girlfriend In a Coma " and the compilation album Louder Than Bombs . 
 Released as a single in April 1984 solely under Shaw 's name , the recording became Shaw 's first hit in a decade when it reached number 27 on the UK Singles Chart . Marr , Rourke and Joyce backed Shaw on two mimed television performances of the song , first on Channel 4 's Earsay in March 1984 , and then on Top of the Pops on 26 April , where the band appeared barefoot in homage to the singer , who did so often in the 1960s . 
 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 
 7 " 
 " Hand in Glove " – 2 : 58 
 " I Don 't Owe You Anything " – 4 : 06 
 12 " 
 " Hand in Glove " – 2 : 58 
 " I Don 't Owe You Anything " – 4 : 06 
 " Jeane " – 2 : 52 
 
 = = = Etchings on vinyl = = = 
 
 British 7 " : KISS MY SHADES / JM 
 
 = = = Charts = = =
