= Andrianjaka = 
 
 Andrianjaka reigned over the Kingdom of Imerina in the central highlands region of Madagascar from around 1612 to 1630 . Despite being the younger of King Ralambo 's two sons , Andrianjaka succeeded to the throne on the basis of his strength of character and skill as a military tactician . The most celebrated accomplishment of his reign was the capture of the hill of Analamanga from a Vazimba king . There he established the fortified compound ( rova ) that would form the heart of his new capital city of Antananarivo . Upon his orders , the first structures within this fortified compound ( known as the Rova of Antananarivo ) were constructed : several traditional royal houses were built , and plans for a series of royal tombs were designed . These buildings took on an enduring political and spiritual significance , ensuring their preservation until being destroyed by fire in 1995 . Andrianjaka obtained a sizable cache of firearms and gunpowder , materials that helped to establish and preserve his dominance and expand his rule over greater Imerina . 
 Many of the cultural practices that were to define Merina social and political life for centuries are credited to Andrianjaka . He designated the twelve sacred hills of Imerina that were to become the spiritual and political heartland of the Merina empire , contributing to the establishment of the kingdom 's traditional boundaries ; clans were assigned to specific regions within his kingdom , further defining the cultural landscape . He consolidated power through such measures as appropriating the folk tradition of sampy ( community talismans ) , thereby ensuring all the powers traditionally attributed to these idols were under the control of the sovereign alone . Merina traditions related to the burial and mourning of sovereigns are also traced back to Andrianjaka 's reign . 
 
 = = Early life = = 
 
 Andrianjaka was the second son of Ralambo , ruler of the Kingdom of Imerina in the central highlands of Madagascar . As a young man , Andrianjaka married Ravadifo , a daughter of Prince Andriampanarivomanjaka . The marriage produced one daughter and one son , Andriantsitakatrandriana , who would rule after his father from 1630 to 1650 . Andrianjaka was also actively involved in providing support to his father 's military campaigns to expand and defend Ralambo 's realm . Oral history describes an incident wherein Andrianjaka and Ralambo were engaged in the defense of Ralambo 's capital at Ambohidrabiby , which was threatened by the advance of Antsihanaka warriors . Andrianjaka reportedly suggested an innovative defensive tactic to annihilate the enemy by filling the town 's hadivory ( defensive trenches ) with cow dung and rice husks , lighting it on fire , and covering the smoldering embers with burnt rice stalks so that the area resembled a patch of land recently re @-@ cleared for planting through tavy ( slash and burn agriculture ) . The enemy troops reportedly marched into the trap , sinking into the embers and burning or suffocating to death . 
 Oral history provides two different accounts of Andrianjaka 's succession to the throne of the Kingdom of Imerina . According to popular legend , Ralambo devised a test to determine which of his two sons was most fit to rule : he would summon them both to join him at his capital in Ambohidrabiby , and whichever of his two sons reached him soonest would inherit his kingdom . In one account of this legend , Andrianjaka was reportedly engrossed in strategizing a win in a difficult game of fanorona and so refused to admit audience to the royal messenger until after the game was over . During this delay , his older brother Andriantompokoindrindra received his father 's message and rushed home ; he was thus awarded Ralambo 's title and kingdom . However , this tale continues , Andriantompokoindrindra 's claim to power was rejected by the public , and he was soon forced to cede the throne to Andrianjaka . In an alternate account of the succession tale , it is Andriantompokoindrindra ( not Andrianjaka ) who was said to be preoccupied with the fanorona game — a version in keeping with the oral tradition that credits him with the game 's invention and popularization at court — and his refusal to return to his father until after the game had finished led Ralambo to choose Andrianjaka as his successor . One source states that the summons was not a test , but rather occurred during the aforementioned incident when Ralambo was besieged in his capital by the Antsihanaka warriors and was genuinely in need of his sons ' assistance . 
 It is generally accepted by historians that Andrianjaka did indeed succeed to the throne around 1610 or 1612 after his older brother 's claim was rejected by the public . All speculation about fanorona and royal summons aside , Ralambo may have chosen Andrianjaka based on the simple fact that he was the son of Ralambo 's first wife . Ralambo 's father , Andriamanelo , had established rules of succession by which Ralambo 's first son by his first wife must rule after his father in order to fulfill a mandate established by his Vazimba antecedents Rafohy and Rangita . The passing over of Andriantompokoindrindra in favor of his younger brother was partially mitigated by the establishment of a royal tradition maintaining that all reigning descendants of Andrianjaka would henceforth be required to marry a princess directly descended from Andriantompokoindrindra , thereby preserving the royal status of descendants in both brothers ' bloodlines . 
 
 = = Reign = = 
 
 Andrianjaka moved his capital from Ambohidrabiby to Ambohimanga upon ascending to the throne around 1610 or 1612 . He was reportedly the first Merina leader to receive Europeans around 1620 and traded slaves in exchange for guns and other firearms to aid in the pacification of rival principalities , obtaining 50 guns and three barrels of gunpowder to equip his army . He unified the principalities on what he later designated as the twelve sacred hills of Imerina at Ambohitratrimo , Ambohimanga , Ilafy , Alasora , Antsahadita , Ambohimanambony , Analamanga , Ambohitrabiby , Namehana , Ambohidrapeto , Ambohijafy and Ambohimandranjaka . These hills became and remain the spiritual heart of Imerina , which was further expanded over a century later when Andrianampoinimerina redesignated the twelve sacred hills to include several different sites . 
 His policies and tactics highlighted and increased the separation between the king and his subjects . Andrianjaka transformed social divisions into spatial divisions by assigning each clan to a specific geographical region within his kingdom . He made a demonstration of royal power by appropriating the local tradition of sampy ( talismans ) , previously created by village chiefs and others for personal or local spiritual ends , restricting their number to twelve and declaring their creation a strictly royal prerogative . The king also imposed an intimidating change to the traditional form of justice , the trial by ordeal : Andrianjaka ordered that rather than administering tangena poison to an accused person 's rooster to determine their innocence by the creature 's survival , the poison would instead be ingested by the accused himself . 
 
 = = = Founding of Antananarivo = = = 
 
 Around 1610 or 1625 according to various estimations , Andrianjaka commanded a garrison of 1 @,@ 000 soldiers to seize the hill of Analamanga ( " Blue Forest " ) — at 1 @,@ 480 metres ( 4 @,@ 860 ft ) above sea level , then the highest and most strategically important in the region — from its Vazimba inhabitants . He constructed a royal fortified compound ( rova ) on the hilltop as the capitol of a new town at the site which he named Antananarivo ( " the city of the thousand " ) in honor of the thousand soldiers who aided in capturing and protecting the hill . He reportedly succeeded with minimal bloodshed : according to oral history , the encampment of his army at the foot of Analamanga was sufficient to secure the submission of the Vazimba . Andrianjaka made Antananarivo the capital of his realm . From his position atop Analamanga , he was well @-@ placed to exert control over the vast plains of Betsimitatatra below . Under his command the plains were gradually transformed into vast , surplus @-@ producing rice paddies . This feat was accomplished by mobilizing large numbers of his able @-@ bodied subjects to construct dikes that enabled the redirection of rainwater for controlled flooding of planted areas . 
 Andrianjaka 's fortified compound came to be known as the Rova of Antananarivo and constituted the heart of his newly founded city of Antananarivo . Prior to Andrianjaka 's rule , Merina sovereigns shifted their capital from one town to another , but with the establishment of the rova on the peak of Analamanga hill , Antananarivo was to become the capital of the Kingdom of Imerina ( and , ultimately , the 19th @-@ century Kingdom of Madagascar ) for generations of Merina sovereigns . The heart of the town was built in stages : first , the army cleared the forest covering the hill 's summit and constructed the rova compound to serve as an initial garrison enclosing a traditional @-@ style wooden house ( lapa ) that served as a residence for the king . Soon thereafter , two more houses were constructed ; Andrianjaka also designated the construction space and design for a row of royal tombs . In keeping with Merina aristocratic tradition , each structure in the compound was given a name . The row of tombs was named Fitomiandalana ( " Seven Aligned Tombs " ) , Andrianjaka 's own tomb being the first of these constructed . According to one account , the very first royal house constructed within the Rova of Antananarivo was named Besakana ( " Great Breadth " ) and served as the personal residence of Andrianjaka . This account is contradicted by another source that states the second and third houses were called Masoandrotsiroa and Besakana , with the latter again characterized as Andrianjaka 's personal residence , leaving the precise origins of Besakana unclear . 
 The Besakana , Masoandrotsiroa and Fitomiandalana structures at the Rova of Antananarivo were preserved and maintained over the centuries by successive generations of Merina sovereigns , imbuing the structures with deep symbolic and spiritual meaning . As Andrianjaka 's residence , the Besakana was particularly significant : the original building was torn down and reconstructed in the same design by Andriamasinavalona around 1680 , and again by Andrianampoinimerina in 1800 , each of whom inhabited the building in turn as their personal residence . King Radama I likewise inhabited the building for much of his time at the Rova , and in 1820 he designated the building as the first site to house what came to be known as the Palace School , the first formal European @-@ style school in Imerina . Sovereigns were enthroned in this building and their mortal remains were displayed here before burial , rendering Besakana " the official state room for civil affairs ... regarded as the throne of the kingdom . " 
 
 = = Death and succession = = 
 
 The rule of Andrianjaka continued uninterrupted until his death at the Rova of Antananarivo around 1630 . He was the first king to be buried on the grounds of the Rova , his tomb forming the first of the Fitomiandalana . To commemorate his greatness , his subjects erected a small wooden house called a trano masina on top of his tomb . Future Merina sovereigns and nobles continued to construct similar tomb houses on their tombs well into the 19th century . According to oral history , the institution of lengthy formal mourning periods for deceased sovereigns in Imerina may also have begun with the death of Andrianjaka . He was succeeded by his son , Andriantsitakatrandriana .
