= Yoshi 's Island = 
 
 Super Mario World 2 : Yoshi 's Island , known in Japan as Yossy 's Island ( ヨッシーアイランド , Yosshī Airando ) , is a 1995 platform video game developed and published by Nintendo for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . Acting as a prequel to Super Mario World , the game casts players as Yoshi as he escorts Baby Mario through 48 levels in order to reunite him with his brother Luigi , who had been kidnapped by Baby Bowser 's minions . As a Super Mario series platformer , Yoshi runs and jumps to reach the end of the level while solving puzzles and collecting items . In a style new to the series , the game has a hand @-@ drawn aesthetic and is the first to have Yoshi as its main character . The game introduces his signature abilities to flutter jump , produce eggs from swallowed enemies , and transform into vehicles . It also features 2D graphics with Linear transformations ( similar to Super Mario World ) . 
 The game 's hand @-@ drawn aesthetic — a style new to the series — descends from producer and Mario creator Shigeru Miyamoto 's distaste for the computer pre @-@ rendered graphics of the game 's contemporary Donkey Kong Country . Yoshi 's Island was released in Japan in August 1995 , and worldwide two months later . Some of its special effects were powered by a new Super FX2 microchip . The game was rereleased for the Game Boy Advance with few changes in 2002 under the title Yoshi 's Island : Super Mario Advance 3 . Nintendo later released this version via the Nintendo 3DS and Wii U Virtual Console . 
 Yoshi 's Island received " instant " and " universal acclaim " , according to IGN and review aggregator Metacritic , and sold over four million copies . Both contemporaneous and retrospective reviewers offered lavish praise for the game 's aesthetics , sound , level design , and gameplay , and posited Yoshi 's Island as a masterpiece and the best platformer of all time . The game brought newfound renown to both Yoshi as a character and Miyamoto 's artistic and directorial career . The distinct art style and Yoshi 's signature characteristics established in Yoshi 's Island would carry throughout a series of cameos , spin @-@ offs , and sequels , including the 1998 Yoshi 's Story , 2006 Yoshi 's Island DS , 2014 Yoshi 's New Island , and 2015 Yoshi 's Woolly World . The next Mario 2D platform game for home consoles was New Super Mario Bros. Wii , released 14 years later . 
 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 
 Yoshi 's Island is a two @-@ dimensional side @-@ scrolling platformer in which players help friendly dinosaurs known as Yoshis escort Baby Mario safely through 48 levels across six worlds in order to rescue his brother Luigi , who had been kidnapped by an evil Magikoopa named Kamek . 
 Each level casts players as a different colored Yoshi , who must escort Baby Mario on his back and reach the end of the level , where he is passed on to the next Yoshi . Similar to Super Mario World , Yoshi can use his tongue to ensnare enemies and put them into his mouth . When something is in his mouth , Yoshi can either spit it out as an attack , or swallow it to turn it into an egg . These eggs can then be thrown at an angle , even bouncing off walls , to attack enemies or reach far away or hard to reach items . Yoshi can carry up to six eggs at a time , with some colored eggs spawning items once they hit something . Yoshi can also eat watermelons that let him spit out seeds , or flaming enemies that let him spit out fire . Yoshi is also able to perform a flutter jump , in which he can kick his legs in mid @-@ air to gain extra height or hover over long distances , and a ground pound , a downward attack that can hammer down on enemies and stumps . 
 The goal of each level is to protect Baby Mario , who rides on Yoshi 's back . If Yoshi is hit by an enemy or obstacle , Baby Mario will float off into a bubble and a timer will start counting down . If the player fails to recover Baby Mario before the counter reaches zero , Baby Mario will be taken away by Koopas and Yoshi will lose a life . The timer can recover up to ten seconds , and Yoshi can collect stars to increase the amount of time on the counter . However , if Yoshi falls into a bottomless pit , gets crushed , or comes into contact with spikes or lava , he will automatically lose a life . In some areas , players can collect a Starman that transforms Baby Mario into Super Baby Mario . During these areas , players take control of Baby Mario who , for a short period , is invincible , can run on walls and ceilings , and can float using his cape . Additionally , some areas transform Yoshi into various vehicles , such as a helicopter or digger , allowing him to reach otherwise inaccessible areas for a short amount of time . 
 Each of the game 's worlds feature eight main levels , with a boss appearing at the end of every fourth and eighth level . Hidden throughout each of these levels are five Flowers and twenty Red Coins , the latter of which are hidden behind specific coins in each level . Collecting Flowers adds flowers to the gate at the end of each level ( not including boss levels ) . If the player manages to land on an open flower after jumping through the end gate , they can play a bonus game during which they can earn extra lives or bonus items that can be activated from the pause menu , such as additional stars or maginifying glasses that reveal the location of hidden Red Coins . At the end of each level , players receive a score based on how many Flowers and Red Coins they found , as well as how many stars they have remaining , with a maximum score of 100 awarded for finding all Flowers and Red Coins and ending the level with 30 stars . Completing all levels in a world with a score of 100 unlocks two additional levels for that world . 
 
 = = Development and re @-@ release = = 
 
 While Mario creator Shigeru Miyamoto worked on Super Mario World , he thought to make Yoshi the series ' " next hero " since the game designer did not like the other Yoshi games , including Yoshi 's Safari and Yoshi 's Cookie , and thought he could make something more authentic . When he first brought the game to Nintendo marketing , they declined the game for having Mario @-@ style graphics rather than the vogue , computer pre @-@ rendered graphics of Donkey Kong Country . In comparison , they felt that his game lacked the power to impress . Incensed and opposed to the style , Miyamoto instead further escalated his cartoonish visuals into a hand @-@ drawn , crayon style . Nintendo 's marketing department accepted this revision . Miyamoto later recalled feeling that the marketing department wanted " better hardware and more beautiful graphics instead of ... art " . Around the time of his rejection , Miyamoto allegedly said that " Donkey Kong Country proves that players will put up with mediocre gameplay as long as the art is good " . However , he later clarified his remarks , stating that " recently some rumour got out that I didn 't really like that game ? I just want to clarify that that 's not the case , because I was very involved in that . And even emailing almost daily with Tim Stamper right up until the end . " 
 Yoshi 's Island was developed by Nintendo EAD and published by Nintendo for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . According to Miyamoto , who served as a producer , Yoshi 's Island was in development for four years , which let the team add " lots of magic tricks " . The game cartridge used an extra microchip to support the game 's rotation , scaling and other sprite @-@ changing special effects . Yoshi 's Island was designed to use the Super FX chip , but when Nintendo stopped supporting the chip , the game became the first to use Argonaut Games 's Super FX2 microchip . The chip powered scenes including a drawbridge falling into the foreground , rotation effects like rolling and enlarged rather than reanimated enemies , and a psychedelic effect in a level when Yoshi touches a floating fungus . 
 Yoshi 's Island was released first in Japan in August 1995 , and two months later in North America and Europe . At the time of release , the Super NES was in its twilight as a console in anticipation of Nintendo 's upcoming console to be released the following year , 1996 . Yoshi 's Island was rereleased for the Game Boy Advance as Yoshi 's Island : Super Mario Advance 3 in North America on September 23 , 2002 . In the game 's preview at E3 2002 , IGN named Yoshi 's Island " Best Platformer " on a handheld console . The Game Boy Advance version is a direct port of the original , apart from few changes . The developers used the Yoshi voice from a subsequent series game , cropped the original display to fit the handheld 's smaller screen , and added exclusive bonus levels . Like the other Super Mario Advance rereleases , the handheld version includes the 1983 game Mario Bros. with support for up to four players via link cable . The new cartridge did not need an extra microchip to support the original 's special effects . 
 The Game Boy Advance version of the game was released on the Nintendo 3DS and Wii U via Nintendo 's digital Virtual Console platform . The port retains the handheld version 's cropped screen and pack @-@ in Mario Bros. game , though its multiplayer mode is disabled . The 3DS version was released on December 16 , 2011 , as an exclusive reward for early adopters of the Nintendo 3DS . It did not receive a wider release . The Wii U version was released worldwide on April 24 , 2014 . At E3 2010 , Nintendo demoed " classic " 2D titles such as Yoshi 's Island as remastered 3D games with a " pop @-@ up book feel " . 
 
 = = Reception = = 
 
 Yoshi 's Island received " instant " and " universal acclaim " , according to an IGN retrospective and video game review aggregator Metacritic , respectively . At the time of its 1995 release , Matt Taylor of Diehard GameFan thought Yoshi 's Island could be " possibly the best platform game of all time " . Nintendo Power too said that the game was " one of the biggest , most beautiful games ever made " . Next Generation was also most impressed by the game 's " size and playability " . Diehard GameFan 's three reviewers gave the game a near perfect score . To wit , Nicholas Dean Des Barres said it was " one of the handful of truly perfect games ever produced " , and lamented that the magazine had given Donkey Kong Country , which he felt was a lackluster game in comparison , the extra single point for a perfect score . Casey Loe removed that one point for Baby Mario 's " annoying screech " . Nintendo Power and Nintendo Life too found Baby Mario 's crying sounds annoying . Major Mike of GamePro called it " a work of art . " He lauded the " almost perfect " control , the variety of techniques , the graphical variety , and the " abundance of hidden items and concealed rooms " , and unlike other reviewers , he found Baby Mario 's cries for help to be very affecting . He concluded that Yoshi 's Island " is one of the last of a dying breed : a 16 @-@ bit game that shows real heart and creativity . " Reviewing the Super NES release over a decade later , Kaes Delgrego of Nintendo Life said the crying and some easy boss battles , while both minor , were the game 's only shortcomings . Delgrego charged Yoshi 's Island with perfecting the genre , calling it " perhaps the greatest platformer of all time " . The game has sold over four million copies . 
 Both contemporaneous and retrospective reviewers offered lavish praise for the game 's aesthetics , level design , and gameplay , which became legacies of the game . Some called it " charm " . Delgrego of Nintendo Life would stop mid @-@ game just to watch what enemies would do . Martin Watts of the same publication called it " an absolute pleasure on the eyes and unlike any other SNES game " . Others praised the control scheme , technical effects , and sound design . Nintendo Life 's Delgrego felt " goosebumps and tingles " during the ending theme , and marked the soundtrack 's range from the lighthearted intro to the " epic grandeur of the final boss battle " . 
 Edge praised the game 's balance of challenge and accessibility . The magazine thought that the new power @-@ ups of Yoshi 's Island gave its gameplay and level design great range , and that the powers were significant additions to the series on par with the suits of Super Mario Bros. 3 or Yoshi 's own debut in Super Mario World . Diehard GameFan 's Taylor wrote that there was enough gameplay innovation to make him cry and listed his favorites as the Baby Mario cape invincibility power @-@ up , the machine gun @-@ style seed spitting , and the snowball hill level . Nintendo Life 's Watts called the egg stockpiling mechanic as " clever " for the way it encourages experimentation with the environment as well as tempered wastefulness . Edge thought of Yoshi 's Island as a " fusion of technology and creativity , each enhancing the other " . The magazine considered the game 's special effects expertly integrated into the gameplay , and described the developer 's handicraft as having an " attention to detail that few games can match " . 
 Reviewing the Game Boy Advance release in 2002 , Craig Harris of IGN wrote that Yoshi 's Island was both the console 's best platformer as well as " the best damn platformer ever developed " . While acknowledging the game 's roots in the Super Mario series , he said the game created enough gameplay ideas to constitute its own franchise . IGN 's Lucas M. Thomas wrote that the game 's story was also interesting as the origin story for the Mario brothers . Harris felt that the FX2 sprite @-@ changing effects gave the game " life " and that the Game Boy Advance cartridge could handle the effects just as well . He added that Yoshi 's morphing abilities and sound effects were designed well . Levi Buchanan of IGN said the game struck the right balance of tutorial by trial and error . IGN 's Harris also noted a few Game Boy Advance @-@ specific issues : framerate drop in areas where a lot is happening onscreen , camera panning problems due to the screen 's lower resolution , and a " poor " implementation of the " dizzy " special effect on the handheld release . Critics wrote that the " coloring book " -style graphics held up well . IGN 's Harris felt it was the best of the Super Mario Advance games . Of the similar version for the Wii U , Watts of Nintendo Life also noticed the framerate issues and problems resulting from the screen 's closer crop , which were " not enough to ruin the game , but ... noticeable " . Edge felt that game 's only disappointment was the linearity of its overworld following the exploratory Super Mario World and that the sequel would " inevitably ... have less impact " in comparison . 
 
 = = Legacy = = 
 
 Multiple retrospective critics declared Yoshi 's Island a " masterpiece " . IGN recalled it as " one of the most loved SNES adventures of all time " . Yoshi 's Island brought newfound renown to both Yoshi as a character and Shigeru Miyamoto 's artistic and directorial career . IGN 's Lucas M. Thomas wrote that game marked where Yoshi " came into his own " and developed many of his definitive characteristics : the " signature " flutter jump , and ability to throw eggs and transform shape . Baby Mario , who debuted in the game , went on to have his own career in a number of sports @-@ related titles . Series producer Takashi Tezuka said he consciously continued " the handicraft feel " of the original throughout the series , which later included yarn and similar variations . Official Nintendo Magazine called the art style " a bold step ... that paid off handsomely " . Delgrego of Nintendo Life wrote that the game marked a new era of art in video games that prioritized creativity over graphics technology . 
 Delgrego continued that the game 's countdown @-@ based life was a " revolutionary " mechanic that would later become ubiquitous in games like the Halo series . Martin Watts also of Nintendo Life considered Super Mario 64 to be a more momentous event in gaming history , but felt that Yoshi 's Island was the " most significant " event in the " Mario Bros. timeline " . In a retrospective , IGN wrote that Super NES owners widely embraced the game alongside Donkey Kong Country . 
 IGN 's Jared Petty wrote that Yoshi 's Island bested " the test of time far better than many of its contemporaries " . Levi Buchanan of IGN thought Nintendo took a risk with Yoshi 's Island by making Mario passive and giving Yoshi new abilities . Christian Donlan of 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die wrote that the game was a testament to the Mario team 's " staggering confidence " in its development ability . He said the game was " perhaps the most imaginative platformer " of its time . Yoshi 's Island ranked 22nd on Official Nintendo Magazine 's 2009 top 100 Nintendo games as a " bone fide classic " , 15th on IGN 's 2014 top 125 Nintendo games of all time , and 2nd on USgamer 's 2015 best Mario platformers list . 
 
 = = = Sequels and spin @-@ offs = = = 
 
 Yoshi 's Island led to a strong year for Yoshi as a character . IGN 's Thomas added that the hand @-@ drawn style of Yoshi 's Island made the computer @-@ generated Donkey Kong Country appear outdated , though both games sold well , and Rareware included a Yoshi cameo in their sequel , Donkey Kong Country 2 : Diddy 's Kong Quest , released that same year . Yoshi 's Island graphics and characters were also incorporated into the 1996 Super NES tile puzzle game Tetris Attack . 
 Following Yoshi 's Island 's success , Nintendo developed Yoshi 's Story , a 1998 platformer for the Nintendo 64 , which " disappointed " audiences and deflated " massive ... anticipation " with fetch quests and the 3D style Miyamoto eschewed in its predecessor . The Nintendo 64 game expanded on Yoshi 's character voice as introduced in Yoshi 's Island , but also " dumbed down Yoshi 's character " . Nintendo created two Yoshi 's Island spin @-@ off games : the tilt sensor @-@ controlled Yoshi Topsy Turvy ( 2004 , Game Boy Advance ) , which was developed by Artoon and critically panned , and the Nintendo @-@ developed minigame Yoshi Touch & Go ( 2005 , Nintendo DS ) . The 1995 original release received a direct sequel in 2006 : Yoshi 's Island DS , also developed by Artoon . Titled Yoshi 's Island 2 until just before it shipped , the game retained the core concept of transporting baby Nintendo characters , and added babies Princess Peach , Bowser , Donkey Kong , and Wario , each with an individual special ability . Yoshi had a similar move set to Yoshi 's Island and added dash and float abilities , but was more passive a character compared to the babies on his back . 
 About seven years later , series producer Takashi Tezuka decided enough time had passed to make another direct sequel , Yoshi 's New Island ( 2013 , Nintendo 3DS ) . It was developed by former Artoon employees at their new company , Arzest . As in the original , Yoshi carries Baby Mario and throws eggs . The game adds the ability to swallow big foes , which become big eggs that can destroy big obstacles . Yoshi 's Island DS developer Arzest assisted in its development . In 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die ( 2010 ) , Christian Donlan wrote that despite the " streamlined " Yoshi 's Story and " brilliant " Yoshi 's Touch and Go , " the original was never bettered and never truly advanced upon " . In Eurogamer 's 2015 preview of Yoshi 's Woolly World , Tom Phillips wrote that it had " been 20 years since the last truly great Yoshi 's Island " . The next console release of a Mario 2D side @-@ scroller , New Super Mario Bros. Wii , was released 14 years later .
