= Ginga Legend Weed = 
 
 Ginga Legend Weed ( Japanese : 銀牙伝説ウィード , Hepburn : Ginga Densetsu Wīdo , lit . Silver Fang Legend Weed ) is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Yoshihiro Takahashi . It is a sequel to Takahashi 's 1980s manga Ginga : Nagareboshi Gin , and focuses on Weed , the son of Gin , the original series ' protagonist . Weed , named after the English word for wild plant , leaves his birthplace to search for his father in the Ōu Mountains . Upon arriving , Weed immediately begins protecting Ōu and its soldiers from dangerous threats . As the series progresses , Weed and his allies journey throughout Japan , aiding those in need and preventing takeovers . 
 Ginga Legend Weed was originally serialized in the magazine Weekly Manga Goraku from 1999 to 2009 . Publisher Nihon Bungeisha released 60 bound volumes and later reprinted early volumes . ComicsOne licensed the series for release in Canada and the United States , but issued only three volumes before it went out of business . Ginga Legend Weed has not been relicensed and distributed in the English language . 
 In addition to the main series , Takahashi authored several side stories and books relating to Weed and the supporting cast . In 2005 , Studio Deen produced an anime series that aired on Animax . The show was released on several DVDs between 2006 and 2007 in Japan , and was licensed and distributed in Taiwan and several Nordic countries . Takahashi also published a prequel to Ginga Legend . 
 
 = = Plot = = 
 
 Several years after the events of Ginga : Nagareboshi Gin , Gin 's son is born in the Japanese Alps . After the puppy 's mother Sakura dies from an illness , an English Setter named GB pledges to bring him to the Ōu Mountains and reunite him with his father . GB decides to name the pup Weed , after the English word for wild plant , because he is " small but powerful " . Upon arriving at Ōu , the pair learn that a monstrous creature is wreaking havoc and Ōu has fallen into turmoil . Gin is away , on a desperate search for his mate . Weed , GB , and other Ōu soldiers meet a team of dogs led by the German shepherd Jerome . Jerome explains that the monster is a mutated dog that escaped from a laboratory after killing several scientists . Weed 's group joins them and they succeed in killing the monster , though lose several soldiers in the process , among them Gin 's old ally , Smith . 
 The series then introduces Hōgen and Genba , Great Dane brothers who plan to create an army and overthrow Gin . When Gin and his close friends John and Akame are found by Hōgen and his troops , Akame escapes to alert Ōu , while Gin , John , and Hiro ( a dog loyal to Gin ) are taken as hostages . John escapes , but is killed while acting as a diversion for Hiro . Akame locates Weed and explains the situation , prompting him to search for dogs to join Ōu 's army . Gin escapes and starts recruiting soldiers . Hōgen , alone after having to mercy kill Genba , launches his attack on Ōu . Weed clashes with Hōgen and is injured , but spirits of dead Ōu soldiers appear to give him strength . Weed defeats Hōgen but chooses not to kill him . Hōgen stumbles away and is found by Shōji Sudou , a policeman whose partner was killed by Genba and Hōgen . Shōji shoots and kills Hōgen . 
 Later , Weed encounters a dog named Yukimura , and learns that a group of monkeys have been terrorizing the area . Leading them is Shōgun , a vicious baboon that feeds on young monkeys and puppies . Shōgun had previously attacked Yukimura and his family , permanently damaging his adopted father Saheiji . Weed , his comrades , Yukimura , and several rebellious monkeys attack Shōgun and his followers . Yukimura is able to injure Shōgun enough to ensure his death , but dies in the process . Saheiji reveals that Yukimura was Weed 's brother : Sakura , too sick to care for all of her children , had given two of her puppies to Saheiji to raise as foster sons . 
 While Jerome is in Hokkaidō , he is captured by a Russian German shepherd named Victor , who aims to conquer the island . Jerome escapes and alerts Hakurō , a former Ōu soldier who resides in Hokkaidō . Hakurō and several of his sons are attacked and killed by Victor 's forces . Gin and Weed go to Hokkaidō , but are unable to defeat Victor 's troops . Jerome rejoins the Ōu soldiers with Lydia and Maxim , two subordinates of Victor . Angry at Maxim 's betrayal , Victor orders a friend of Maxim , Alam , to kill him . Alam feels an intense regret for following orders , but later learns that Maxim survived . Alam decides to drown Victor by dragging him underwater and entangling him in seaweed . With Victor gone , Lydia chooses to stay with Jerome while Maxim and his remaining subordinates swim back to Russia . 
 While traveling , Weed meets his other brother , Joe . Joe dislikes Gin for leaving Sakura unattended in the Alps . He is unaware that Sakura had left Ōu under the false impression that Gin was dead , and that Gin had been unaware of Sakura 's leaving . Joe explains that a large hybrid bear has attacked and killed his mate , Hitomi . Weed 's group joins Joe to defeat the animal . During the battle , GB dies saving Weed , and Weed vows to avenge him . Weed knocks himself and the bear into a river . The bear dies after hitting a floodgate and Weed manages to survive . He returns to Ōu and learns that his mate , Koyuki , is pregnant . Weeks later , she gives birth to four pups . 
 
 = = Media = = 
 
 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 
 Ginga Legend Weed was written and illustrated by Yoshihiro Takahashi . It is a sequel to his 1980s series Ginga : Nagareboshi Gin , and follows the son of Gin , the title character from the original series . It began serialization in Weekly Manga Goraku magazine in 1999 . The Japanese publisher Nihon Bungeisha released the series in collected volumes from January 2000 to September 2009 . Cumulatively , 60 volumes were published . In October 2006 , Nihon Bungeisha released the first volume of a reprinted edition of Ginga Legend Weed . The company has released 22 volumes of the reprint edition , with the latest published in December 2007 . The American company ComicsOne licensed the series for release in the United States and Canada in 2000 with the first three volumes released between March and June 2001 . Additionally , they provided an Adobe Digital Editions e @-@ book version . ComicsOne later went bankrupt . American publisher DrMaster acquired the rights to some of ComicsOne 's titles , but not Ginga Legend Weed . While the physical copies are out @-@ of @-@ print , the e @-@ book version is still available . 
 Under their G @-@ Comics imprint , Nihon Bungeisha released several Ginga Legend Weed omnibus editions labeled as " specials " . A series of three specials were released in April 2004 called Gajō no Kettō Hen ( 牙城の血闘編 ) . Throughout 2009 and 2010 , another set of eight " specials " were produced : Tabidachi Hen ( September 2009 ) , Senshi no Shōmei Hen ( October 2009 ) , Inuzoku no Tsutome Hen ( November 2009 ) , Otoko no Yakusoku Hen ( December 2009 ) , Taiman Shōbu Hen ( January 2010 ) , Taishō no Utsuwa Hen ( February 2010 ) , Dōshu Taiketsu Hen ( March 2010 ) , and Uketsuga Reshi Kiba Hen ( April 2010 ) . 
 
 = = = Related books = = = 
 
 Nihon Bungeisha released several books authored by Takahashi that relate to the main series . Ginga Legend Weed Gaiden ( 銀牙伝説ウィード外伝 ) , first released on August 9 , 2001 and re @-@ released in December 2007 , is a collection of four short stories , including a side @-@ story about a Golden Retriever named Mel , who is a character in the main series , and the story of Takahashi 's past dog Hanako . My Dog , My Weed ( ぼくの犬 僕のウィード ) , a collection of art , essays , and personal experiences pertaining to the attachment between people and animals , was released in November 2001 . In 2002 , Nihon Bungeisha released a magazine called Weed World , which centered around Ginga Legend Weed and related material . In total , 5 issues were published between March and May . In January 2002 , an art book entitled Ginga Legend Weed : Gengashū ( 銀牙伝説ウィード原画集 ) was released . Ginga Legend Weed : Meishōbu Retsuden ( 銀牙伝説ウィード名勝負列伝 ) , a book containing character biographies and statistics , was released in May 2003 . In November 2005 , Ginga Densetsu Weed Tokubetsu Han ( 銀牙伝説ウィード特別版 ) , an omnibus volume containing the prequel Ginga Legend Riki and Weed Gaiden , was released . 
 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 
 In 2005 , Studio Deen produced a 26 @-@ episode animated adaptation of Ginga Legend Weed , directed by Toshiyuki Kato . In Japan , the series aired from November 3 , 2005 to May 11 , 2006 on Animax with the SKY PerfecTV ! service . Dohatsuten , a Japanese band , performed both the opening and ending themes , Ginga Densetsu Weed and Tsuki Akari ( つきあかり ) , respectively . On December 7 , 2005 , Imperial Records released a single containing the themes and karaoke versions . The full soundtrack for the series , composed by Y2 DOGS , was released by Imperial Records on January 25 , 2006 . The entirety of Ginga Legend Weed was initially released on 13 DVDs published between February 17 , 2006 and March 1 , 2007 . On August 29 , 2008 , a complete box set containing all 13 discs was released . The electronics company Sankyo created a Ginga Legend Weed pachinko game that utilizes the anime character designs . 
 Top @-@ Insight International licensed Ginga Legend Weed for release in Taiwan . The company released seven individual DVDs , and one complete box set . The series aired in Taiwan on China Television . Future Film licensed and released the series in Finland . The company released Ginga Legend Weed on eight separate DVDs between August 2 , 2006 and December 5 , 2006 . On November 14 , 2007 , Future Film released the entire series on a collector 's edition . The release was bundled with a Weed booklet and mobile phone charm . In Sweden , AudVid distributed the series in one box set on June 15 , 2007 . The set included an extra 16 @-@ page booklet . The Finnish and Swedish releases included both Swedish and Finnish subtitles . In Denmark , Scanbox Entertainment released eight DVDs containing the series in 2007 , and in 2008 produced two box sets containing episodes 1 @-@ 13 and 14 @-@ 26 , respectively . In addition to a Danish dub , Scanbox 's release included Danish and Norwegian subtitles . 
 
 = = Reception = = 
 
 The 55th volume of Ginga Legend Weed was listed as number 30 on the Oricon sales chart in Japan for the week December 9 – 15 , 2008 . Its sales numbers for the week were 20 @,@ 059 copies , for a cumulative total of 21 @,@ 320 since its release . 
 Ginga Legend Weed was featured on Jason Thompson 's House of 1000 Manga segment on Anime News Network . He praised the series for its story and took note of the " flavor " of having a combination of physically realistic dogs , " shōnen tropes " , the dogs ' knowledge of the human world ( such as job occupations and dog breeds ) , and dog behavior involving honor , loyalty , honorifics , and auras . However , Thompson noted that the " noble melodrama sometimes gets to be a little much " , and felt that several characters , with the exception of Weed , began " to blur together " due to the difficulty of drawing a very large cast of dogs . Additionally , he commented that the fights weren 't visually " exciting " , as dogs are " lacking prehensile arms " . Overall , Thompson felt that the series was unique , stating that " no one else [ is ] making manga quite like this . " In a later installment of House of 1000 Manga , Thompson expressed his preference for Takahashi 's original work , Ginga : Nagareboshi Gin , stating that it felt " more exciting and natural " than its " stiffer and more pompous " sequel . 
 
 = = Legacy = = 
 
 In 2002 , Takahashi began publishing Ginga Legend Riki ( 銀牙伝説リキ , lit . Silver Fang Legend Riki ) , a prequel to Ginga Legend Weed and Ginga : Nagareboshi Gin . It was originally serialized in the Weed @-@ centric magazine Weed World , published by Nihon Bungeisha , between March 31 , 2002 and December 10 , 2002 . In March 2003 , Nihon Bungeisha released the collected chapters in a single book and in December 2005 , it was included in the omnibus Ginga Densetsu Weed Tokubetsu Han with Weed Gaiden . A reprinted edition of Ginga Legend Riki was released in March 2007 . The one @-@ shot follows Riki , father of Gin and former leader of the Ōu soldiers . Riki , though sired by the prized bear hound Shiro , is born a runt and never homed . After his mother Yamabuki is returned to her owner , Riki , stricken with sadness , decides to visit her . 
 During his trek , Riki is attacked by a pack of dogs and falls into a river . Riki is rescued by his father , Shiro , who advises him about the importance of strength and leaves , not knowing Riki is his son . Influenced by Shiro , Riki aims to become strong and continually visits his mother . On a later trip , Riki sees a young boy , Daisuke , hit by a truck on a mountain road and sent over the road railing . Riki howls for help , but instead attracts the dogs that had attacked him . Riki defends Daisuke until Shiro and his owner , Gohei , arrive . Shiro learns that Riki is his son . The book ends with Gohei and Shiro fighting the bear Akakabuto . A bullet becomes lodged in Akakabuto 's brain , driving him insane . Riki watches as the bear grabs Shiro and they fall off a cliff . 
 Takahashi began a sequel to Ginga Legend Weed , entitled Ginga Legend Weed : Orion ( 銀牙伝説ウィード オリオン , Ginga Densetsu Wīdo : Orion , lit . Silver Fang Legend Weed : Orion ) , in issue # 2173 of Manga Goraku , released on July 24 , 2009 . The first collected volume was released by Nihon Bungeisha in November 2009 . 30 volumes have been published and the series as of July 2014 . The new series follows Weed 's offspring : Bellatrix , Rigel , Sirius , and , in particular , Orion . They are all named after astronomical phenomenon : Orion after the Orion constellation , Rigel after the star Rigel , Sirius after the star Sirius , and Bellatrix after the star Bellatrix . Orion bears a close physical resemblance Riki and possesses an inborn strength , but is rude and hot @-@ headed . Rigel shares Orion 's fiery personality , while Sirius , who resembles his father , is level @-@ headed and a peace @-@ keeper . Bellatrix , Weed 's only daughter , is portrayed as immature and whiny . 
 An earthquake and subsequent volcanic eruption separates Orion from his parents and siblings . Joe locates Orion and brings him to safety but disappears in the process , while the other siblings are put under the charge of the Ōu soldier Sasuke . With the Ōu Mountains in complete disarray , new threats arrive to exploit its weaknesses . Three sons of the Irish Wolfhound Kamakiri , a platoon leader for Hōgen , wish to avenge their father 's death . Kurohabaki Masamune , the leader of the Kurohabaki Clan of ninja dogs , aims to take over Ōu and strengthen his army . He is the adoptive son of the former Kurohabaki leader , Terumune , and was previously denied leadership of the clan , despite his striving for approval . Instead , Terumune decided that his blood @-@ related son Yamabiko , born after Masamune 's arrival , would become leader . Thereafter , Masamune banished Terumune and took control of the clan . He holds a grudge against Yamabiko and plans to find and kill him . Meanwhile , members of the Kurohabaki clan roam Ōu , gathering recruits and killing those who resist .
