= Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! = 
 
 Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! ( ストップ ! ! ひばりくん ! , Sutoppu ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! ) is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Hisashi Eguchi . It was serialized in Weekly Shōnen Jump from October 1981 to November 1983 , and the chapters were published in four tankōbon volumes by Shueisha from November 1982 to January 1984 . The series was adapted into a 35 @-@ episode anime television series by Toei Animation that aired on Fuji Television from May 1983 to January 1984 . The story focuses on Kōsaku Sakamoto , a high school student who goes to live with yakuza boss Ibari Ōzora and his four children — Tsugumi , Tsubame , Hibari and Suzume — after the death of his mother . Kōsaku is shocked to learn that Hibari , who looks and behaves as a girl , was assigned male at birth . 
 Eguchi wanted to create a romantic comedy manga where the main female character is a cross @-@ dressing boy so as to poke fun at the genre . He took more time to draw the chapters compared to his earlier manga , and as the serialization continued , he found it increasingly difficult to keep up a weekly pace for the chapters . He eventually abandoned the series after the editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Weekly Shōnen Jump refused his request to release the chapters every other week . From July 2009 to February 2010 , Shogakukan published a three @-@ volume Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! Complete Edition omnibus collection , which features various revisions to the originally published chapters in addition to newly drawn cover art . 
 Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! has been described as achieving a dizzying reality with Hibari by contrasting a girlish exterior with a male interior . The series has been praised for its overall light and pop literary style , and the delicate touch in how Hibari is drawn has been described as so attractive that it makes the reader forget that it is a gag manga . However , the jokes surrounding the yakuza characters have been criticized as extreme and no longer humorous in modern times . The series has been described as having had a hand in paving the way for the J @-@ pop phenomenon . 
 
 = = Plot = = 
 
 Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! follows Kōsaku Sakamoto , a high school student whose mother tells him on her deathbed to live with her friend and yakuza boss Ibari Ōzora and his family in Tokyo after she dies . Although Kōsaku is initially unsure about his situation , he is relieved when he meets Ibari 's four children : Tsugumi , Tsubame , Hibari and Suzume . Kōsaku is attracted to Hibari from the start , but he is shocked to learn that Hibari , who looks and behaves as a girl , was assigned male at birth — something only known within the Ōzora Group and Hibari 's family . A group of four girls led by Kaori Hanazono begin to suspect that Hibari may be a guy , but Tsubame takes Hibari 's place during a health checkup , effectively quelling any suspicions . Hibari begins to show an immediate interest in Kōsaku , so in an effort to distance himself from Hibari , Kōsaku joins the Wakaba Academy boxing club . Also in the club is Makoto Shiina , who is attracted to Hibari , and Rie Kawai , the club manager who Kōsaku likes . Hibari soon joins the club as its second manager shortly before they go on a training camp in Kujūkuri at the end of the year . 
 At the start of the new school year , Hibari is scouted to join the girl 's volleyball team after the captain , Jun Ōtori , witnesses Hibari 's athletic prowess . Although Hibari refuses , Jun continues to pursue Hibari until Jun is overwhelmed by Hibari 's superhuman ability to spike the ball . After Kaori and her friends try to embarrass Hibari during swim class , they once again suspect that Hibari may be a guy , but Hibari prevents them from getting any proof during the school sponsored summer camp . After Hibari refuses several advances from a popular guy at school named Takuto Honda , Hibari starts openly flirting with Kōsaku at school . Shiina becomes enraged at Kōsaku for earning Hibari 's affection , but Shiina and Kōsaku grow closer as friends after they fight it out and Kōsaku reassures him that there is nothing going on between him and Hibari . 
 When Kōsaku is out jogging one day , he helps out a girl named Sayuri Kōenji who was being harassed by three guys from the Kokuryū High School boxing club , although Hibari deals with them before Kōsaku can do anything . Despite this , Sayuri is instantly enamored by Kōsaku and hires a detective to find out more about him , leading her to discover Hibari 's secret . Hibari has another run @-@ in with the Kokuryū boxing club members after they harass Tsubame at a festival . The Kokuryū boxing club challenges the Wakaba boxing club to some inter @-@ school matches , but this turns out to be a ruse to get a chance to gang up on Hibari . However , the Ōzora Group intercedes , allowing Hibari to knock out the Kokuryū boxing club 's leader . Sayuri transfers into Kōsaku 's class , and she blackmails him into going on a date with her in exchange for not revealing Hibari 's secret . During the school festival , Kōsaku 's class acts out a Sleeping Beauty play with Kōsaku as the prince and Hibari as the princess , culminating in Hibari giving Kōsaku a French kiss on stage . Ibari agrees to look after Gekijirō Taiga , the son of one of his close friends , who Kōsaku is surprised to learn is a trans man . 
 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 
 Kōsaku Sakamoto ( 坂本 耕作 , Sakamoto Kōsaku ) is the protagonist of Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! ! and is originally from Kumamoto.Ch. 33 He is a pure @-@ hearted high school student who constantly refuses Hibari 's advances toward him , Ch . 2 , 3 , 10 , 17 but as time goes on , he becomes increasingly concerned that he is being influenced by Hibari.Ch. 8 , 22 , 35 , 38 Kōsaku treats Hibari kindly , and helps to maintain Hibari 's secret.Ch. 25 , 50 , 51 Initially unskilled at fighting , Ch . 3 he joins the Wakaba Academy boxing club in an effort to get stronger because of Hibari 's inherent strength , Ch . 8 which he achieves as the series progresses.Ch. 38 Kōsaku is voiced by Tōru Furuya . 
 Hibari Ōzora ( 大空 ひばり , Ōzora Hibari ) is the titular character of Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! ! . Hibari is a high school student assigned male at birth who looks and behaves as a girl , much to Ibari 's dismay.Ch. 2 , 4 , 8 Hibari prefers being referred to as Ibari 's daughter , Ch . 6 , 8 , 15 and has expressed an interest in having breasts.Ch. 6 According to Suzume , Hibari becomes more feminine after Kōsaku starts living at the Ōzora household.Ch. 8 Hibari show an interest in Kōsaku early on , Ch . 9 and continues to make advances toward him throughout the series.Ch. 17 , 22 , 35 Hibari gets bolder as the series progresses , including openly flirting with Kōsaku at school , Ch . 37 and kissing him.Ch. 18 , 48 , 51 Hibari is extremely athletic and intelligent , in addition to being physically strong despite Hibari 's relatively small body frame.Ch. 5 , 7 , 8 , 22 Hibari is voiced by Satomi Majima . 
 Ibari Ōzora ( 大空 いばり , Ōzora Ibari ) is the boss of the Ōzora Group , a yakuza organization.Ch. 1 As the father of Tsugumi , Tsubame , Hibari and Suzume , he wants the Ōzora Group to be family @-@ oriented.Ch. 4 Ibari is extremely distressed by Hibari 's usual behavior , partly because Hibari is his only choice to inherit the Ōzora Group.Ch. 2 He has a weak heart and frequently gets attacks whenever he is overly excited or shocked by something.Ch. 2 , 4 , 8 , 28 Ibari had been in love with Kōsaku 's mother , but she ended up marrying a Matagi hunter.Ch. 19 Ibari is voiced by Jōji Yanami . 
 Tsugumi Ōzora ( 大空 つぐみ , Ōzora Tsugumi ) is the eldest daughter who has acted as a motherly figure to her family after their mother died . She dropped out of art school in her second year and became a professional illustrator.Ch. 31 Tsugumi is voiced by Fumi Hirano . 
 Tsubame Ōzora ( 大空 つばめ , Ōzora Tsubame ) is the second daughter and is two years older than Hibari . Like her father , Tsubame is against Hibari acting as a girl , Ch . 5 , 7 and constantly gets mad at Hibari for wearing her clothes , Ch . 4 , 23 , 44 although Tsubame sometimes wears Hibari 's clothes , too.Ch. 6 Tsubame and Hibari are nearly identical except for their hair and eye color , and they impersonate each other on certain occasions.Ch. 7 , 13 , 18 Tsubame is voiced by Kyōko Irokawa . 
 Suzume Ōzora ( 大空 すずめ , Ōzora Suzume ) is the youngest daughter and is a precocious elementary school student.Ch. 14 , 19 , 48 She is scared of flat @-@ faced men.Ch. 4 , 28 Suzume is voiced by Tomiko Suzuki . 
 Sabu ( サブ ) is a member of the Ōzora Group . He is in love with Tsugumi.Ch. 32 Sabu is voiced by Norio Wakamoto . 
 Seiji ( 政二 ) is a member of the Ōzora Group . He looks scary , but he has a timid personality.Ch. 2 , 4 , 18 He scares Kōsaku awake in the mornings.Ch. 6 , 9 , 20 Seiji is voiced by Toku Nishio . 
 Makoto Shiina ( 椎名 まこと , Shiina Makoto ) is Kōsaku 's classmate who likes Hibari.Ch. 3 , 12 He is a member of the boxing club , and initially hates Kōsaku for earning Hibari 's affection , Ch . 8 but as the series progresses , the two become friends.Ch. 38 Shiina is voiced by Katsuji Mori . 
 Rie Kawai ( 可愛 理絵 , Kawai Rie ) is a normal girl with a gentle personality who is attracted to Shiina.Ch. 12 She joined the boxing club as a manager because of him.Ch. 17 She leaves the boxing club when she learns Shiina likes Hibari , Ch . 30 but she rejoins the club after she gets over him.Ch. 50 Rie is voiced by Hiromi Tsuru . 
 Mitsuo Kaji ( 梶 みつを , Kaji Mitsuwo ) is one of Tsubame 's classmates and is the boxing club captain.Ch. 10 , 13 He is an overbearing guy and is very pushy towards Tsubame whom he likes.Ch. 13 , 18 His family members have the same face as him.Ch. 18 He is voiced by Kōzō Shioya . 
 Kaori Hanazono ( 花園 かおり , Hanzono Kaori ) is Kōsaku 's classmate.Ch. 23 She is jealous of Hibari 's popularity at school , Ch . 6 and takes pride in her devious personality.Ch. 7 , 27 Along with her three friends , they try to embarrass Hibari.Ch. 24 , 27 Kaori is voiced by Seiko Nakano . 
 Sayuri Kōenji ( 高円寺 さゆり , Kōenji Sayuri ) is a rich girl one year younger than Kōsaku.Ch. 50 She falls in love easily and will do anything she can to bring her love to fruition . When something surprises her , she composes a haiku.Ch. 43 Sayuri is voiced by Yuriko Yamamoto . 
 
 = = Media = = 
 
 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 
 Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! is written and illustrated by Hisashi Eguchi . Following the conclusion of his manga Hinomaru Gekijō ( ひのまる劇場 ) in 1981 , Eguchi wanted to go against the notion at the time that there was currently a golden age of romantic comedy manga in shōnen manga magazines . In response , Eguchi thought of creating a romantic comedy manga where the main female character is a cross @-@ dressing boy , and in doing so , poke fun at the genre by developing it as the antithesis of a romantic comedy . Eguchi drew up the storyboard for the first chapter in about 30 minutes in a cafe , and came up with the title Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! as a reference to Hisashi Sekiya 's manga Stop ! Nii @-@ chan ( ストップ ! にいちゃん ) . In wanting to highlight the comedy of having a character like Hibari , Eguchi realized that the cuter he could draw Hibari , the more effective the jokes would be , so he tried to draw Hibari as cute as he could . 
 Eguchi had often rushed when drawing his earlier manga Susume ! ! Pirates ( すすめ ! ! パイレーツ ) , but starting with Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! , he raised the standards he held for his art and had to began taking more time to draw the chapters . In addition , Eguchi was very particular about the appearance of his manuscripts , so he never used white @-@ out to correct any drawing errors because he disliked how it looked . As the serialization continued , Eguchi found it increasingly difficult to keep up a weekly pace for the chapters , leading him to take frequent hiatuses and later say that " drawing weekly isn 't something humans can do . " Furthermore , the editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Weekly Shōnen Jump at the time , Shigeo Nishimura , refused his request to release the chapters every other week . When it came time to draw what would end up being the last serialized chapter , Eguchi completed the chapter 's storyboard , but ultimately submitted only about two @-@ thirds of the chapter , leaving out the last five pages . After he submitted the chapter 's manuscript , Eguchi fled to a hotel and secluded himself for a day , only coming out after Nishimura called him to say that he could not deal with him anymore on a weekly basis . As a result , Eguchi abandoned the serialization and the editorial department decided to discontinue the series . 
 Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! was serialized in the manga magazine Weekly Shōnen Jump from the October 19 , 1981 issue to the November 28 , 1983 issue . The individual chapters were collected and published in four tankōbon volumes by Shueisha from November 1982 to January 1984 . Inspired by Katsuhiro Otomo , Eguchi fought against the established design format for the volumes that at the time was " set in stone " for series serialized in Weekly Shōnen Jump . Futabasha later published it in three volumes in July 1991 , and again in two volumes in February 1995 . Shueisha republished it in four volumes from May to June 2001 . Home @-@ sha published it in two volumes in January 2004 . In an interview in 2007 , Eguchi expressed a desire to continue some of his older series , but stated that a continuation of Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! would be difficult . 
 Starting in 2009 , Eguchi began working with Shogakukan on releasing a Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! Complete Edition omnibus collection , which features various revisions to the originally published chapters in addition to newly drawn cover art . Not wanting to end the Complete Edition with an abrupt conclusion like he had done before , Eguchi found the storyboard for the final chapter and used it as a basis to newly draw the last five pages he had omitted 27 years earlier . Shogakukan published the Complete Edition in three volumes from July 2009 to February 2010 ; Shogakukan later republished the series in another three volumes from May to July 2012 . In 2010 , Eguchi did not rule out the possibility of someday drawing a continuation of the series , but he said it probably would not be a story under the title Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! . 
 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 
 A 35 @-@ episode anime television series adaptation , produced by Toei Animation and directed by Takashi Hisaoka . It aired from May 20 , 1983 to January 27 , 1984 on Fuji Television . The screenplay was written by : Shigeru Yanagawa , Tokio Tsuchiya , Hiroshi Toda , Tomomi Tsutsui , Takeshi Shudo and Yumi Asano . The character design used in the anime was provided by Yoshinori Kanemori , and the music was composed by Kōji Nishimura . The series was later released by Universal J to two DVD compilation volumes from February to March 2003 . A DVD box set was released by TC Entertainment in September 2014 . The opening theme is " Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! " ( ストップ ! ! ひばりくん ! ) sung by Yuki Yukino and the ending theme is " Kongara Connection " ( コンガラ ・ コネクション ) sung by Ai Hoshino . 
 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 
 Psychologist Tamaki Saitō described Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! as achieving a " dizzying reality " with Hibari " by contrasting a girlish exterior with a male interior " , and went on to say that the series could be seen as a " continuation of the sartorial perversion lineage " of cross @-@ dressing characters . Manga critic Haruyuki Nakano has called Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! a unique and outstanding gag manga for its juxtaposition of Hibari being a boy and the heir to a yakuza organization . Nakano largely attributes this successful combination to Eguchi 's ability to draw girls that are not only cute , but also have good taste and sex appeal . The delicate touch in how Hibari is drawn has been described as so attractive that it makes the reader forget that it is a gag manga . 
 In writing for the magazine Cyzo , manga critic Jyamao wrote that because of its overall light and pop literary style , none of the indecency or immorality cross @-@ dressing may engender comes through , which he surmises is why the anime was able to air during prime time . Jyamao notes the more extreme nature of the jokes surrounding the yakuza characters in comparison to the jokes involving cross @-@ dressing , and that some jokes such as those involving drugs would not be humorous today . Manga commentator Nobunaga Minami lauded Eguchi for being a pioneer in drawing characters with a high fashion sense in Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! , which he says effectively changed fashion in shōnen manga from being seen as a " symbol " to now being treated as an " accessory " . Eguchi 's attention to detail is also praised , such as drawing Kōsaku wearing Chuck Taylor All @-@ Stars in one chapter . 
 The series has been called effervescent and having had a hand in paving the way for the J @-@ pop phenomenon . When Tegami Bachi author Hiroyuki Asada read Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! in junior high school , he admired its novel sensibility , and Eguchi 's art also influenced him . According to Eguchi , some people who read Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! were influenced to start cross @-@ dressing .
