= The Chariot ( band ) = 
 
 The Chariot was an American metalcore band from Douglasville , Georgia , that existed from 2003 to 2013 . The last lineup consisted of drummer David Kennedy , vocalist and bandleader Josh Scogin , and guitarists Brandon Henderson and Stephen Harrison . The band experienced frequent lineup changes since its inception , with Scogin being the only original member . The band played an abrasive style of hardcore that does not adhere to typical stylings such as melodic / abrasive dynamics and harmonic vocals . They built a reputation around their powerful live performances , with Scogin 's lyrics covering topics like materialism , personal struggle , current events , politics , and Christian themes . Their music was critically acclaimed as something " that will melt your face and leave you wanting more . " 
 The band was formed by Scogin shortly after he left his position of vocalist in Norma Jean . In 2004 , a record deal was signed with Solid State Records and a debut album was released , titled Everything Is Alive , Everything Is Breathing , Nothing Is Dead , and Nothing Is Bleeding . The band toured constantly after that . The Chariot released the Unsung EP in 2005 , which was then followed by three successful studio albums : The Fiancée in 2007 , Wars and Rumors of Wars in 2009 , and Long Live in 2010 . The band entered the studio in May 2012 to record their fifth full @-@ length album titled One Wing which was released August 28 , 2012 . The Chariot disbanded following a farewell tour in late 2013 . 
 
 = = Biography = = 
 
 
 = = = 2003 – 2004 : Formation and debut album = = = 
 
 The Chariot was formed by Josh Scogin almost immediately after leaving his previous band Norma Jean , a metalcore group based in Douglasville , Georgia . He recorded one album with them titled Bless the Martyr and Kiss the Child in 2002 . Later that year , following Norma Jean 's set at Furnace Fest , Scogin shocked the audience and his unaware bandmates by announcing his departure . Scogin stated that his departure was not the result of internal conflict , but a personal choice . The event generated a public outcry from fans in hardcore circles . Scogin returned to Douglasville in 2003 and started the Chariot with other musicians in the area ; the first lineup included guitarists Keller Harbin and Tony " Taco " Medina , bassist Joshua Beiser , and drummer Jeff Carter . The band 's name was inspired by the Biblical story of Elijah and the chariot of fire . 
 In 2004 , a record contract was signed with Solid State Records , a metal subdivision of Tooth & Nail Records and their first recorded song titled " It Is Usually the Boys Who Cry Wolf That Grow up to Be the Men Who Cry Sanctuary " was released on the compilation " This Is Solid State , Volume 5 " . This song was later re @-@ recorded as " Yellow Dress , Locked Knees " on their debut . The band traveled to Atlanta , Georgia and worked on their debut album with Matt Goldman . The entire album was recorded live . The album was released in November and titled Everything Is Alive , Everything Is Breathing , Nothing Is Dead , and Nothing Is Bleeding , a parody of albums that featured morbid names . The album debuted at No. 23 on Top Heatseekers , and received favorable reviews from critics . Touring followed with As Cities Burn , He Is Legend , Far @-@ less and Showbread on the Young Bloods Tour in Winter . 
 
 = = = 2005 – 2008 : The Fiancée = = = 
 
 Medina and Carter left the band soon after ; they were replaced by Brian Khounvichit and Mark Nicks respectively . Carter went on to form the progressive death metal band , Deus Invictus . Nicks was later replaced by drummer Jake Ryan . In September 2005 , The Chariot began a 27 @-@ city tour at Poughkeepsie , New York with High on Fire , Every Time I Die , and The Red Chord . An EP , titled Unsung , was released at the beginning of December . It featured two new tracks and four re @-@ recordings from their debut and was well received among critics . The band played shows with labelmates As Cities Burn , mewithoutYou , and Underoath later that month . Touring continued through 2006 as the band shared a national tour with P.O.D. in spring and garnered a spot in the Sounds of the Underground Tour with As I Lay Dying that summer . In June 2006 , Beiser and Harbin stepped down and were replaced by bassist Dan Eaton and guitarist Jon Terry respectively . The two men had been longtime friends of the band . 
 The Chariot embarked on the Youngbloods II Tour in fall with Solid State labelmates August Burns Red , Destroy The Runner , and Inhale Exhale . In January 2007 , the band toured through Europe with Becoming the Archetype , and Shaped by Fate . By this time , yet another bass player had been recruited — Jon " KC Wolf " Kindler . In April of the same year , after delays relating to lineup changes , their second album , The Fiancée , was released . The record was produced by Matt Goldman . The writing and recording process had been driven by time constraints . " It was actually a very easy record to write , " said Scogin , " It came more naturally to us . " However , Scogin waited until the music was written before writing lyrics , an exercise he vowed never to attempt again . Hayley Williams of Paramore made a guest performance on the track " Then Came To Kill " as did Aaron Weiss of mewithoutYou when he played the harmonica on " Forgive Me Nashville " ; Scogin had been friends with both artists for many years . The Fiancée broke the Billboard 200 — it debuted at No. 169 , selling 6 @,@ 800 copies — and was well received in the Christian and secular markets . The group played a release tour with Misery Signals , I Am Ghost , and I Hate Sally , and then made a short run on the Warped Tour in summer . Another leg of The Fiancée Tour extended into spring 2008 with LoveHateHero , Alesana , Our Last Night , and Sky Eats Airplane . The lineup underwent another drastic change in mid @-@ 2008 , as Jake Ryan , Dan Eaton and Jon Terry all decided to step down . Ryan and Eaton went on to form the indie pop band Queens Club and were signed to Tooth & Nail Records . 
 
 = = = 2009 – 2010 : Wars and Rumors of Wars = = = 
 
 The group 's third album , titled Wars and Rumors of Wars , was released in May 2009 . The lineup changed once again , leaving Scogin as the only member to appear on their first two releases . The album title was inspired by Matthew 24 : 6 , which contains the passage " You will be hearing of wars and rumors of wars ... " Scogin explained that the album title referred to internal conflict that people experience , not literal war . The band hand @-@ made the artwork and liner notes for the first 25 @,@ 000 copies of the album . Wars and Rumors of War debuted at No. 112 on the Billboard 200 , their highest to date . Critical reception was very positive about the release . The Chariot performed on the Scream the Prayer Tour with Haste the Day , Sleeping Giant , Oh , Sleeper , and Project 86 that summer . Beginning late November , The Chariot and a group of hand picked artists , including Horse the Band supported Norma Jean who headlined the nationwide Explosions 2009 Tour . 
 
 = = = 2010 : Long Live = = = 
 
 The Chariot released their fourth studio album Long Live through Good Fight on November 22 , 2010 . The album was produced with Matt Goldman . They began touring with Haste the Day in February 2011 for Haste the Day 's Farewell Tour , along with A Plea for Purging and MyChildren MyBride . 
 
 = = = 2012 – 2013 : One Wing and final tour = = = 
 
 The band announced via Twitter that they were entering the studio in May to record their next album . The album is called One Wing , and was released August 28 , 2012 . In June 2012 , longtime bassist Jon ( KC Wolf ) Kindler left the band to return to college . The band opted not to replace Kindler , continuing as a four @-@ piece . The bass on One Wing has been recorded by both Henderson and Harrison . A track from the album , " In , " premiered on Alternative Press on August 16 . 
 The Chariot had their final tour in October / November 2013 with Glass Cloud , Rebuker , Birds in Row and To the Wind . 
 Josh moved on to form the band ' 68 . 
 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 
 The band 's music is characterized by a metal sound , and the screamed vocals of frontman Josh Scogin . Journalists have frequently referred to the music as " chaotic " ; Allmusic writer Alex Henderson described it as a " dense , clobbering sledgehammer " , while Brian Shultz of Alternative Press called it " manically pounding , distortion @-@ soaked exercises of catharsis " . The Chariot has often been labeled a metalcore band . However , the music generally defies genre standards like melodic / abrasive dynamics and harmonizing vocals ; it wouldn 't leave room for the " nonstop firestorm of exploding drums , heaving guitars , and visceral shrieking , " as Allmusic writer Corey Apar put it . The band utilizes time changes and start @-@ stop shifts , and typically write very short songs . Some journalists believe the music is challenging and an acquired taste . In interviews , Josh Scogin has described the band as “ heavy punk rock ” , doing away with genres and subgenres , and has also debunked many of these labels . “ Sometimes people refer to us as mathcore , which I think is a very incorrect statement , because I feel like that ’ s a very pre @-@ calculated , ‘ this is weird because this time signature doesn ’ t go with this time … ’ . It ’ s very planned out . We ’ re not that smart . ” 
 Live performances are very important to the band . " We love playing live , " said Scogin , " That 's what this band are all about : playing live shows . " This mentality leaked into their recording process : the band 's first album was recorded entirely live in one take . Their next two efforts followed more traditional recording sensibilities : " We may go in and [ fix ] this one part , " explained Scogin , " but [ ... ] there 's lots of stuff we probably should have tightened up . [ Laughs . ] But that [ keeps ] it feeling like a real record . " Despite their attentiveness to the recording process , Scogin has maintained that their focal point is live performances , " ... recording records , that 's all circled around hopefully bringing more kids to the live show so we can perform for them . " The band 's shows have built up a reputation ; MTV called them " the thing of metalcore legend " . When tasked to describe their set on the Scream the Prayer Tour in HM Magazine , Corey Erb wrote : 
 Artists who possessed strong showmanship skills have largely influenced Scogin ; some of these artists include James Brown , Frank Sinatra , Jerry Lee Lewis , and Elvis Presley . He is also fond of Arcade Fire , The Beatles , Björk , Interpol , and The Killers . In an interview , Scogin expressed a desire to have seen At The Drive @-@ In and Nirvana before they disbanded . 
 Scogin 's introspective lyrics have covered topics like materialism , death , and the Nashville Christian music industry . The lyrics for Wars and Rumors of Wars were formed after a family loss : " ... only a year ago my father passed away . And I hate to say this , because it sounds like such a band @-@ dude thing to say , but the lyrics are a lot darker than any other record just because of how personal they are for me . " Scogin usually refers to his lyrics as poems and has maintained that " a song is never finished but abandoned . " " ... as an artist you can forever be changing a song or making a song ' better ' or whatever but the moment that you stop recording and send it off to be mastered you have not ' finished ' the song … you have only abandoned the song and that is how it will stay forever . " His lyrics sometimes espouse Christian themes and beliefs , albeit subtly . For example , the track " Yellow Dress : Locked Knees " from Everything ... contains the Spanish lyrics " Jesus , yo quiero que este mundo te conozca . " ; when translated , it says " Jesus , I want this world to know You . " The song " And Shot Each Other " from The Fiancée fades out into a Sacred Harp choir singing the song ' Child of Grace ' , which features the lyrics " How happy is a child of grace , who feels his sins forgiven / This world , he cries , is not my place / I seek a place in Heaven . " 
 The Chariot is frequently called a Christian band , which Scogin agreed with in a 2005 interview : " We are Christians in a band therefore we are a Christian band . We are not ashamed of our beliefs but we don ’ t force feed people what we believe either . " In 2006 , he reaffirmed his previous statements and further opined , " When I was growing up , if I liked [ a band ] , I listened to it — and I went to the shows . If I didn 't , I didn 't . It wasn 't like , ' Oh , they don 't believe the same thing I do , ' [ ... ] People care too much about the fashion of it all . To me , a band 's either good or they ain 't , and that 's the only thing that should matter . " 
 
 = = Members = = 
 
 Final Lineup 
 Past members 
 Timeline 
 
 = = Discography = = 
 
 Studio albums 
 2004 : Everything Is Alive , Everything Is Breathing , Nothing Is Dead , and Nothing Is Bleeding 
 2007 : The Fiancée 
 2009 : Wars and Rumors of Wars 
 2010 : Long Live 
 2012 : One Wing 
 EPs 
 2005 : Unsung EP 
 Compilations 
 2011 : Before There Was 
 Singles 
 2011 : " Music of a Grateful Heart " 
 Appearances 
 2007 : Forgive Me Nashville - This is Solid State Vol.6 
 2010 : The Fox and The Wolf - Bring Me The Horizon 
 
 = = Videography = = 
 
 This is the list of The Chariot music videos . Among them are official videoclips and live videos . 
 
 = = Filmography = = 
 
 2004 : Ladies and Gentlemen ... The Chariot 
 2007 : One More Song 
 2014 : Farewell Documentary
