= Jungle Strike = 
 
 Jungle Strike is a video game developed and published by Electronic Arts in 1993 for the Sega Mega Drive . The game was later released on several other consoles such as the Super Nintendo Entertainment System ( SNES ) , and an upgraded version was made for the Amiga . The Amiga and other home computer conversions were the responsibility of Ocean Software while the SNES version was that of Gremlin Interactive . It is the direct sequel to Desert Strike : Return to the Gulf ( a best @-@ seller released the previous year ) and is the second instalment in the Strike series . The game is a helicopter based shoot ' em up , mixing action and strategy . The plot concerns two villains intent on destroying Washington , D.C .. The player must use the helicopter and occasionally other vehicles to thwart their plans . 
 Its game engine was carried over from a failed attempt at a flight simulator and was inspired by Matchbox toys and Choplifter . Jungle Strike retained its predecessor 's core mechanics and expanded on the model with additional vehicles and settings . The game was well received by most critics upon release , with the Mega Drive release receiving critical acclaim from their respective reviewers . Publications praised its gameplay , strategy , design , controls and graphics , although there were some complaints regarding the interface , difficulty and perceived jingoistic politics . 
 
 = = Plot = = 
 
 Jungle Strike features two antagonists : Ibn Kilbaba , the son of Desert Strike 's antagonist , and Carlos Ortega , a notorious South American drug lord . The opening sequence depicts the two men observing a nuclear explosion on a deserted island , while discussing the delivery of " nuclear resources " and an attack on Washington D.C. ; Kilbaba seeks revenge for his father 's death at the hands of the US , while Ortega wishes to " teach the Yankees to stay out of my drug trade " . 
 The player takes control of a " lone special forces " pilot . The game 's first level depicts the protagonist repelling terrorist attacks on Washington , D.C. , including the President 's limousine . Subsequent levels depict counter @-@ attacks on the drug lord 's forces , progressing towards his " jungle fortress " . In the game 's penultimate level , the player pursues Kilbaba and Ortega to their respective hideouts before capturing them . 
 The final level takes place in Washington , D.C. again , where the two antagonists attempt to flee after escaping from prison . The player must destroy both Kilbaba and Ortega and stop four trucks carrying nuclear bombs from blowing up the White House . The PC version also extends the storyline with an extra level set in Alaska , in which the player must wipe out the remainder of Ortega 's forces under the command of a Russian defector named Ptofski , who has taken control of oil tankers and is threatening to destroy the ecosystem with crude oil if his demands are not met . Once all levels are complete , the ending sequence begins and depicts the protagonist and his co @-@ pilot in an open @-@ topped car in front of cheering crowds . 
 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 
 Jungle Strike is a helicopter @-@ based shoot ' em up , mixing action and strategy . The player 's main weapon is a Comanche attack helicopter . Additional vehicles can be commandeered : a motorbike , hovercraft and F @-@ 117 . The latter in particular features variable height and unlimited ammunition , but is more vulnerable to crashes . The game features an " overhead " perspective " with a slight 3D twist " . The graphics uses a 2.5D perspective which simulates the appearance of being 3D . 
 Levels consist of several missions , which are based around the destruction of enemy weapons and installations , as well as rescuing hostages or prisoners of war , or capturing enemy personnel . The helicopter is armed with machine guns , more powerful Hydra rockets and yet more deadly Hellfire missiles . The more powerful the weapon , the fewer can be carried : the player must choose an appropriate weapon for each situation . Enemy weapons range from armoured cars , to artillery and tanks . 
 The player 's craft has a limited amount of armour , which is depleted as the helicopter is hit by enemy fire . Should the armour reach zero , the craft will be destroyed , losing the player a life . The player must outmanoeuvre enemies to avoid damage , but can replenish armour by means of power @-@ ups or by airlifting rescued friendlies or captives to a landing zone . The helicopter has a finite amount of fuel which is steadily depleted as the level progresses . Should the fuel run out the Comanche will crash , again costing the player a life . The craft can refuel by collecting fuel barrels . The helicopter also carries limited ammunition , which must be replenished by means of ammo crates . 
 
 = = Development and release = = 
 
 Jungle Strike is the sequel to Desert Strike : Return to the Gulf , a similar game which parodied the Gulf War and which was released in 1992 . Desert Strike arose from a failed attempt at a flight simulator and was inspired by Matchbox toys and Choplifter . Central to the game 's concept were nonlinear gameplay and the eschewing of power @-@ ups and bosses . With the success of the original title , producer Scott Berfield , game director John Manley and associate producer Tony Barnes were tasked with creating the sequel . Jungle Strike retained the core mechanics of its predecessor , with the addition of various vehicles and settings . Desert Strike was at the time Electronic Arts ' highest selling video game and maintained a high sales chart position as Jungle Strike was released in 1993 . 
 The Amiga conversion of Desert Strike featured upgraded graphics and sound over the Mega Drive original . With regards to the Jungle Strike Amiga conversion , senior programmer Stuart Johnson stated he " tried to keep this conversion a lot more faithful to the Mega Drive version than Desert Strike was " . He attempted to make the Amiga conversion run more smoothly than the Mega Drive original . Graphical improvements were attempted : these were less successful on the A500 than the A1200 because of technical restrictions . The developers also struggled with technical challenges because of differences in hardware between the Mega Drive and Amiga . Amendments were also made to the workings of in @-@ mission plot screens . The Amiga conversion was released as sequel Urban Strike was published for the Mega Drive in 1994 . 
 Jungle Strike was followed by three further sequels : Urban Strike , Soviet Strike , and Nuclear Strike . As the series moved to more advanced consoles , series creator Mike Posehn became less involved in the programming side of development . Urban Strike , released for the Mega Drive , featured new vehicles and locations , as well as on @-@ foot sections . Soviet Strike , released for Sony 's PlayStation and the Sega Saturn in 1996 , featured 3D graphics , as did Nuclear Strike , released on PC and PlayStation in 1997 and the Nintendo 64 in 1999 . Another sequel provisionally titled Future Strike was planned , but the game was eventually released as Future Cop : LAPD , a mech @-@ based shooter game . 
 
 = = Reception = = 
 
 The game was well received by critics upon release , with some reviews regarding it with critical acclaim . Adrian Pitt and Mat Yeo of Sega Force both reviewed the game . Adrian Pitt called the title a " strategy game " and commented it as the " greatest game in the genre " . Pritt said the controls were " without fault " and the graphics " superb " . The second reviewer , Mat Yeo , praised the " amazing playability and ' lastability ' " and said the game was " twice as good " as Desert Strike . Yeo called the graphics " brilliant " and said the game was " the best shoot ' em up I 've seen in a long time " . The Mega Drive version was a best @-@ seller for 3 months . MegaTech magazine said the game has " impressive graphics and tons of missions " . Mega placed the game at No. 13 in their Top Mega Drive Games of All Time . 
 Lim Choon Klet of New Straits Times praised the " simply wonderful " graphics but questioned whether the sound effects were enough to " create the environment of a full @-@ scale war " . Choon Klet pointed to a high initial difficulty but said : " Once the skills are acquired , be ready for many hours of enjoyment and sleepless nights . " Chip and Jonathan Carter of St. Petersburg Times deemed the game one of the best of the year and felt the SNES version " loses nothing in the translation " . The duo said the Game Boy and Game Gear versions were " less impressive " due to their technical restrictions but " about as good as you can get on the small screen " . " Sir Garnabus " of GamePro was impressed with the Game Boy version 's clear and detailed graphics , lack of slowdown , good controls , and faithfulness to the original version , but judged the Game Gear version to be " merely average " , saying issues such as poor collision detection hamper the game despite its outstanding graphics . Amiga CD32 Gamer called Jungle Strike " a 500lb gorilla among games " and praised its ease of control and " masses of gameplay and realistic detail " . 
 Amiga Computing said : " With its impressive graphics and superbly designed game system , it could well be the best chopper title yet " although the reviewer felt the difficulty curve was too steep . Amiga Format said of the game : " with a little more foresight and planning , it could have been a lot more fun " , as the reviewer was irritated by the fact that fuel , armour and ammunition levels were displayed on map screen . However the magazine also wrote : " The bottom line though , is that Jungle Strike is an incredibly good game " . Amiga Power called the game " an appreciable shoot ' em up " but said it was " clearly tailored for the shorter attention span " of a console gamer . CU Amiga Magazine wrote : " This blend of shooting and thinking action blends together seamlessly and in the process creates a classic blaster well worth a ride " . The One Amiga magazine wrote : " Jungle Strike 's a fine game , which will prove both a challenge for Desert Strike @-@ ophiles , and a good solid blast for first bloods " . ACAR observed the game 's " Good graphics , okay sound , smooth animation and tough game play . " Amiga Power complained that " Throughout the game you 're battered with uneasily right @-@ wing US politics " , while Amiga Format said " jingoism " was " rife " throughout the game . Amiga CD32 Gamer called the plot " typically ' ugly American ' idiocy " . 
 GamePro commented on the game 's skilful challenge and variety of locales , and particularly praised the Super NES version for retaining the same gameplay of the Genesis version while improving on the graphics and sound .
