= California spiny lobster = 
 
 The California spiny lobster ( Panulirus interruptus ) is a species of spiny lobster found in the eastern Pacific Ocean from Monterey Bay , California to the Gulf of Tehuantepec , Mexico . It typically grows to a length of 30 cm ( 12 in ) and is a reddish @-@ brown color with stripes along the legs , and has a pair of enlarged antennae but no claws . The interrupted grooves across the tail are characteristic for the species . 
 Females can carry up to 680 @,@ 000 eggs , which hatch after 10 weeks into flat phyllosoma larvae . These feed on plankton before the metamorphosis into the juvenile state . Adults are nocturnal and migratory , living among rocks at depths of up to 65 m ( 213 ft ) , and feeding on sea urchins , clams , mussels and worms . The spiny lobster is eaten by various fish , octopuses and sea otters , but can defend itself with a loud noise produced by its antennae . The California spiny lobster is the subject of both commercial and recreational fishery in both Mexico and the United States , with sport fishermen using hoop nets and commercial fishermen using lobster traps . 
 
 = = Description = = 
 
 In common with all spiny lobsters , the California spiny lobster has two large , spiny antennae , but no large claws on its legs . The California spiny lobster is one of the largest spiny lobster species , and grows up to 60 centimeters ( 24 in ) long , but does not usually exceed 30 cm ( 12 in ) . Males can weigh up to 7 @.@ 4 kilograms ( 16 lb ) . , with the record being a 16 lbs . , 1 oz. male caught off Catalina island in 1968 . The upper side of the animal is brownish red , without the paler bands or spots seen in some other spiny lobsters . The legs are a similar color , but with one or more lighter streaks running along their length . 
 Males and females of all ages can be distinguished by the position of the two round genital openings or gonopores . In females , they are at the bases of the third pair of pereiopods , while in males they are at the base of the fifth ( last ) pereiopods , furthest from the head and the closest to the abdomen . Mature females have a small claw on the fifth pereiopod , and enlarged pleopods . 
 
 = = Distribution = = 
 
 The California spiny lobster is found in parts of the Gulf of California , and along the Pacific coast of the length of the Baja California peninsula , extending as far north as San Luis Obispo Bay , California . There are occasional records from Monterey Bay , but the water there is too cold for the California spiny lobster to breed , and it is thought that any adult found in Central California arrived as a larva during El Niño years . 
 California spiny lobsters live on rocky substrates , at depths of up to 65 meters ( 213 ft ) . Although they can be found in shallow water , including tide pools , they are more frequent in deeper waters . Juveniles generally inhabit rocky habitats at a depth of 0 – 4 m ( 0 – 13 ft ) with dense plant cover , especially the surf grass Phyllospadix torreyi . 
 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 
 California spiny lobsters are nocturnal , hiding in crevices during the day , with only the tips of their long antennae showing , as a means of avoiding predators . Towards dawn , the spiny lobsters form aggregations , which they maintain until dusk . At night , they emerge and feed on sea urchins , clams , mussels and worms . This activity is important in limiting sea urchin populations , and so maintaining healthy seabed communities . 
 Natural predators of the California spiny lobster include bony fish such as the California sheepshead , giant sea bass and cabezone , sharks including the horn shark and leopard shark , octopuses and sea otters . In response to an approaching predator , spiny lobsters including the California spiny lobster can produce a loud noise using the stick @-@ slip phenomenon , akin to a bowed instrument . The bases of the antennae act as a plectrum , which is rubbed over a file on the edge of the antennular plate . If a predator is very close , spiny lobsters will flex their muscular tail in order to escape the predator , backwards . 
 There is an annual migration , in which spiny lobsters enter shallower water in spring and summer , and head out to deeper water in fall and winter , reaching depths as great as 240 ft ( 73 m ) , perhaps to avoid the effects of winter storms . 
 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 
 Female California spiny lobsters reach sexual maturity at a length of 65 – 69 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 7 in ) , which is typically at an age of 5 – 9 years ; males are sexually mature after 3 – 6 years . Because all the hard parts are lost at each molt , the life span of mature spiny lobsters is uncertain ; they are thought to live for 50 years or more . 
 Spiny lobsters do not have the gonopods ( first pleopods modified for reproduction ) that occur in clawed lobsters and crabs , and females do not have a deep pocket on the sternum in which to store sperm . Instead , a spermatophore is transferred directly from one of the male 's gonopores to the sternum of the female . The male gonopore is , however , adorned with a " penile process " , which is straight and serrated , with a small " hairbrush " . The sternum of mature females has three " windows " on the last three segments , which uniquely among Panulirus species , span both halves of the sternum . These windows are softer than the rest of the exoskeleton , and are thought to help the male locate the correct location to place the tar @-@ like spermatophore . 
 After mating , the fertilized eggs are carried on the female 's pleopods until they hatch , with between 120 @,@ 000 and 680 @,@ 000 carried by a single female . The eggs begin coral red , but darken as they develop to a deep maroon . When she is carrying the eggs , the female is said to be " berried " . The eggs are ready to hatch after 10 weeks , and spawning takes place from May to August , The larvae that hatch ( called phyllosoma larvae ) do not resemble the adults . Instead , they are flat , transparent animals around 14 mm ( 0 @.@ 55 in ) long , but as thin as a sheet of paper . The larvae feed on plankton , and grow through ten molts into ten further larval stages , the last of which is around 30 – 32 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 3 in ) long . The full series of larval molts takes around 7 months , and when the last stage molts , it metamorphoses into the puerulus state , which is a juvenile form of the adult , albeit still transparent . The puerulus larvae settle to the sea floor when the water is near its maximum temperature , which in Baja California is in the fall . 
 The diet of the juveniles is varied , but comprises mostly amphipods and isopods , together with coralline algae and the plant Phyllospadix . When available , the juveniles prefer to eat crabs . 
 
 = = Fishery = = 
 
 In his original description , John Witt Randall noted that the California spiny lobster is " used as food by the natives " of Upper California . The California spiny lobster is now the most economically important lobster on the American West Coast . Sport fishing may account for up to half the entire catch , while most of the commercial catch comes from lobster traps , with smaller amounts coming from the use of trammel nets or by trawling . The major fishing area is west of Baja California , and imports from Mexico to the United States are twice the amount produced in California . 
 
 = = = Sport fishing in California = = = 
 
 Recreational fishermen are allowed to catch lobsters with hoop nets or by SCUBA diving or free @-@ diving ; almost all come from California , with only small numbers from other U.S. states . The California Department of Fish and Game estimates that recreational fishers caught more than 200 @,@ 000 spiny lobsters in the first half of the 2008 / 2009 season , amounting to around 280 @,@ 000 pounds ( 130 @,@ 000 kg ) , compared to commercial fishermen , who caught a total of 580 @,@ 000 lb ( 260 @,@ 000 kg ) in the same time . 
 The California Department of Fish and Game sets and enforces a number of regulations pertaining to recreational fishing of spiny lobsters : 
 Open season for California spiny lobster runs from the Saturday before the first Wednesday in October until the first Wednesday after March 15 . 
 No implements other than hoop nets may be used ; no one person may have more than 5 nets and no vessel may use more than 10 hoop nets . When fishing from land , each fisherman is limited to two hoop nets . 
 Lobster fishers may not land more than seven California spiny lobsters on any given day , and may not have more than seven in their possession at any time . 
 Fishers must carry a lobster gauge , and any lobster smaller than the minimum landing size must be returned to the sea immediately . The minimum size is a carapace length of 3 1 ⁄ 4 inches ( 82 @.@ 6 mm ) , measured along the midline from the rear of the eye socket between the horns , to the end of the carapace . This is equivalent to a total body length of 20 centimeters or 7 @.@ 9 inches . 
 To fish for spiny lobster south of Point Arguello , a sport fishing license with ocean enhancement stamp must be displayed or kept nearby . 
 A report card for the season must be bought , filled in and returned before April 30 after the season ends . 
 Commercial and recreational traps must not be interfered with . 
 
 = = = Commercial fishing in California = = = 
 
 The open season for commercial fishing begins on the first Wednesday in October and runs until the first Wednesday after the 15th of March . Commercial fishermen may use individually buoyed traps , but may not dive for lobsters . 
 For those using lobster traps , the fishing effort is greatest at the beginning of the permitted season in California , and peters out towards the end of the season , 24 weeks later . Although the fishing effort becomes better concentrated on areas with more spiny lobsters during the season , the fishing efficiency ( catch per unit effort ) nonetheless decreases throughout the season . 
 
 = = = Fishing in Mexico = = = 
 
 In Mexico , spiny lobsters are an important commercial resource , representing the fifth most valuable fishery , worth US $ 18 million . Three species are exploited along the Pacific coast of the Baja California peninsula , but the catch of 744 t of the California spiny lobster makes up 95 % – 97 % of the total , with only small quantities of Panulirus inflatus and Panulirus gracilis . The fishing rights are held by 26 local co @-@ operatives . 
 The main legal restrictions on fishing for California spiny lobster in Mexico are a minimum landing size of 82 @.@ 5 mm ( 3 @.@ 25 in ) , the prohibition of catching berried females , and a closed season : from February 16 to November 15 , fishing for spiny lobsters is prohibited in a region which moves south along Mexico 's Pacific coast during the season . 
 The Mexican fishery for the California spiny lobster was the first Latin American fishery to be awarded the Marine Stewardship Council 's sustainable fishery ecolabel , and the species is classed as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List . 
 
 = = Names = = 
 
 Panulirus interruptus is called the California spiny lobster by the Food and Agriculture Organization , but a number of other local , vernacular names exist , including California lobster , California marine crayfish , and red lobster in the United States , and langosta colorada and langosta roja in Mexico . The preferred common name of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service is simply spiny lobster . 
 John Witt Randall described the species in the Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia in 1840 , based on material given to him by Thomas Nuttall . The exact locality is not known , being given only as " Upper California " , but the most likely sources are the places where Nuttall was most active , namely Santa Barbara and San Diego . The specific epithet interruptus refers to the grooves on the abdominal tergites , which are interrupted in this species . Although originally placed in the genus Palinurus , the California spiny lobster was later transferred to Adam White 's new genus Panulirus , together with other spiny lobsters that have long flagella on their first antennae . 
 
 = = Related species = = 
 
 The California spiny lobster is one of 19 species in the genus Panulirus , which is one of several genera of spiny lobsters whose names are anagrams of the original spiny lobster genus , Palinurus . Its closest relatives are not the other species that occur in the East Pacific , but rather Panulirus argus from the Caribbean Sea and West Pacific species such as Panulirus japonicus , Panulirus marginatus , Panulirus pascuensis , Panulirus cygnus and Panulirus longipes ; this relationship has been recovered from comparative studies of adult and larval morphology , as well as from molecular phylogenetics , using the sequences from cytochrome c oxidase and 16S ribosomal RNA genes . 
 The California spiny lobster can be differentiated from the other species in the genus by the interrupted grooves across the abdomen ; other species either lack grooves , or have grooves which span the entire body segment .
