= Music of Final Fantasy IV = 
 
 The music of the video game Final Fantasy IV was composed by regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu . The Final Fantasy IV Original Sound Version , a compilation of almost all of the music in the game , was released by Square Co . / NTT Publishing , and subsequently re @-@ released by NTT Publishing . It was released in North America by Tokyopop as Final Fantasy IV Official Soundtrack : Music from Final Fantasy Chronicles , with one additional track . It has since been re @-@ released multiple times with slight changes as part of the Final Fantasy Finest Box and as Final Fantasy IV DS OST . An arranged album entitled Final Fantasy IV Celtic Moon , containing a selection of musical tracks from the game performed in the style of Celtic music by Máire Breatnach , was released by Square and later re @-@ released by NTT Publishing . Additionally , a collection of piano arrangements composed by Nobuo Uematsu and played by Toshiyuki Mori titled Piano Collections Final Fantasy IV was released by NTT Publishing . 
 The music was overall well received ; reviewers have praised the quality of the original composition despite the limitations of the medium , and reacted favorably to the arranged soundtracks . Several tracks , especially " Theme of Love " , remain popular today , and have been performed numerous times in orchestral concert series , as well as been published in arranged and compilation albums by Square as well as outside groups . 
 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 
 Uematsu has noted that the process of composing was excruciating , involving trial and error and requiring the sound staff to spend several nights in sleeping bags at Square Co. headquarters . He blamed much of the problem on the fact that this was his first soundtrack to use the new Super Famicom hardware , as opposed to his previous soundtracks composed for the Famicom . The liner notes for the Final Fantasy IV OSV album were humorously signed as being written at 1 : 30 AM " in the office , naturally . " Uematsu has stated that , beginning with the soundtrack to Final Fantasy IV , he started to move away from the idea that the soundtrack had to be solely an orchestral score . In June 2007 , Square Enix held a casting for a vocalist to sing a version of Final Fantasy IV 's " Theme of Love " rearranged by Nobuo Uematsu . Megumi Ida was selected from approximately 800 applicants to perform the song , which was featured on the Japanese Nintendo DS remake of the game , as well as the accompanying soundtrack album . 
 
 = = Final Fantasy IV Original Sound Version = = 
 
 Final Fantasy IV Original Sound Version is a soundtrack album containing the musical tracks from the game , composed , arranged , produced and performed by Nobuo Uematsu . It spans 44 tracks and covers a duration of 58 : 25 . It was first released on June 14 , 1991 , by Square Co . / NTT Publishing , and subsequently re @-@ released on November 26 , 1994 , and October 1 , 2004 , by NTT Publishing . The original release bears the catalog number N23D @-@ 001 , and the re @-@ release bears the catalog number NTCP @-@ 5014 . After the release of Final Fantasy IV for the Sony PlayStation as part of Final Fantasy Chronicles , the album was released in North America by Tokyopop on August 21 , 2001 as Final Fantasy IV Official Soundtrack : Music from Final Fantasy Chronicles . This is nearly the same release as Final Fantasy IV : Original Sound Version , some track titles were slightly changed , and a 45th track was added , " Theme of Love ( Arranged ) " , which had previously only been released as a piano version on the second track of Piano Collections Final Fantasy IV . This release has the catalog numbers TPCD 0210 @-@ 2 . 
 The GBA version was again released as part of the Final Fantasy Finest Box by Square Enix on March 28 , 2007 under the catalog number FFFB @-@ 0001 along with the OSTs of Final Fantasy V and Final Fantasy VI after the game was ported to the Game Boy Advance . This version included several tracks which were not included in the original album , such as the " Chocobo Forest " theme , the music for the dancing girl , the short intro to " Cry in Sorrow / Sorrow and Loss " , and various fanfares . 
 After the release of Final Fantasy IV for the Nintendo DS , a new version of the Soundtrack arranged by Junya Nakano and Kenichiro Fukui , respectively , was released in Japan in January 2008 as Final Fantasy IV Original Soundtrack . Most of the pieces are the same as on the original album , although they were reproduced for the sound hardware of the DS , with new synthesizer effects . A new version of " Theme of Love " was included , with lyrics sung by Megumi Ida . It was released as a two @-@ disk set with a bonus DVD containing the full motion video included in the re @-@ releases of Final Fantasy IV , and has the catalog numbers SQEX @-@ 10105 @-@ 7 . This version of " Theme of Love " was also released as a single , entitled Moonlight -Final Fantasy IV Theme of Love- . The single also includes the DS version of the song , the original track , and a karaoke version of the Megumi Ida rendition . It was released along with a bonus DVD containing a music video for the song on December 5 , 2007 with the catalog numbers of BVCR @-@ 19727 @-@ 8 and a duration of 16 : 21 . 
 Final Fantasy IV OSV was well received ; reviewers have praised the quality of the composition despite the limited medium . Soundtrack Central compared it favorably with Uematsu 's later works , especially the soundtrack for Final Fantasy VI , and termed it a " great CD " . However , the length of several tracks as well as of the album as a whole was criticized , with reviewers finding it " too short " and disapproving of the early fade @-@ out of some tracks . Reviewers found the expanded and remastered version found in the Finest Box to be comparable to the quality of the original album , with some tracks improving in their remake , becoming " deeper " or " sharper " as was appropriate . 
 A new edition of the soundtrack , Final Fantasy IV Original Soundtrack Remaster Version , was released by Square Enix on July 3 , 2013 . This version is expanded to two discs , allowing the tracks to play through two loops rather than just one , as well as the addition of a few short pieces that were left off of the original recording . Despite the name , the album features the original Super NES version of the music , rather than a more modern synthesizer sound . The album has the catalog number SQEX @-@ 10373 ~ 4 , and its 57 tracks have a duration of 1 : 32 : 40 . Joshua Bateman of RPGFan stated that while the remaster edition wasn 't strictly necessary , given that Square Enix still sold the original version online , the new edition was still a superior version and an important step in preserving classic video game music . 
 
 = = Final Fantasy IV Celtic Moon = = 
 
 Final Fantasy IV Celtic Moon is a selection of musical tracks from the game , arranged and performed in the style of Celtic music by Máire Breatnach . It spans 15 tracks and covers a duration of 52 : 36 . It was first released on October 28 , 1991 , in Japan , and subsequently re @-@ released on November 26 , 1994 , and on October 1 , 2004 , by NTT Publishing . The original release bears the catalog number N30D @-@ 006 , the first re @-@ release bears the catalog number PSCN @-@ 5017 , and the most recent re @-@ release has the catalog number NTCP @-@ 5017 . 
 Overall reception of Final Fantasy IV Celtic Moon was also positive , though some reviewers felt that several of the tracks were of lesser quality than the rest of the album . Patrick Gann of RPGFan described it as " Awesome . Purely spectacular . " and Matt Brady of Final Fantasy Symphony concurred , saying that the " music quality for this soundtrack was spectacular . " Daniel Space of RPGFan , however , found the quality mixed , and said that " some of the pieces do not live up to the new orchestration , " although others " were a delight to hear . " He also found some of the instruments to be slightly out of tune , which he disliked , though Matt Brady felt it gave the pieces an " ethnic feel " . 
 
 = = Piano Collections Final Fantasy IV = = 
 
 Piano Collections Final Fantasy IV is a collection of Final Fantasy IV music composed by Nobuo Uematsu , arranged by Shiro Satou and played on piano by Toshiyuki Mori . It spans 14 tracks and covers a duration of 57 : 24 . It was first published by NTT Publishing on April 21 , 1992 , and subsequently re @-@ published on May 23 , 2001 . The original release bears the catalog number N38D @-@ 010 , and the reprint bears the catalog number NTCP @-@ 1001 . 
 Critical reception for Piano Collections Final Fantasy IV was positive , with reviewers terming the album " fantastic " . Damian Thomas of RPGFan said that the album was " a true gem " and said that despite his dislike of piano arrangements , he " truly appreciated " the album . Some reviewers felt that the pieces in the album were " simplistic " , especially in comparison to the piano collections for Final Fantasy V and Final Fantasy VI , but said that " its simplicity calls for a different feeling , and it is still great , " and that despite the lack of complexity , " all of the songs ... are extremely nicely done . " 
 
 = = Final Fantasy IV Minimum Album = = 
 
 Final Fantasy IV Minimum Album is a 6 track Mini CD EP released on September 5 , 1991 by NTT Publishing Co . It contains unreleased and arranged tracks from the original soundtrack . The catalog number is N09D @-@ 004 and it has a total playing time of 20 : 25 . 
 
 = = Legacy = = 
 
 The music of Final Fantasy IV has remained popular since its release , especially in Japan . The track " Theme of Love " has even been taught to Japanese school children as part of the music curriculum . Additionally , The Black Mages have arranged two pieces from Final Fantasy IV . These are " Battle with the Four Fiends " , an arrangement of " The Dreadful Fight " , and " Zeromus " , an arrangement of " The Final Battle " , both of which can be found on the album The Skies Above , published in 2004 . A lyrical version of " Theme of Love " , sung by Risa Ohki , appeared on Final Fantasy : Pray , a compilation album produced by Square . Additionally , lyrical versions of " Main Theme of FINAL FANTASY IV " and " Edward 's Harp " , sung by Risa Ohki and Ikuko Noguchi , appeared on Final Fantasy : Love Will Grow . 
 Uematsu continues to perform certain pieces in his Dear Friends : Music from Final Fantasy concert series . The music of Final Fantasy IV has also appeared in various official concerts and live albums , such as 20020220 music from FINAL FANTASY , a live recording of an orchestra performing music from the series including several pieces from the game . " Red Wings " , " Theme of Love " , and " Ending Theme " , were played by the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra in their first Orchestral Game Concert in 1991 as part of a five concert tour , which was later released as a series of albums . Additionally , " Theme of Love " was performed by the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra for the Distant Worlds - Music from Final Fantasy concert tour , as well as by the New Japan Philharmonic Orchestra in the Tour de Japon : Music from Final Fantasy concert series . Independent but officially licensed releases of Final Fantasy IV music have been composed by such groups as Project Majestic Mix , which focuses on arranging video game music . Another popular album release was Echoes of Betrayal , Light of Redemption , an unofficial download @-@ only album release by the remix website OverClocked ReMix on July 19 , 2009 containing 54 remixes over 4 " discs " . Selections also appear on Japanese remix albums , called dojin music , and on English remixing websites .
