= Sandsfoot Castle = 
 
 Sandsfoot Castle , also known historically as Weymouth Castle , is an artillery fort constructed by Henry VIII near Weymouth , Dorset . It formed part of the King 's Device programme to protect against invasion from France and the Holy Roman Empire , and defended the Weymouth Bay anchorage . The stone castle had an octagonal gun platform , linked to a residential blockhouse , and was completed by 1542 at a cost of £ 3 @,@ 887 . Earthwork defences were built around the landward side of the castle , probably in 1623 . Sandsfoot saw service during the English Civil War , when it was held by Parliament and Royalists in turn during the conflict . It survived the interregnum but , following Charles II 's restoration to the throne , the fortress was withdrawn from military use in 1665 . 
 By the early 18th century , Sandsfoot was in ruins , its stonework taken for use in local building projects . The clay cliffs on which the castle had been built had always been unstable and subject to erosion . The castle 's gun platform began to collapse into the sea and , by the 1950s , had been entirely destroyed . The ruins were closed to visitors on safety grounds , although civic gardens were planted alongside it in 1951 . Repairs were undertaken between 2009 and 2012 at a total cost of £ 217 @,@ 800 , enabling the site to be reopened to the public . Historic England considers Sandsfoot to be " one of the most substantial examples " of the 16th @-@ century blockhouses to survive in England . 
 
 = = History = = 
 
 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 
 Sandsfoot Castle was built as a consequence of international tensions between England , France and the Holy Roman Empire in the final years of the reign of King Henry VIII . Traditionally the Crown had left coastal defences to the local lords and communities , only taking a modest role in building and maintaining fortifications , and while France and the Empire remained in conflict with one another , maritime raids were common but an actual invasion of England seemed unlikely . Modest defences , based around simple blockhouses and towers , existed in the south @-@ west and along the Sussex coast , with a few more impressive works in the north of England , but in general the fortifications were very limited in scale . 
 After 1533 , Henry broke with popes Pope Clement VII and Paul III in order to annul the long @-@ standing marriage to his wife , Catherine of Aragon , and remarry . Catherine was the aunt of Charles V , the Holy Roman Emperor , and Charles took the annulment as a personal insult . This resulted in France and the Empire declaring an alliance against Henry in 1538 , and the Pope encouraging the two countries to attack England . An invasion of England appeared certain . In response , Henry issued an order , called a " device " , in 1539 , giving instructions for the " defence of the realm in time of invasion " and the construction of forts along the English coastline . 
 Sandsfoot Castle was built to protect the Weymouth Bay anchorage , being placed on cliffs overlooking the waterway , opposite Portland Castle on the other side . Sandsfoot was a blockhouse , intended to defeat enemy ships using a battery of heavy artillery , and had minimal protection against an attack from the land . It was completed by 1541 , run by a captain appointed by the Crown , and cost £ 3 @,@ 887 to build . There was probably an early agreement that the nearby village of Wyke Regis had a responsibility to support the castle , and in exchange they came to traditionally enjoy an exemption from taxes and militia duties . The antiquarian John Leland visited the castle soon after its construction , describing it as " a right goodlie and warlyke castle " with " one open barbican " , probably referring to the castle 's gun platform . 
 Coastal erosion quickly began to threaten the castle , causing what was reported as a " great gulf " on its seaward side , and repairs costing £ 383 were necessary by 1583 . During the invasion scare that accompanied the Spanish Armada of 1588 , the normal garrison of Sandsfoot was supplemented by another 50 men . 
 
 = = = 17th – 19th centuries = = = 
 
 Repairs were made to the castle between 1610 and 1611 by the captain , Sir George Bampfield , at a cost of £ 211 . A survey in 1623 carried out by Sir Richard Morryson showed the castle to be equipped with ten iron guns – one culverin , five demi @-@ culverins , two sakers , a minion and a falcon – and garrisoned by its captain , five gunners and three soldiers . It was in a poor condition , and one corner of the gun platform had been undermined by the sea ; Morryson 's team estimated the likely costs of repairs to amount to £ 459 . 
 During the English Civil War between the supporters of Charles I and Parliament , Weymouth was predominantly Parliamentarian in loyalty and the surrounding forts were held by their garrisons . Robert Dormer , the Earl of Carnarvon , entered Dorset with an army in 1643 and Weymouth surrendered , resulting in Sandsfoot Castle being controlled by the Royalists between August 1643 and June 1644 . During this period the castle may have been used as a Royalist mint . Robert Devereux , the Earl of Essex , then retook the county for Parliament ; Colonel William Ashburnham , the Royalist governor of Weymouth , retreated to Portland Castle without a fight . Devereux approached Sandsfoot and , after three hours of negotiations , the fort surrendered to him . In 1647 , Parliament ordered the garrison at the castle to be demobilised but this did not occur , and John Hayne was appointed as its new captain . 
 Charles II was restored to the throne in 1660 and the next year a fresh order was given to demobilise the garrison at Sandsfoot . An argument then broke out between Humphrey Weld , the lieutenant @-@ governor of Portland and captain of Sandsfoot Castle , and Charles Stewart , the Duke of Richmond , over the control of the local defences . The village of Wyke Regis petitioned Weld in a bid to prevent the demobilisation , concerned that their traditional exemptions from militia service would be revoked by the Duke . Weld championed their case but was dismissed from his post as lieutenant @-@ governor , and the Duke occupied Sandsfoot with his militia . Weld appealed to the government and in 1665 a compromise was announced in which Weld would be reappointed to his role as lieutenant @-@ governor , while Sandsfoot would be declared redundant and be demolished . The order for its destruction was never carried out , and the castle was used as a storehouse until at least 1691 . 
 By 1725 , the castle had become ruinous . Early in the century , the remains of the castle was sold to the town of Weymouth , whose people reused some of the stone to construct their new town bridge . Local tradition in the 19th century maintained that several houses in Weymouth were also constructed using stone taken from the castle . In 1825 , the carved stone Elizabethan arms of the castle were moved to All Saints Church in Wyke Regis . Captains continued to be formally appointed , however , and Gabriel Stewart held the post as late as 1795 . 
 The majority of the gun platform collapsed into the sea as the cliffs eroded . It is uncertain precisely when this occurred ; in a prolonged historical debate over this during the late 19th and early 20th centuries , the historian Henry Symonds argued that the first falls occurred during the 18th century , W. Norman placed the main fall in 1835 , and T. Groves argued in favour of a more recent collapse in the second half of the 19th century . The ruined castle was drawn and painted by various artists in the 18th and 19th centuries , including Samuel Buck , J. H. Grimm , C. Sawyer and Edward Pritchard . The castle featured in Joseph Drew 's short novel " the Poisoned Cup " in 1876 . 
 
 = = = 20th – 21st centuries = = = 
 
 In 1902 , the Weymouth Corporation purchased the castle for the town from the Department of Woods and Forests for a total of £ 150 . During the Second World War the castle probably housed an anti @-@ aircraft battery as part of the defences created around Portland Harbour . Despite the construction of the Portland breakwaters nearby , the unstable clay cliffs remained vulnerable to erosion ; in 1930 the ruins were closed to the public due to safety concerns and the remaining embrasure of the gun platform collapsed during in the 1950s . 
 In 2009 , £ 23 @,@ 100 was awarded by the Heritage Lottery Fund for an initial survey of the site , which by now had been placed on English Heritage 's register of listed buildings at risk of decline , followed by a further £ 194 @,@ 700 in 2011 for substantial repair work . As part of the work , a three @-@ dimensional laser scan of the stonework was undertaken , and a steel and oak walkway was installed around the interior of the castle . The castle reopened to the public in 2012 , and the following year it was removed from English Heritage 's at risk register . The castle is protected under UK law as a grade II * listed building and as a scheduled ancient monument . 
 
 = = Architecture = = 
 
 Sandsfoot Castle was built from Portland stone with ashlar facings and a rubble core . It comprised a main blockhouse attached to an octagonal gun room , overlooking the sea . The two @-@ storey blockhouse is 42 by 32 feet ( 12 @.@ 8 by 9 @.@ 8 m ) across , with a gate @-@ tower on its landward side . It probably originally had four rooms for the accommodation and cooking facilities for the garrison , with staircases leading up to the first floor and down into its basement . The gate @-@ tower held a small room on the first floor and was designed to hold a portcullis . The one @-@ storey gun room was approximately 36 by 28 feet ( 11 @.@ 0 by 8 @.@ 5 m ) across with five embrasures for guns and a flat roof that also probably supported artillery . Both the gun room and the main block were probably protected by parapets . 
 The gun room has been lost to erosion , although the south @-@ western embrasure is still visible where it fell onto the beach below . The ashlar facings of the blockhouse have been largely robbed , although some elements remain , and the roof and floors have been lost . Historic England considers that the castle " represents one of the most substantial examples " of an unaltered 16th @-@ century blockhouse in England . 
 The castle originally had an outer ward , reached over a bridge , and stables , although these have been both been lost . Protective rectangular earthworks were constructed to protect the castle on the landward side , probably in 1623 , with two bastions in the north and west corners , and some form of stone structure along the earthworks . In the 18th century these earthworks were described as forming a " deep trench " and mid @-@ 19th century accounts suggested that they were around 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) deep . Now only 100 feet ( 30 m ) of the bank and ditch survives , with the earthworks approximately 10 metres ( 33 ft ) wide overall and 2 @.@ 2 metres ( 7 ft 3 in ) deep between the top of the bank and the base of the ditch . The north bastion still survives largely intact , although the west has been mostly destroyed . Outside the entrance to the earthworks are the Sandsfoot Gardens , civic gardens dating from 1951 , designed in a Tudor style with an ornamental pond .
