= Evan Rachel Wood = 
 
 Evan Rachel Wood ( born September 7 , 1987 ) is an American actress . She began acting in the 1990s , appearing in several television series , including American Gothic ( 1995 – 1996 ) and Once and Again ( 1999 – 2002 ) . Wood made her début as a leading film actress at the age of nine in Digging to China ( 1998 ) and became well known after her transition to a more adult @-@ oriented Golden Globe @-@ nominated role in the teen drama film Thirteen ( 2003 ) . 
 Wood continued acting mostly in independent films , including Pretty Persuasion ( 2005 ) , Down in the Valley ( 2006 ) , Running with Scissors ( 2006 ) , and in the big studio production Across the Universe ( 2007 ) . Since 2008 , Wood has appeared in more mainstream films , including The Wrestler ( 2008 ) , Whatever Works ( 2009 ) and The Ides of March ( 2011 ) . She has also returned to television , playing the supporting role of Queen Sophie @-@ Anne on True Blood from 2009 to 2011 and playing Kate Winslet 's character 's daughter in the HBO miniseries Mildred Pierce ( 2011 ) , a role for which she was nominated for the Golden Globe and Emmy Award for Best Supporting Actress . 
 Her personal life , particularly her relationship with Marilyn Manson , to whom she was previously engaged , has attracted press attention . In 2012 , she married English actor Jamie Bell , with whom she has one son . They separated in 2014 after two years of marriage . 
 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 
 Wood was born in Raleigh , North Carolina . Her father , Ira David Wood III , is a locally prominent actor , singer , theater director , and playwright ; he is the Executive Director of a local regional theatre company called Theatre in the Park . Her mother , Sara Lynn Moore ( b . March 6 , 1958 ) , is an actress , director , and acting coach . Wood 's brother , Ira David Wood IV , is also an actor ; she has two other brothers , Dana and Thomas , and a sister named Aden . Her paternal aunt , Carol Winstead Wood , was a Hollywood production designer . 
 Wood and her brothers were actively involved in Theatre in the Park while growing up , including an appearance by her in the 1987 production of her father 's musical comedy adaptation of A Christmas Carol when she was just a few months old . Subsequently , she played the Ghost of Christmas Past in several productions at the theater , and she later starred as Helen Keller alongside her mother ( who played Anne Sullivan ) in a production of The Miracle Worker , under her father 's direction . Wood briefly attended Cary Elementary , a public school in Cary , North Carolina . She was subsequently home @-@ schooled and received her high school diploma at age 15 . 
 
 = = Career = = 
 
 
 = = = Early works : 1994 – 2000 = = = 
 
 Wood began her career appearing in several made @-@ for @-@ television films from 1994 onward , also playing an occasional role in the television series American Gothic . In 1996 , Wood 's parents separated and later divorced , and Wood moved with her mother to her mother 's native Los Angeles County , California . After a one @-@ season role on the television drama Profiler , Wood was cast in the supporting role of Jessie Sammler on the television show Once and Again . 
 Wood 's first major screen role was in the low @-@ budget 1998 film Digging to China , which also starred Kevin Bacon and Mary Stuart Masterson . The film won the Children 's Jury Award at the Chicago International Children 's Film Festival . Wood remembers the role as initially being hard , but notes that it " eventually led to her decision that acting is something she might never want to stop doing . " She also had a role in Practical Magic , a fantasy film directed by Griffin Dunne , starring Sandra Bullock and Nicole Kidman , that same year . 
 
 = = = 2001 – 2005 = = = 
 
 Wood made her teenage debut as a leading film actress in 2002 's Little Secrets , directed by Blair Treu , where she played aspiring 14 @-@ year @-@ old concert violinist Emily Lindstrom . For that role , she was nominated for Best Leading Young Actress at the Young Artist Awards . That same year , Wood played a supporting role in the Andrew Niccol @-@ directed science fiction satirical drama film , S1m0ne , which starred Al Pacino . Wood 's breakthrough movie role followed with the 2003 film Thirteen . She played the role of Tracy Louise Freeland , one of two young teens who sink into a downward spiral of hard drugs , sex , and petty crime . Her performance was nominated for a Golden Globe Award as Best Actress - Drama and for a Screen Actors Guild ( SAG ) Award for Best Actress . During the time of Thirteen 's release , Vanity Fair named Wood as one of the It Girls of Hollywood , and she appeared , along with the other actresses , on the magazine 's July 2003 cover . A supporting role opposite Cate Blanchett and Tommy Lee Jones in Ron Howard 's The Missing , in which she played the kidnapped daughter , Lilly Gilkeson , followed the same year , as well as a role in the CSI : Crime Scene Investigation episode " Got Murder ? " . 
 In 2005 , Wood appeared in the Mike Binder @-@ directed The Upside of Anger , opposite Kevin Costner and Joan Allen , a well @-@ reviewed film in which Wood played Lavender " Popeye " Wolfmeyer , one of four sisters dealing with their father 's absence . Her character also narrated the film . Wood 's next two starring roles were in dark independent films . In the 2005 Grand Jury Prize Sundance Film Festival nominee Pretty Persuasion , a black comedy / satirical focusing on themes of sexual harassment and discrimination in schools and attitudes about females in media and society , Wood played Kimberly Joyce , a manipulative , sexually active high @-@ schooler . One critic commented , " Wood does flip cynicism with such precise , easy rhythms and with such obvious pleasure in naughtiness that she 's impossible to hate . " 
 In Down in the Valley , which was directed by David Jacobson , Wood 's character , Tobe , falls in love with an older man , a cowboy who is at odds with modern society ( Edward Norton ) . Of her performance , it was written that " Wood conveys every bit of the adamant certainty and aching vulnerability inherent in late adolescence . " Wood has commented on her choice of sexually themed roles , saying that she is not aiming for the " shock factor " in her film choices . 
 In 2005 , Wood starred in the music videos for Bright Eyes ' " At the Bottom of Everything " and Green Day 's " Wake Me Up When September Ends " . 
 
 = = = 2006 – present = = = 
 
 In September 2006 , Wood received Premiere magazine 's " Spotlight Award for Emerging Talent . " Also in 2006 , she was described by The Guardian as being " wise beyond her years " and as " one of the best actresses of her generation . " Later in 2006 , Wood appeared with an all @-@ star ensemble cast as Natalie Finch in the Golden Globe @-@ nominated 2006 comedy @-@ drama film Running with Scissors . Directed by Ryan Murphy and starring Annette Bening , the film was based on the memoir by Augusten Burroughs , which is a semi @-@ autobiographical account of Burroughs ' childhood in a dysfunctional family . Wood was awarded the 2007 Cannes Film Festival Chopard Trophy for Female Revelation for her performance . 
 Wood had roles in two films released in September 2007 . King of California , which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival , a story of a bipolar jazz musician ( Michael Douglas ) and his long @-@ suffering teenage daughter , Miranda ( Wood ) , who are reunited after his two @-@ year stay in a mental institution and who embark on a quixotic search for Spanish treasure . One review praised Wood 's performance as " excellent " . 
 Across the Universe , a Julie Taymor @-@ directed musical that was nominated for a Golden Globe and an Academy Award and was set in Liverpool , New York City , and Vietnam , focused on the tribulations of several characters during the counter @-@ cultural revolution of the 1960s . It was set to the songs of The Beatles . Wood , who has described the music of The Beatles as a major part of her life , played Lucy , who develops a relationship with Jude ( Jim Sturgess ) . The film featured her singing musical numbers and she describes the role as her favorite , calling director Julie Taymor " one of the most amazing directors out there . " One critic wrote that " Wood brings much @-@ needed emotional depth . " Wood provided the voice of an alien named Mala , a mechanically inclined free @-@ thinker , in Battle for Terra , a 2008 computer @-@ animated science fiction film about a peaceful alien planet that faces destruction from colonization by the displaced remainder of the human race . The film won the 2008 Grand Prize at the Ottawa International Animation Festival . The film showed at the San Francisco International Film Festival , where she received an award at the Midnight Awards along with Elijah Wood . 
 Wood starred in 2008 's Vadim Perelman @-@ directed The Life Before Her Eyes , based on the Laura Kasischke novel of the same name , about the friendship of two teens of opposite character who are involved in a Columbine @-@ like shooting incident at their school and are forced to make an impossible choice . Wood played the younger version of Uma Thurman 's character , Diana . One critic cited her performance as " hands @-@ down extraordinary " . Wood stated that she intended the film to be the last one in which she played a teenager . 
 In the same year , she also co @-@ starred in director Darren Aronofsky 's The Wrestler , winner of the Golden Lion Award for Best Film at the Venice Film Festival , about Randy " Ram " Robinson ( Mickey Rourke ) , a professional wrestler from the 1980s who is forced to retire after a heart attack threatens to kill him the next time he wrestles . Wood played Stephanie , Randy " Ram " Robinson 's estranged daughter . Of her performance , one critic wrote , " Once her character stops stonewalling her father and hears him out , Wood provides a fine foil for Rourke in their turbulent scenes together . " 
 Wood co @-@ starred in Woody Allen 's Whatever Works , which premiered at the 2009 Tribeca Film Festival , playing the young wife of Larry David 's character . In May 2009 , she played Juliet in six fundraising performances of William Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet at the Theater In The Park . The production was directed by her brother , who also starred . Wood had a recurring role in the second and third seasons of the HBO supernatural drama series , True Blood , from 2009 to 2011 as Sophie @-@ Anne Leclerq . She appeared at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards on September 12 , 2010 . Wood had a role in the film The Conspirator , which premiered at Ford 's Theatre in Washington D. C. in April , 2011 , directed by Robert Redford ( about the conspiracy surrounding the assassination of Abraham Lincoln ) . She also had a role in The Ides of March . She portrayed the title character 's daughter in the 2011 HBO miniseries Mildred Pierce , for which she was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie . 
 Wood played Gabi in the 2013 psychological romantic thriller film Charlie Countryman with Shia LaBeouf and Rupert Grint . 
 She is featured with Chris Evans in a 2016 ad for Gucci Guilty Eau fragrances . " 
 In June 2016 , the Human Rights Campaign released a video in tribute to the victims of the 2016 Orlando gay nightclub shooting ; in the video , Wood and others told the stories of the people killed there . 
 
 = = Personal life = = 
 
 Wood began dating British actor Jamie Bell in 2005 after they co @-@ starred in the music video for Green Day 's song " Wake Me Up When September Ends . " They got matching tattoos of each other 's initials ; in Wood 's case , a " J " on her left ankle . After a year together , the relationship ended in 2006 . Wood later commented that , " We had matching tattoos because we knew our love would last forever . Trouble is , it didn 't , things happened , we split . But I don 't regret the tattoo . It reminds me of a great , great period in my life . " 
 In January 2007 , Wood 's relationship with Marilyn Manson became public . The two met at a party at the Chateau Marmont Hotel ; Wood has stated that she was attracted to Manson 's frequent use of black eye liner and once described their relationship as " healthy and loving " . Two portraits of Wood , painted by Manson , have been exhibited at the Celebritarian Corporation Gallery of Fine Art . Wood is also the inspiration behind Manson 's song " Heart @-@ Shaped Glasses " , and she appeared with Manson in the song 's music video . Manson has said that Wood 's appearance was the highest @-@ paid music video role ever . The couple split in November 2008 ; according to Wood , they " both decided to take some time apart so [ they ] could concentrate on work . " They later re @-@ united and it was reported in early January 2010 that the couple was engaged to be married . Wood and Manson ended their engagement in August 2010 . 
 In the summer of 2011 , Wood was reported to have rekindled her relationship with Jamie Bell , five years after they first broke up . The couple married in a small ceremony on October 30 , 2012 . They have one son , born in July 2013 . Wood had a natural home birth with her son , and publicly thanked Ricki Lake , creator of the documentary The Business of Being Born , for inspiring her decision . In May 2014 , Wood and Bell announced that they had separated after 19 months of marriage . 
 In August 2012 , Wood came out as bisexual via Twitter . 
 Wood 's mother is a convert to Judaism and Wood 's father is Christian . In 2003 , Wood described herself as Jewish . In 2012 , she stated , " I believe in God but I am not religious . I am spiritual . My definition of God isn 't in any religion . It 's very personal " . 
 Wood has a black belt in taekwondo . 
 
 = = Filmography = = 
 
 
 = = Awards and nominations = =
