= Timothy Everest = 
 
 Timothy Everest , MBE ( born 1961 ) is a Welsh bespoke tailor and designer who has , according to Vogue , " dressed some of the world 's most famous people " . Born in Haverfordwest , Wales , he moved to London in his early twenties to work with innovative Savile Row tailor Tommy Nutter , where he learned the art of bespoke . Everest was one of the leaders of the New Bespoke Movement , which brought designer attitudes to the traditional skills of Savile Row tailoring . 
 Everest has been running his own tailoring business in the East End of London since 1989 . Based at his Spitalfields atelier since 1993 , he opened a West End store off Bond Street , near Savile Row , in 2008 . As well as collaborating on projects with designers and brands such as Brooks England , DAKS , Kim Jones , Levi 's , Rapha and Rocawear , as costume designer Everest has dressed the stars of films including Mission Impossible ( One and M : i @-@ 2 ) , Eyes Wide Shut , Atonement and Mamma Mia ! . He has been associated with the British high street retailer Marks and Spencer since 1999 , and has been a contributor to men 's magazine The Rake since 2008 . Everest is at the forefront of the bespoke casual movement . 
 
 = = Early life = = 
 
 Everest was born and brought up in Haverfordwest , Pembrokeshire , west Wales ; most of his family remain in the area . His parents were restaurateurs . He had aspired to become a racing driver . But , his ambition unfulfilled , he took a job with his uncle when he was 17 , working as a sales assistant at Hepworths , Milford Haven ; a high street tailor that would form the foundation of the Next retail empire . In the early 1980s , he became interested in the club scene , often driving to London , where he mixed with New Romantics such as Boy George at The Blitz ; a trendy London nightclub run by Steve Strange of the group Visage . 
 Determined to become part of the fashion industry , but unable to make a breakthrough , Everest decided to use his knowledge of tailoring . He answered an advertisement placed in the London Evening Standard , in 1982 , by Tommy Nutter ; ' Boy wanted in Savile Row ' . He pestered Nutter for weeks , until he was given the job . Nutter 's client base included rock stars , celebrities , politicians and businessmen ; he famously dressed The Beatles and The Stones . Everest also mixed with future celebrities of the fashion world . John Galliano , who had been studying at the Central Saint Martins College of Art and Design , passed on some design skills to Everest , while on work placement with Nutter . Everest met his future wife Catherine ( now an actress and film producer ) at this time , while she was also working with Nutter . The couple have two daughters . Everest 's time under Nutter , a Savile Row revolutionary in the 1960s , inspired him to experiment with tone and pattern in his own designs . In 1986 , after nearly five years as Nutter 's apprentice , Everest was persuaded to move on to work for Malcolm Levene . He had become disillusioned with Savile Row , particularly with their lack of appreciation for Nutter 's more modern approach . Everest found that working with Levene , a small menswear retailer based away from Savile Row , on Chiltern Street , provided a welcome change . During Everest 's first year there , Levene 's turnover doubled . 
 
 = = Career = = 
 
 
 = = = Setting out on his own = = = 
 
 Leaving Levene in the late 1980s to become a freelance stylist in television advertising , MTV and film , Everest began styling bands and pop stars such as George Michael . He recognised a shift in perception of the male fashion industry ; men had become more label conscious . This had coincided with the increased awareness of top @-@ end fashion designers , like Hugo Boss and Armani , highlighted by men 's lifestyle magazines ; such as Arena and The Face . He said , " I thought that if we could demystify bespoke tailoring and make it more accessible , as well as really understanding what was going on in ready @-@ to @-@ wear fashion and being directional with it , there was possibly a market there . " Having decided to create the Timothy Everest brand as an alternative to ' designer ' ready @-@ to @-@ wear , he searched for a suitable location away from " the stuffiness of Savile Row " . Everest opened his first premises in 1989 ; in Princelet Street , Spitalfields , just outside the City of London , in the East End . He said , " We started in one room of a house . We had one rail with four garments on and a telephone , no chairs , no furniture . " To begin with , business was slow . Moving premises in 1993 , he chose a three @-@ storey , early Georgian townhouse ( built in 1724 ) , just north of Old Spitalfields Market in nearby Elder Street – the former home of artist Mark Gertler ( 1891 – 1939 ) – converting it to an atelier over seven weeks . He dressed Tom Cruise for the 1996 film Mission : Impossible . Cruise liked the suits so much that he kept them , and commissioned Everest to make him some more . 
 
 = = = New Bespoke Movement = = = 
 
 Everest became one of the " Cool Britannia " tailoring generation of the mid @-@ 1990s , identified by James Sherwood ( author of Savile Row : The Master Tailors of British Bespoke ) as having begun with the publication of Vanity Fair 's " Cool Britania " issue in 1997 . Sensing a change in consumer attitudes , away from the more traditional styling of Savile Row , he sought to revitalise bespoke suiting , which he believed had been in danger of disappearing . With contemporaries Ozwald Boateng and Richard James , he launched the New Bespoke Movement , which brought a fashion designer approach to Savile Row craftsmanship . He launched the brand 's first ready @-@ to @-@ wear collection in 1999 . His long @-@ standing association with Marks and Spencer began that year . He dressed Tom Cruise again , for his reprised role in the 2000 film Mission : Impossible II , and at the Oscars that year , when he also dressed Robin Williams and Burt Bacharach . By 2000 , he had 3 @,@ 500 bespoke clients . Everest joined DAKS Simpson as design consultant in May 2000 . He was appointed to the board as Group Creative Director in 2002 , leaving in 2003 . One of the lines he designed for DAKS was an affordable suiting range aimed at teenagers , launched in August 2001 ; called DAKS E1 , after the postal district of his atelier . 
 
 = = = Bespoke casual = = = 
 
 Everest is at the forefront of the bespoke casual movement which , as the name suggests , provides individually tailored casual clothing of Savile Row quality , including : casual shirts ; smart @-@ casual jackets ; T @-@ shirts ; and jeans . In collaboration with Levi 's in 2004 , he designed a tailored @-@ denim suit , sold in Japanese retailer Oki @-@ Ni 's stores . Expanding the bespoke casual concept , he offered a bespoke denim tailoring service dressing celebrities from sports , Hollywood and rock music , such as David Beckham , Kevin Bacon and Ricky Wilson of the Kaiser Chiefs . Everest designed a suit collection in 2004 / 05 in collaboration with Rocawear , the fashion clothing company founded by American hip hop artists Damon Dash and Jay @-@ Z. The advertising campaign was fronted by Dash 's friends Kevin Bacon and Naomi Campbell . He teamed up with British casual and sportswear designer Kim Jones during 2005 and 2006 . The collaboration produced tailoring collections for four seasons that were shown on the catwalk at Paris fashion week . For his next collaboration , in 2006 Everest showed a limited collection of menswear with New York hair salon Bumble and bumble , including a fully bespoke denim line , which retailed at around US $ 1 @,@ 000 . Marketed as a ' destination location ' , the retail space on the store 's 8th floor , in the fashionable Meatpacking District of Manhattan , also featured a barbershop , a café and a teahouse . In autumn 2007 , the Timothy Everest ready @-@ to @-@ wear collection was available in shops for the first time , including Flannels , Liberty and John Lewis . The range included suits , shirts and trousers . He was costume designer for the 2008 film Mamma Mia ! , dressing its stars , including Pierce Brosnan and Colin Firth . He opened a West End store in 2008 , at Bruton Street , Mayfair , off Bond Street ; less than five minutes walk from Savile Row . He has been a creative contributor and Sartorial Advisor to men 's magazine The Rake since 2008 . 
 
 = = = Bespoke active wear = = = 
 
 A keen cyclist , in 2009 Everest collaborated with cyclewear brand Rapha to develop a bespoke suit that could be worn while cycling ; what he called " bespoke active wear " . Priced at £ 3 @,@ 500 , the three @-@ piece suit was made of blended wool , using nanotechnology to repel water and dirt . It combined the functionality of classic cycling clothing with the elegance of bespoke tailoring . Its features included a high button fastening to keep the jacket closely fitted to the body , a lapel pocket for an MP3 player and pleats at the shoulders and center back to allow extra fabric when the rider was bent over the bicycle . The jacket design was incorporated into Rapha 's ready @-@ to @-@ wear collection in 2010 . In collaboration with bicycle saddle manufacturer Brooks England during 2010 , he developed a cycling jacket ; under Brooks ' John Boultbee clothing label . The resulting ' Criterion Mk.1 cycling jacket ' , which used water and sweat @-@ resistant materials , was shown at the Bread and Butter street and urban fashion fair , Berlin , in January 2011 . 
 Everest received an MBE in the 2010 New Year 's Honours list for his " services to the British fashion industry " . Having receiving the award from Queen Elizabeth at Buckingham Palace on Saint David 's Day 2010 , with his wife and two daughters watching , he described the award as a " great honour , not only for me but my business and all who have been involved " . He is quoted as saying that he would like " to be remembered as someone who made people take British clothing seriously " . 
 
 = = = The brand = = = 
 
 The Timothy Everest brand has three levels of tailoring . ' Bespoke ' is aimed at young professionals with the means to purchase bespoke tailoring , but not necessarily the desire to visit Savile Row . Each customer is measured for an individual pattern to be hand @-@ cut , from which their chosen cloth is cut and sewn by hand . Although still hand made , ' Made @-@ to @-@ measure ' garments use existing ' house ' patterns , adapted to the customer 's measurements . The ' Ready @-@ to @-@ wear ' collection is sold in @-@ house , at Everest 's Mayfair branch , and in Japan . Emphasising his Savile Row background , Everest said , " We are tailors who design , not designers who discovered tailoring " . 
 
 = = Marks and Spencer = = 
 
 UK department store retailer Debenhams ' collaboration with designers , launched in 1993 under their Designers at Debenhams range , was a success . Hoping to recapture some of their lost market share , Marks and Spencer ( M & S ) asked Everest to review their menswear range . As Creative Consultant , he designed the Sartorial suiting line for their menswear collection . In October 2000 , he designed the Autograph suiting line . Noting that the M & S range consisted of Italian @-@ style suiting , he aimed to achieve a more ' British ' look from the cut , fit and styling and by using different fabrics and colours . He also has responsibility for their Luxury collection . During M & S advertising campaigns , his designs for the Autograph range have been modelled by several British celebrities , including David Beckham , Bryan Ferry , Jimmy Carr , Martin Freeman , Bob Mortimer and Take That . In 2007 , M & S were selected by The Football Association as ' Official Tailor to the England football team ' and Everest designed the team 's official suits for the 2010 World Cup in South Africa . 
 
 = = Clientele = = 
 
 Everest has , according to Vogue , dressed " some of the world 's most famous people " . He has clients worldwide and travels regularly for fittings in New York , Los Angeles and Japan . Closer to home , Everest 's bespoke atelier in Spitalfields has a diverse client base that includes politicians ( including British Prime Ministers past and present ) , and sports and Hollywood personalities . Of his suit worn to the Oscars , Tom Cruise commented : " Of course it fits ; it 's a Timothy Everest " . 
 He has been costume designer on several films , including Mission Impossible ( One and M : i @-@ 2 ) , Tube Tales , Eyes Wide Shut , Appaloosa , Atonement , The Accidental Husband and Mamma Mia ! . Among his celebrity clients are : Kevin Bacon ; David Beckham ; Matthew Broderick ; Gordon Brown ; Pierce Brosnan ; David Cameron ; Jarvis Cocker ; Jeremy Irons ; Jay @-@ Z ; Mick Jagger ; and James McAvoy .
