= Ratu ( band ) = 
 
 Ratu was an Indonesian music duo formed in 1999 with Maia Estianty , then the wife of musician Ahmad Dhani , on instruments and Pinkan Mambo on vocals . Ratu entered the Indonesian musical scene with their first album , Bersama ( Together ; 2003 ) . After a short break caused by Mambo 's departure in 2004 , the group formed anew with Mulan Kwok as vocalist . This new line @-@ up proved more successful , with their most successful songs – " Teman Tapi Mesra " ( " Friends with Benefits " ) and " Lelaki Buaya Darat " ( " Womaniser " ) – released in this period ; both song titles later became common terms in the Indonesian vocabulary . The group 's second studio album , No . Satu ( Number One ; 2006 ) , sold 200 @,@ 000 copies on the day of its release , a record for an album by an Indonesian female group . The group dissolved in 2007 . 
 Ratu was the most successful female Indonesian music group of the 2000s . Aside from their music , they were known for their physical appearance and wide coverage in infotainment media . Through their choice in costumes , Ratu popularised Harajuku styles in Indonesia . Throughout their career , the band won numerous awards ; they were the first musical act to twice be declared " Artist of the Year " and " Group / Duo Artist of The Year " at the MTV Ampuh music awards . This success inspired numerous other groups to follow in their tracks . 
 
 = = Career = = 
 
 
 = = = Formation and first record = = = 
 
 Maia Ahmad , at the time wife of the musician Ahmad Dhani , had been a background singer for her husband 's band Dewa 19 since 1993 . She had been musically inclined since childhood and had formed a band while a teenager . She intended to be like her husband and enter the music industry as a headline performer . In a later interview , she explained her motivations : " I wasn 't following on the success of Krisdayanti dan Anang , a husband and wife who had made an album together . I just started when I did . Dhani only gave me the time then , as our children were getting older and I could focus on my music . " With Dhani 's guidance , in 1999 Maia decided to form a duo consisting of a singer and a musician , with the name Ratu . The concept was based on that of international bands like Roxette and Savage Garden . Maia set herself as a keyboardist , then began to look for a vocalist . 
 Pinkan Mambo , who at the time sang at a café , was working towards a career as a professional musician . In mid @-@ 1999 , she met Dhani at a café in Pondok Indah Mall , South Jakarta . She introduced herself to him , saying that she had a good voice . When Dhani asked how good , she replied " Amazing . [ ... ] as good as Mariah Carey . " Mambo then received Dhani 's number , which she used to call him repeatedly and ask for an album . On the fifth day , Maia answered the phone and eventually offered Mambo the position of vocalist with Ratu . Although Mambo wanted to be a soloist , she accepted and had an audition at Maia 's home , where she was accepted before she could finish singing . Before she began work with Ratu , Pinkan was given training as a backing vocalist for Dewa 19 . 
 After three years of preparation , in January 2003 Ratu launched their debut album Bersama with Sony Music Indonesia . The album included ten songs , seven written by Maia and three by Dhani ; Maia also did the arrangement and served as backing vocalist . Other musicians involved on the album included Bintang ( bass ) , Denny Chasmala , Andra Ramadhan and Taras ( guitar ) , Agil Cinere ( drums ) , Donni ( flute ) , Sa 'unine ( strings ) and Henry Lamiri ( violin ) . The music was R & B @-@ influenced , with added piano for a " feminine touch . " With the album several singles , " Aku Baik @-@ Baik Saja " ( " I 'm Fine " ) , " Salahkah Aku Terlalu Mencintaimu " ( " Blame Me For Loving You Too Much " ) and " Jangan Bilang Siapa Siapa " ( " Don 't Tell Anyone " ) , were released . This first album was well @-@ received and sold more than 250 @,@ 000 copies . Ratu also provided a new sound , as the Indonesian music industry of the time was dominated by male groups . Ratu won Best Newcomer at the 2003 Clear Top Ten Awards . At the 2006 MTV Ampuh awards , Ratu was awarded Artist of the Year and Group / Duo Artist of The Year . 
 After the success of Bersama , Maia and Mambo began to work on a second album , scheduled for a 2004 release . However , on 14 October 2004 Mambo announced she was leaving the group amidst widespread media coverage of her being pregnant outside of wedlock . Reports indicated that she may have left the group because of Maia 's more dominant personality and conflicts between the two . Maia , left as the only member of the band , insisted that it was not dissolving , and would soon hold auditions for a new vocalist . As a temporary measure , several singers were contracted to perform with Maia , although not signed as members . Tia , a finalist in Akademi Fantasi Indosiar ( AFI ) , came under consideration for the position , but was unable to accept as she was still contracted to AFI . 
 
 = = = Line @-@ up change and success = = = 
 
 While looking for a new vocalist , Maia met Mulan Kwok , a performer at Barbados Cafe in Bilangan Kemang , Jakarta , in December 2004 . Of this meeting , Maia later recalled " When I met Mulan it was like meeting a new lover . I saw her and I liked her . Just fell in love . " Mulan was a café singer from Bandung who sang with Dimensi Band . She was asked to audition for the role and ultimately selected ; her appointment was announced at a press conference on 7 April 2005 . With Mulan , the group 's concept , originally " elegant " , became " coquettish and sexy " . The group 's musical style also changed ; while originally R & B with light piano , it was changed to a rock sound with dominant guitars . 
 On 30 August 2005 Ratu released a compilation album entitled Ratu & Friends which included two new songs from the group , " Teman Tapi Mesra " ( " Friends With Benefits " ) and a cover of Vina Panduwinata 's " Di Dadaku Ada Kamu " ( " In My Chest there is You " ) . " Teman Tapi Mesra " was an overnight hit in Indonesia , Malaysia , and Singapore and enjoyed by both adults and children alike . The term " Teman Tapi Mesra " , often abbreviated TTM , became widely used to describe those in a physical relationship without an emotional one . The ringback tone for " Teman Tapi Mesra " held the top position in Malaysia for several weeks . In Indonesia , the ringback tone saw more than a million downloads . The album sold more than 400 @,@ 000 copies and was certified double platinum . Ratu then put on a forty @-@ city concert tour throughout Indonesia with the band Radja ; the Rock in Love tour began with a concert at the Jakarta Convention Center on 20 February 2006 . 
 On 22 May 2006 Ratu released their second studio album , No . Satu ( Number One ) . Like on Bersama , most of the songs recorded were written by Maia . Dhani contributed three songs , while Mulan helped write the song " Seribu Cinta " ( " A Thousand Loves " ) . No . Satu also involved musicians such as Yoyo Padi , Denny Chasmala , Tepi Item , and Bintang . Two singles from the album , " Lelaki Buaya Darat " ( " Womanizer " ) and " Dear Diary " , were hits , as was the album ; it sold 200 @,@ 000 copies on the day of its release , a record for a work by a female Indonesian group . " Lelaki Buaya Darat " was banned in Malaysia because of its perceived negative connotations . The band tried to change the song 's title , but this was unsuccessful . However , some radio stations in Malaysia still played the song . 
 Throughout 2005 and 2006 Ratu was one of Indonesia 's dominant bands and often used in product advertisements . Both members explored different aspects of show business . Maia acted in Extravaganza , a comedy show on Trans TV , while Mulan starred in several television films . The band 's clothing , inspired by the Harajuku fashion district in Japan , made teenagers interested in street clothing . The band also received widespread coverage in infotainment media , with much gossip about Dhani 's relationship with Mulan . Noting the role that infotainment media had played in the band 's success , Maia said " Ratu should give thanks to all those reporters who gave us fame with their gossip . " 
 Ratu received numerous awards during this period . At the tenth Anugerah Musik Indonesia , the band received three nominations and won Best Produced Work for " Teman Tapi Mesra " . Maia and Mulan were also awarded Top Singer at the SCTV Awards , winning over established stars Agnes Monica , Ari Lasso , Iwan Fals , dan Krisdayanti . Ada the MTV Indonesia Awards , they were nominated in two categories . At the MTV Ampuh Awards , Ratu was declared Artist of the Year and " Group / Duo Artist of The Year " , making them the first group to win both awards twice . 
 
 = = = Dissolution = = = 
 
 At the end of 2006 , Ahmad Dhani threatened to disband the group if Maia did not cut back on her performance schedule ; he felt she was too busy , to the point of forgetting their children . Dhani later withdrew his threat , but – after becoming manager – limited the group to one performance a week . He then fired the group 's manager , Vita Ramona , who threatened to bring Dhani to court if he did not apologize for perceived defamation . This situation was exacerbated when Mulan publicly complained of not receiving her share of the band 's money and a lack of transparency in the management . She resigned on 30 January 2007 , after waiting ten days for her open letter to the management to receive a reply . Mulan then hired a lawyer and sued Dhani , resulting in her contract fee being returned . 
 After Mulan left , Maia continued to perform as Ratu own her own . She participated in the concert tour A Mild Live Soundrenaline with Shanty , Bunga Citra Lestari , and Ghea — a winner of Indonesian Idol . Later domestic troubles between Dhani and Maia led to the group to dissolve . At the end of 2007 , the group 's name became an object of contention between the two . Dhani claimed the name " Ratu " as his intellectual right and said that he had registered it with the General Directorate of Intellectual Rights . He forbid Maia , who was then looking for a new partner , to use the name . 
 
 = = Later activities = = 
 
 At the beginning of 2008 , Maia launched Duo Maia with her new partner Mey Chan . Unlike Ratu , Duo Maia was conceived as a vocal group and Maia was predominantly a vocalist . Meanwhile , Mulan signed with Republik Cinta Management under Ahmad Dhani . Mulan released a solo album entitled Makhluk Tuhan Paling Seksi ( God 's Sexiest Creature ) in 2008 and changed her stage name to Mulan Jameela . Mambo , the Ratu 's original vocalist , had already released a solo album , entitled Aku Tahu Rasanya ( I Know How It Feels ) in 2006 . In 2009 , " Teman Tapi Mesra " was bought by LadyLike , a Swedish girl band , and released in the European market as the English @-@ language " Dreaming of the Time " . 
 Ratu was followed by numerous Indonesian duos attempting to follow in its success . Towards the end of the 2000s , Ahmad Dhani did so as well , coaching the duos MahaDewi and The Virgin . None of these groups were as successful as Ratu , and , by 2011 , Korean @-@ inspired boy and girl bands had become dominant . Maia later said that Ratu had been successful because it was the only one of its kind , that " there were benefits to being a pioneer " 
 
 = = Discography = = 
 
 Bersama ( Together ; 2003 ) 
 Ratu & Friends ( 2005 ) 
 No . Satu ( Number One ; 2006 ) 
 
 = = Concert tours = = 
 
 Rock in Love ( 2005 – 2006 ) 
 A Mild Live Soundrenaline ( 2007 ) 
 
 = = Awards = =
