= Victoria 's Secret Fashion Show = 
 
 The Victoria 's Secret Fashion Show is an annual fashion show sponsored by and featuring Victoria 's Secret , a brand of lingerie and sleepwear . Victoria 's Secret uses the show to promote and market its goods in high @-@ profile settings . The show features some of the world 's leading fashion models such as current Victoria 's Secret Angels Adriana Lima , Alessandra Ambrosio , Behati Prinsloo , Candice Swanepoel , and Lily Aldridge . 
 American network television broadcasts the show during prime time . The first few shows in the 1990s were held in the days preceding Valentine 's Day to promote the brand for this holiday . They were not aired on national television . In 1999 and 2000 the show was webcast . Beginning in 2001 , the shows were moved ahead of the Christmas holiday season . Also in 2001 , the show made its network television broadcast on ABC , though in all subsequent years , it has been broadcast on CBS . The show has been held at a variety of locations in different cities including Miami , Los Angeles , and Cannes . The first four shows were held at the Plaza Hotel in New York City , but since it has become a televised event it has most often been held at the 69th Regiment Armory in New York City . 
 The show is a lavish event with elaborate costumed lingerie , varying music by leading entertainers , and set design according to the different themes running within the show . The show attracts hundreds of celebrities and entertainers , with special performers and acts every year . Each year , twenty to forty of the world 's top fashion models are selected to perform in the fashion show . In a typical year , this includes about a half dozen women under contract to the company , known as Victoria 's Secret Angels , who help publicize the event . The giant angel wings worn by the models , as well as other wings of various forms and sizes such as butterfly , peacock , or devil wings , have become emblematic of the Victoria 's Secret brand . 
 
 = = History = = 
 
 The first fashion show extravaganza , introduced by Stephanie Seymour , was held at the Plaza Hotel in New York City in August 1995 . The show also featured Beverly Peele and Frederique van der Wal . This first fashion show occurred two months before The Limited , parent company of Victoria 's Secret owner Intimate Brands , sold an initial public offering of a 16 percent stake in the company and almost had Seymour make an appearance at the New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) for the opening bell . She actually did ring the closing bell at the NYSE as part of the publicity campaign . The subsequent three annual shows were also held at the Plaza . 
 In 1999 , during Super Bowl XXXIII , Victoria 's Secret announced a 72 @-@ hour countdown to the Internet webcast of the Victoria 's Secret fashion show , which resulted in over 2 million internet viewers of the show . Parent company Intimate Brands bought a $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( $ 2 @.@ 1 million today ) 30 @-@ second television advertisement during the Super Bowl broadcast and spent an additional $ 4 million ( $ 5 @.@ 7 million ) for subsequent international newspaper advertisements to publicize the event . The show , which was aired by Broadcast.com , featured Tyra Banks , Laetitia Casta , Heidi Klum , Karen Mulder , Daniela Pestova , Inés Rivero , and Seymour . In 1999 and 2000 , the show was broadcast live on the internet , but the 2000 show was moved for a year from the usual February event at the Plaza to a May event in concert with the Cannes Film Festival in France to raise money for the Cinema Against AIDS charity ; it raised $ 3 @.@ 5 million . 
 In 2001 , the show , which was hosted by Rupert Everett , returned to the New York City but at Bryant Park instead of the Plaza . That year , the show made its broadcast debut on ABC , drawing millions of viewers as well as some middle @-@ brow controversy ; the Federal Communications Commission received many complaints about the broadcast every year . The show has continued to be broadcast on network television every year since . 
 From 2002 through 2005 , it was held at the Lexington Avenue Armory in New York City . The 2004 show was canceled due to a widespread crackdown on perceived indecency in broadcasting stemming from the Janet Jackson and Justin Timberlake Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy , in which Jackson encountered a breast @-@ revealing " wardrobe malfunction " . Before the 2005 show , Banks announced her retirement from modeling and embarkation on a television career with The Tyra Banks Show , making the 2005 show a farewell to her decade of fashion shows for the company . 
 In 2004 , instead of the annual fashion show , the Angels ( Tyra Banks , Heidi Klum , Gisele Bündchen , Adriana Lima , and Alessandra Ambrosio ) did an Angels Across America Tour , a grassroots campaign for the brand visiting four major cities : New York City , Miami , Las Vegas , and Los Angeles . 
 The 2006 and 2007 shows were held at the Kodak Theatre in Los Angeles . On November 13 , 2007 , the Victoria 's Secret Angels were honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk Of Fame right outside the Kodak Theatre . The 2007 Angels honored in this celebration to mark Victoria 's Secret 's 25th anniversary on Hollywood Boulevard were Heidi Klum , Adriana Lima , Alessandra Ambrosio , Karolina Kurkova , Selita Ebanks , Izabel Goulart , Marisa Miller , and Miranda Kerr . The other models , who also appeared in that year 's fashion show , were in attendance that day . The 2008 show coincided with the grand re @-@ opening of the Fontainebleau Miami Beach hotel . 
 In 2006 , Victoria 's Secret sub @-@ brand PINK made its debut on the runway . Justin Timberlake opened the show with his popular song " Sexy Back " . This year fashion show was the final walk of Gisele Bündchen . 
 The 2007 show featured a performance by the Spice Girls and gained prominence as the first American TV debut of the band after their comeback . Kanye West was also scheduled to perform at the event , but cancelled his appearance due to his mother 's death. will.i.am was called to perform in his place . 
 The 2008 show was held at Fountainebleu Miami Beach , Florida . Usher was appeared on the show as well as opened it . Unlike the other shows , the runway was designed parallel with the audience seats . 
 In 2009 , the fashion show took place in New York City at the Lexington Avenue Armory , where it was last held in 2005 . The 2009 show was notable for featuring the results of a competition , called the Victoria 's Secret Model Search , to find a new Victoria 's Secret " runway Angel . " The winner was announced as Kylie Bisutti . 
 The 2010 Victoria 's Secret Fashion show aired on November 30 , 2010 on CBS , and featured performances by Katy Perry and Akon . A promotional ad featured a lipdub for Katy Perry 's " Firework " . As of 2010 , 152 models have walked the show . 
 In 2011 , Kanye West started his song " Stronger " with a tribute to his mother who had died before his scheduled performance four years before , saying : " In 2007 , I was supposed to perform this song on this show ... and I lost my superhero . Now she 's my super @-@ angel . " 
 In 2012 , an outfit worn by model Karlie Kloss , which was reminiscent of Native American attire , sparked controversy due to its alleged stereotypical depiction of Native Americans . Victoria 's Secret released a statement of apology shortly after , saying that they will remove it from future advertisements and the broadcast . Kloss apologized on her Twitter account for the outfit and expressed her support for the outfit 's removal in the broadcast . 
 In 2013 , the Victoria 's Secret Fashion show featured performances by Taylor Swift , A Great Big World , Neon Jungle and Fall Out Boy . Taylor Swift performed " I Knew You Were Trouble " , A Great Big World performed " Say Something " , UK 's Neon Jungle made their US television debut with " Trouble " , and Fall Out Boy performed with Taylor Swift in " My Songs Know What You Did In The Dark " and later performed " The Phoenix " . 
 In 2014 , the Victoria 's Secret Fashion show featured performances by Taylor Swift ; for the second year in a row , Ed Sheeran , Ariana Grande , and Hozier . Taylor Swift performed " Blank Space " and " Style " . Ed Sheeran performed " Thinking Out Loud " . Ariana Grande performed " Love Me Harder " , " Bang Bang " , " Break Free " , and " Problem " . Hozier performed " Take Me to Church " . During the show , Ariana Grande was performing and was hit by accident with an angel 's wings . 
 
 = = Critical review = = 
 
 The early webcasts were criticized for poor connection , and users that could connect were subjected to low video quality . One critic from The New York Times described the initial 20th @-@ century webcast experience as having felt like he was " watching a striptease through a keyhole " . 
 Some critics have described the 21st @-@ century televised editions of the show as pornographic , while others have described it as both " outright commercialism " and an infomercial . The Federal Communications Commission has received complaints regarding the broadcast , but no fines have been imposed , with the FCC , following the 2001 airing , citing the First Amendment and stating that " sexual or excretory activities or organs in a patently offensive manner as measured by contemporary community standards for the broadcast medium " were not broadcast . In the initial 2001 airing ABC blurred the screen on particularly sheer lingerie . This enabled the show to pass muster with its internal Broadcast Standards and Practices department and to achieve the TV @-@ 14 rating . In 2002 , the National Organization for Women protested the show calling it a " soft @-@ core porn infomercial . " They were joined in protest by the Parents Television Council and other watchdog organizations . CBS has given past shows TV @-@ 14 ratings , which is a warning that the show may contain material unsuitable for children age 14 and under . Nonetheless some affiliates have chosen not to air the show in past years including Fisher Broadcasting affiliates in Idaho . In 2009 , the American Decency Association organized email letters of protests to sponsors of the show including AT & T , Kentucky Fried Chicken , Netflix , Nikon , and Reebok . CBS has described the event to as " the Super Bowl of fashion " . 
 
 = = Summary table = = 
 
 
 = = Fantasy Bra = = 
 
 Typically , one model is chosen among the Angels to wear a bejeweled bra dubbed the " Fantasy Bra " . It was first advertised in the Victoria 's Secret catalog , but since 2001 has been worn in the Fashion Shows . Prior to each Fashion Show , Victoria 's Secret contracts a renowned jewelry designer to craft the bra to be used as a focal point for promoting the fashion show and as a centerpiece within it . The company offers the Fantasy Bra for sale as " the ultimate holiday " gift . However , only the centerpiece from the 2004 Heavenly " 70 " Fantasy Bra and the 2012 Floral Fantasy Bra and Gift Set have found a buyer . If not bought , the bras are dismantled after a year . 
 Heidi Klum and Adriana Lima have worn the Fantasy Bra in three different years . Gisele Bündchen , Tyra Banks , Karolina Kurkova , and Alessandra Ambrosio have each worn two Fantasy Bras . 
 The $ 15 million price tag for the 2000 bra worn by Gisele Bündchen earned a place in the Guinness World Records as the most expensive item of lingerie ever created . The $ 3 million 2009 Harlequin Fantasy Bra and the $ 2 million 2010 Bombshell Fantasy Bra were designed by Damiani . Listed below are the prices per set ( including accessories for the 2007 and 2013 editions , the 2013 bra alone is worth $ 8 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ) . The 2012 Floral Fantasy Bra was accompanied by a $ 500 @,@ 000 perfume bottle . 
 In 2014 , for the first time , two fantasy bras were created . They were worn by Alessandra Ambrosio and Adriana Lima and were valued at $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 each .
