= Cultura Profética = 
 
 Cultura Profética ( in English , Prophetic Culture ) is a Puerto Rican reggae band formed in 1996 . The band has undergone several lineup changes , but founding members Willy Rodríguez ( bass guitar , vocals ) , Boris Bilbraut ( drums , vocals ) , Eliut González ( guitar ) , and Omar Silva ( guitar , bass guitar ) have remained in the group throughout its history . Despite primarily performing reggae music , Cultura Profética has experimented with genres such as bossa nova , tango , jazz , and salsa . Lyrically , the group discusses socio @-@ political and ecological issues including Latin American identity and environmental concerns , as well as interpersonal relationships and love . 
 After gaining popularity in Puerto Rico as a cover band , Cultura Profética began performing original music and released its debut album , Canción de Alerta , in 1998 . The group followed up with Ideas Nuevas in 2000 , which featured further musical experimentation with a wider variety of musical styles , and then Diario in 2004 . After relocating to Mexico , the band released M.O.T.A. in 2005 , which peaked at number 12 on the Billboard Hot Latin Albums chart . In 2010 , La Dulzura was released , which took a more romantic lyrical focus and produced the radio hit " La Complicidad " . Cultura Profética released its most recent single , " Saca , Prende y Sorprende " in 2014 , and is reported to be working on a new album . 
 
 = = History = = 
 
 
 = = = 1996 – 99 : Formation and Canción de Alerta = = = 
 
 Cultura Profética originally began as a cover band , performing popular reggae songs in small bars and clubs before beginning to perform original music in Spanish . Shortly after transitioning to perform original music , the group adopted the name Cultura Profética , which was inspired by the view that " music is a voice of culture and is prophetic because the reggae music that we love , and that influenced us , is from the ’ 70s with themes of what 's happening now that can affect our future " , according to guitarist / bassist Omar Silva . 
 Many of the original members of the group attended the Escuela Elemental and the Escuela Secundaria of the University of Puerto Rico , an institution noted for its progressive and experimental teaching approaches . Vocalist / bassist Willy Rodriguez commented , " It is a school in which you are allowed to decide a few things on your own , you have free time between classes [ when ] you can do your own things , and there is a lot of musical culture in the school . It tends to allow you to explore your artistic interests ... There was always an air of liberation , of thinking on your own . I think that influenced a lot in what we do today musically and ideologically . " Group members Boris Bilbraut , Willy Rodríguez , Eliut González , Juan Costa , and Ivan Gutiérres began jamming together in 1996 , bonding over a shared interest in reggae music , particularly Bob Marley . These rehearsal sessions took place in El Hoyo , a neighborhood in the San Juan metropolitan area . 
 After transitioning away from being a cover band , the group quickly gained popularity in the Puerto Rican reggae scene . Cultura Profética began performing in major reggae festivals and opening for Jamaican reggae musician Don Carlos . The band 's first album , Canción de Alerta ( 1998 ) , was recorded in the Tuff Gong studios at Jamaica with Errol Brown , frontman of Hot Chocolate and Bob Marley 's sound engineer . The group was the first Spanish @-@ language act to record in Marley 's studios . The record discusses a number of social issues in Puerto Rico , including the importance of acknowledging the island 's African influence . 
 
 = = = 1998 – 2009 : Ideas Nuevas , Diario , and M.O.T.A. = = = 
 
 The group returned to Tuff Gong studios in 1999 to record its second album , Ideas Nuevas , which was released in May 2000 . On this record , the band began experimenting with a variety of rhythms such as bossa nova , salsa , ska , and jazz . The album was dedicated to a music instructor at the University of Puerto Rico . The band performed in Tito Puente 's amphitheater on May 12 , 2000 , later releasing a recording of the performance in the form of the live album Cultura en Vivo . In 2002 , the band released its third studio album , Diario . On this album , the band aimed to produce a record that represents Puerto Rican daily life , occasionally introducing songs with interludes of casual conversations and background noise , exemplified by songs such as " De Antes " and " Pa 'l Tanama " . 
 In 2004 , Cultura Profetica began to focus on the international stage , eventually moving temporarily to Mexico . Their fourth studio album , M.O.T.A. , was released in October 2005 after a tour through Mexico . M.O.T.A peaked at number 12 on the Billboard Hot Latin Albums chart , remaining at the position for two weeks . Also in 2005 , the group collaborated with Puerto Rican rapper Vico C on his song " Te Me Puedo Escapar " from his album Desahogo . In January 2006 , the song " Ritmo Que Pesa " from M.O.T.A peaked at number 35 on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart . In 2007 , the group released Tribute to the Legend : Bob Marley , a live recording of the group performing Bob Marley songs . After the release of the tribute album , Cultura Profética toured extensively through Latin America and expanded its fan base , particularly in Argentina . A DVD covering their performance at Jose Miguel Agrelot Coliseum was released in late summer of 2008 . 
 
 = = = 2010 – present : La Dulzura and upcoming album = = = 
 
 In 2010 , Cultura Profética released La Dulzura , the group 's first album on its own record label , La Mafafa . While discussing the decision to create an independent record label , Rodríguez explained " I can 't deny we spoke with different labels , but we didn 't find anything favorable . Labels are going through tough times and we decided to brave it on our own . " Many of the songs on the album were written and performed during the band 's extensive touring beginning in 2007 , and the songs went through numerous transformations during this time . Before the album 's official release , the band posted songs on the internet , including " La Complicidad " , which became a radio hit in Puerto Rico . La Dulzura debuted at number five on Billboard 's Top Latin Albums Chart . 
 La Dulzura represented a stylistic departure for the group , both musically and lyrically . The song " Del Tope al Fondo " is influenced by Argentine music , especially the genre of tango . Lyrically , the band discusses more romantic themes as opposed to the political emphasis of the group 's previous records . Guitarist Eliut Gonzalez remarked that the band aimed to shift discussion to " the good things in the world " , explaining that " We know that people need help , and that behind every revolution or movement , there is love . We wanted to document that in our music , but without doing it in a cheesy or typical way . " The singles " Baja la Tensión " , " La Complicidad " , " Para Estar " and " Ilegal " all charted on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart . In 2011 , the group collaborated with Dominican musician Vicente García on his single " Mi Balcón " . 
 The group 's most recent single , " Saca , Prende y Sorprende " , released in 2014 , pays homage to Jamaican deejay and rapper Super Cat and advocates for the legalization of marijuana . Gonzalez describes the band 's upcoming record as " very different " from La Dulzura , noting that the group began working on new material while on tour approximately a year after the album 's release . 
 
 = = Style and lyrical themes = = 
 
 Cultura Profética has been described as roots reggae . The group has often made use of the moog synthesizer , an instrument commonly used in traditional reggae but is generally rare in contemporary reggae . Despite primarily performing reggae music , the group incorporates various other rhythms into its compositions , including those of Caribbean genres such as salsa . The song " Reggae Rústico " from Ideas Nuevas includes an extended soneo , an improvised call @-@ and @-@ response section common in the salsa genre , at its closing , calling for unity in reggae music . Additionally , the band 's music features a strong emphasis on improvisation and polyrhythmic patterns . Rodríguez notes that " We 've developed what I think is our own genre . We don 't consider ourselves a pop act but we do make popular music in the sense that we are supported by many people . People have finally understood what we do . " Leila Cobo of Billboard observed elements of jazz in the single " La Complicidad , " additionally describing it as " more mellow rock than reggae . " 
 Lyrically , the group addresses social issues including corruption , environmentalism , personal liberty , and Latin American identity . Canción de Alerta contains the song " Por qué cantamos , " an adaptation of Uruguayan writer Mario Benedetti 's poem of the same name . Author Eunice Rojas cites this as an example of the group using " the power of music to advance social causes . " The song " Suelta Los Amarres " from Ideas Nuevas discourages listeners from using violence to advance a political cause . However , the lyrics on La Dulzura place more emphasis on interpersonal relationships and love . Silva notes that the group refrains from writing " romantic " lyrics , noting that " romanticism has a connotation of suffering for love . We are talking about the love that elevates and purifies your soul . We are talking in the sense of the love that sets you free . " 
 
 = = Discography = = 
 
 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 
 Canción de Alerta ( 1998 ) 
 Ideas Nuevas ( 1999 ) 
 Diario ( 2002 ) 
 M.O.T.A. ( 2005 ) 
 La Dulzura ( 2010 ) 
 
 = = Band members = = 
 
 
 = = = Current members = = = 
 
 Willy Rodríguez — Bass Guitar , Vocals 
 Boris Bilbraut — Drums , Vocals 
 Omar Silva — Guitar , Bass Guitar 
 Juanqui Sulsona — Piano , Keyboards 
 Eliut González — Guitar 
 Eggie Santiago — Organ , Keyboards 
 Ernesto Rodriguez — Percussion 
 Patricia Lewis — Vocals 
 Adrianna Betancourt — Vocals 
 Victor Vazquez — Trombone 
 Kalani Trinidad — Flute & Saxophone 
 Jahaziel Garcia — Trumpet 
 
 = = = Former members = = = 
 
 Iván Gutiérrez — piano , brass arrangements 
 Sergio Orellana — keyboards , organ 
 Melvin Villanueva — piano 
 Juan Costa — rhythm guitar 
 Raúl Gaztambide — organ 
 Eduardo Fernández — trombone 
 Javier Joglar — tenor saxophone , flute 
 Luis Rafael Torres — tenor saxophone , alto saxophone , flute 
 Juan José " Cheo " Quiñones — trumpet 
 María Soledad Gaztambide — vocals 
 Yarimir Cabán , better known professionally as Mima — vocals 
 Eduardo " Edo " Sanz — drums , percussion 
 Omar Cruz — percussion 
 Beto Torrens , Juansi — percussion 
 Bayrex Jimenez — piano , keyboards
