= Hello Good Morning = 
 
 " Hello Good Morning " is a song by American rapper and producer Diddy and his band Dirty Money , from their debut album , Last Train to Paris . It was released from March 30 , 2010 as the album 's third single . The electronic dance song incorporates an acid squelch section in the middle 8 , ad was written by Marcella Araica , Richard Butler , Clifford " T.I. " Harris and Nathaniel " Danja " Hills who also produced the song . T.I. has a featured rap on the song . The song 's musical composition was inspired by Diddy 's experiences in Ibiza night clubs ; its lyrics focus around sex and money . Three official remixes were released alongside the main single : the Official Remix with Rick Ross & Nicki Minaj , the " Grime Remix " with Skepta , and a " Team UK remix " with Tinchy Stryder and Tinie Tempah . Critics noted the track as one of the better songs from Last Train to Paris , particularly for Danja 's production , but criticized the lyrics for being superficial and for lacking substance . 
 " Hello Good Morning " was promoted with several live television performances including on season nine of American Idol and Friday Night with Jonathan Ross , amongst others . An accompanying music video , filmed by Hype Williams , features Diddy – Dirty Money parting in Los Angeles , with T.I. enjoying the company of two ladies in an apartment and Diddy driving through the city at night . It was inspired by the 1995 film Heat . An edited version of the clip was made for the official remix , and a completely new street party @-@ themed video was filmed for the grime remix . At the time of release , " Hello Good Morning " became the album and group 's first single to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 , reaching No. 27 . Commercially , the single was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for selling in excess of 500 @,@ 000 copies . Internationally , the single peaked at No. 22 in UK , and was particularly successful on the German Black Chart and UK R & B Chart , reaching number one and number eight respectively . 
 
 = = Composition = = 
 
 " Hello Good Morning " was written by Marcella Araica , Richard Butler , T.I. , Nathaniel " Danja " Hills . The song which features T.I. , and was produced by Danja , is an electro @-@ dance song influenced by Diddy 's experiences in Ibiza where he visited the DC10 nightclub . The music influences included " Felix da Housecat , Erick Morillo , Deep Dish and DJ Hell " . According to Rap @-@ Up magazine , the lyrics refer to " keeping a party going till early hours of the morning " and see Diddy return to using his signature ad @-@ libs . Nicki Escudero from The Phoenix New Times noted the song 's superficial themes which included lyrics about " sex , money and cheating " Brandon Soderberg from The Village Voice noted the song 's bridge where there was an " epic acid @-@ squelch breakdown " . 
 
 = = Remixes = = 
 
 Several official remixes were released alongside the video to promote the song . The first of these remixes added an introduction verse from rapper Rick Ross and then a new verse later in the song from female rapper , Nicki Minaj . Labelled the " Official Remix " , it was released in the United States on June 29 , 2010 for digital download . A music video for this version was created by adding additional footage to the original video . It premiered on June 21 , 2010 . A second remix featuring just Ross 's additional verse was used for the song 's main music video which premiered on May 11 , 2010 A third remix was made for the UK , titled the " Team UK Remix " . This version featured Tinie Tempah and Tinchy Stryder in place of Minaj and Ross . It premiered on June 11 , 2010 on Tim Westwood 's Radio 1Xtra daytime show Westwood . It was released as track two on the UK Digital EP single , released June 20 , 2010 . A final remix was created after Diddy highlighted his intent to find a UK emcee to record a new version of the song with him . Skepta was chosen for the remix , which was released as the " Official Grime Remix " . It is the only remix which alters the song 's production , and was released only in the UK , on August 12 , 2010 . A video for the grime remix was released on November 5 , 2010 . On January 5 , 2010 , MTV reported the emergence of a new remix of " Hello Good Morning " . The new remix replaces T.I. ' s vocals with a new verse from Eminem . D.L. Chandler from MTV said " Slim Shady ’ s humorous verses sound right at home over producer Danja ’ s club @-@ ready banger . " 
 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 
 In a review by USA Today , " Hello Good Morning " was picked out as one of the best three songs on the Last Train to Paris . Nick Levine of Digital Spy gave the song three out of five stars in his review for the song , stating that although Dirty Money promised a new sound the song sounded like " Timba – pop , albeit one with a better @-@ than @-@ average hook . " He continued , " in Diddy 's final @-@ minute rap , [ it 's ] a reminder of how he jump @-@ started his journey towards a reported $ 300m fortune and a butler called Fonzworth Bentley . " Matt from Above & Beyond said it was the Danja @-@ produced beat and the T.I. feature that make the song good . Fraser McAlpine of BBC Music said " Diddy seems to have abandoned conventional rapping in favour of some Kanye – style automooing . He 's quite good at it , too . Adds a certain nasal edge to proceedings . There 's a middle bit , and it 's like nothing else in the song ... It sounds more like someone doing the " I 've lost my keys " song , just before they leave the house in the morning . The odd thing is that it was left in there . I mean if minimal is your bag , surely that 'd be the first bit to cut ? " He awarded in four out of five stars . Becky Bain of Idolator was also positive about the song , saying , " Lyrically and stylistically , it ’ s a pretty standard club track — over various synth beats , the song covers the usual topics : hot girls dancing , crowds waiting to have fun , and spending time in a five star suite with some five star freaks getting high all week ... But honestly , we ’ re just overjoyed this song isn ’ t just a thinly @-@ veiled four @-@ minute commercial for any one of Diddy ’ s various products . " 
 However Nicki Escudero of the Phoenix New Times said that although the song was good for what it is , it lacked substance . " Now that Diddy @-@ Dirty Money has had success with a superficial track about money , sex and cheating , here 's hoping the group will release a deeper song about something more meaningful . Unfortunately , hope can only go so far . " Meanwhile , Michael Cragg from The Guardian 's music blog commented that the UK remix featuring Skepta salvages what would otherwise be a boring Diddy track . " Thankfully , UK grime king , Skepta , has rescued the song by pushing Diddy to the periphery – his flow consists of going ' uh ' , ' Skepta ' and spelling out ' D.I.D.D.Y. # – setting off a smorgasbord of sonic explosions , tightening the whole thing up and making it sound a lot darker and more thrilling than a host of US producers could manage . Skepta also drops the following immortal line in the first verse : ' I like tea , but I don 't like crumpets . ' A man after my own heart . " 
 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 
 Two weeks after Diddy – Dirty Money 's appearance on American Idol , " Hello Good Morning " debuted on the U.S. Hot Digital Songs chart at No. 17 , and the single debuted on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 at No. 34 . Eventually the song peaked at No. 27 on the Hot 100 in the chart week dated July 24 , 2010 . At the time of its charting , it was the first single from Last Train to Paris to appear on the Billboard Hot 100 . Consequently , the song became Diddy 's best charting Hot 100 single since his 2007 hit single " Last Night " with Keyshia Cole , as well as his eleventh top @-@ thirty Hot 100 single . In comparison , " Hello Good Morning " is Dawn Richard 's second lowest charting Hot 100 single , but first appearance on the chart since 2008 's " Damaged " as part of girlgroup , Danity Kane . For Kalenna Harper , it is her first Hot 100 chart appearance . T.I. , who is featured on the song , received his highest Hot 100 chart peak , since his 2009 single " Dead and Gone " with Justin Timberlake . On August 18 , 2010 , the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified the single gold for selling at least 500 @,@ 000 copies . On the official end of year charts , compiled by Billboard , " Hello Good Morning " ranked at No. 29 on the U.S. Hot Rap Songs chart and No. 65 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 Additionally the single proved successful on urban charts around the world . " Hello Good Morning " peaked at No. 8 on the U.S. Hot Rap Songs chart and No. 13 on the U.S. Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . In Germany , it topped the Deutsche Black Charts ( German Black Charts ) while reaching top @-@ ten on the United Kingdom 's R & B Singles Chart and No. 24 on Australia 's Urban Singles Chart . On the main singles charts , the song was most successful in the UK , where it charted at No. 22 on the UK Singles Chart . At the time of release , it became T.I. ' s best UK charting single since 2009 's " Dead and Gone " , and his overall joint sixth @-@ best charting UK single along with 2006 's " Why You Wanna " . In the rest of Europe the single had mixed success , reaching the top @-@ twenty in Belgium , on both the Ultratip Flemish and Wallonian single charts . In Canada the single managed to chart at No. 55 , and in Australia it peaked at No. 44 . According to a press release by Interscope Records , as of March 25 , 2011 , " Hello Good Morning " has sold 1 million digital downloads worldwide . 
 
 = = Music video = = 
 
 
 = = = Background and concept = = = 
 
 The music video for " Hello Good Morning " was directed by Hype Williams , and premiered on May 11 , 2010 , through the group 's official VEVO account . Later on May 23 , 2010 , a behind the scenes video was released , revealing that the video was filmed in Agua Dulce , California and Los Angeles . Swizz Beatz , Rico Love and Rick Ross all make cameos in the video . The video uses a remix of the song which is the same as the album version , but features an introduction rap from Ross . Dawn Richard said the concept of the video was based on the 1995 film Heat starring Robert De Niro and Al Pacino . T.I. ' s scenes were amongst the last to be filmed , and took place in an apartment in Bel Aire , CA . 
 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 
 The opening scene begins with panoramic camera shots of a helicopter flying over Los Angeles , at night . Then during Rick Ross 's verse the female members of the group appear posing in the background while Ross raps for the camera . Swizz Beatz and Rico Love make cameos alongside Ross . In a third scene , Diddy can be seen driving through the city at night in a black Bugatti Veyron . For the song 's chorus , Dawn Richard and Kalenna Harper take the lead , ordering drinks in a bar and enjoying the night club . A forth scene for T.I. ' s verse sees the camera focus on T.I. serenading two women in an apartment . Throughout the video the images flicker between the various scenes . In the final part of the video , and during the bridge , all three members of the group appear outside against a backdrop of thick smoke and bright red fireworks . There is a final flash of fireworks before the camera fades completely , to black . 
 
 = = = Remix videos = = = 
 
 The official remix video premiered on June 21 , 2010 , this version features Rick Ross and Nicki Minaj . The music video takes footage from the original version , but adds several new scenes . When Diddy drives through LA at night , the scene was refilmed with Minaj as his front seat passenger . Additionally there is another new scene where Minaj , in a blue curly wig , raps some of her verse against a dark backdrop . For the " Grime Remix " of the song , a completely new video was filmed Glasgow , Scotland on November 5 , 2010 and features cameos from Boy Better Know & Chipmunk . In this version , Diddy @-@ Dirty Money and Skepta pose for the camera in an elevator before joining Chipmunk and Boy Better Know , backstage at a gig . The cameras follow the group and their guests as they move around backstage partying and walking the streets at night . 
 
 = = Live performances = = 
 
 Diddy – Dirty Money performed " Hello Good Morning " live for the first time on March 31 , 2010 , on the ninth season of American Idol . The next performance did not come until June 4 , 2010 , this time on Good Morning America . They then reprised the performance five days later on French TV show , Le Grand Journal . On June 12 , 2010 , the group performed ( with guest drummer Matt Helders of Arctic Monkeys ) on Friday Night with Jonathan Ross . Dirty Money later performed " Hello Good Morning " at the 2010 Teen Choice Awards on August 9 , 2010 . 
 
 = = Track listing = = 
 
 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 
 " Hello Good Morning " was recorded at Chalice Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California and mixed at Larrabee Studios in Universal City , California . 
 Marcella Araica – songwriter , engineer 
 Richard " Rico Love " Butler – songwriter , vocal production 
 Smith Carlson – assistant engineer 
 Sean " Diddy " Combs – lead vocals 
 Steve " Rock Star " Dickey – engineer 
 Clifford " T.I. " Harris – songwriter , featured vocals 
 Nathaniel " Danja " Hills – songwriter , producer , instruments 
 Jaycen Joshua – mixing 
 Giancarlo Lino – mixing 
 Dirty Money ( Dawn Richard , Kalenna Harper ) – lead vocals , vocal production 
 Jared Newcomb – assistant engineer 
 Edward Sanders – assistant engineer 
 Matthew Testa – engineer 
 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 
 
 = = Radio and release history = =
