= The Firefly ( Fringe ) = 
 
 " The Firefly " is the 10th episode of the third season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe , and the 53rd episode overall . The episode centers on a chain of events created by Walter crossing over into the parallel universe in 1985 that has had subtle but significant effects in the present . Christopher Lloyd guest @-@ starred as retired rocker Roscoe Joyce . 
 As the first episode in its new Friday time slot , " The Firefly " aired on January 21 , 2011 in the United States to 4 @.@ 88 million viewers , outperforming the previous episode " Marionette " Thursday night viewership by 18 % . Time shifted viewership added 42 % in its ratings . It received generally positive reviews , with many praising the storyline as " elegant " and " beautiful . " 
 
 = = Plot = = 
 
 The Fringe team is brought to a nursing home , where Roscoe Joyce ( Christopher Lloyd ) , the former keyboardist of the band Violet Sedan Chair , was seen talking to his son Bobby ( Nick Ouellette ) who had died in 1985 , as well as evidence of an Observer . Walter Bishop ( John Noble ) , meeting his musical hero , requests to take Roscoe back to his lab to help Roscoe remember what his son said . Walter is able to help Roscoe remember much of his past since the loss of his son through therapy that includes helping Roscoe to recall his piano @-@ playing skills . Roscoe shortly recalls the conversation with his son , which was actually a message from the Observer September to Walter . September ( Michael Cerveris ) soon appears at the lab and requests to speak to Walter . 
 As they walk , September reminds Walter of the damage he did when he brought Peter from the parallel universe . September recounts the events of one such chain : in the prime universe , three months after Walter 's crossing , Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) captured a firefly which set into motion a chain of events that eventually led to the death of a pedestrian in a car accident . September mysteriously departs when Walter answers a telephone call , but not before leaving him with a message : " give him the keys and save the girl . " Later , Walter returns Roscoe to the nursing home . Roscoe thanks him and explains that the recent events reminded him of the last phone call he had with his son , where Bobby said he had dreamed of meeting Roscoe in a nursing home in the future . Roscoe is remorseful that Bobby died shortly after that call when a car struck him while crossing the street , which led to the breakup of the band . Walter realizes that Roscoe 's son was the pedestrian that was previously alluded to by September . 
 Unbeknownst to the Fringe team , September has engineered several events in the last few days , including stopping an armed robbery to help the asthmatic female employee ( Olivia Cheng ) recover from an asthma attack , taking her inhaler . When Walter hears of this witness , he requests Peter and Agent Olivia Dunham ( Anna Torv ) to bring her to his lab , believing her to be related to the Observer 's warning . Minutes from the lab , September rams the car in which the woman is being transported , initiating another asthma attack . September races from the scene , prompting Peter to follow him in Walter 's car , requesting Walter to " give me the keys and save the girl . " Walter realizes that September has been orchestrating the events leading up to this point and urges Peter not to go , believing that following the advice of the Observer might lead to Peter 's death . Walter eventually relents and returns to help the woman , creating a makeshift inhaler before emergency help arrives . Meanwhile , Peter and Olivia follow the Observer to a rooftop . Peter corners September , who says " It must be very difficult , being a father " , before he shoots Peter with an energy blast that knocks him off his feet . Olivia arrives in time to give chase to the Observer but September disappears from an adjacent rooftop . 
 While Walter and Agent Astrid Farnsworth ( Jasika Nicole ) ensure that the witness is safe at the hospital , Olivia takes Peter back to the lab . Peter , suffering from a headache , takes an aspirin and drinks out of what he believes to be an ordinary bottle of milk from the fridge . In reality , the milk contains a serum developed by Walter in order to help him recover his full mental function . However , the serum was incorrectly prepared , which causes Peter to begin convulsing . Over the phone , Walter directs Olivia to inject Peter with the correct compounds in order to save his life . Walter realizes that the serum would have killed him if he had consumed it , and that this was another step in the Observer 's plot . Later that evening , September meets with another Observer , and identifies the fact that Walter was able to let Peter go , despite believing that he may not survive , and that when the time comes , they can expect Walter to do it again . 
 In a side plot , Olivia and Peter attempt to reorganize their relationship after Olivia receives a book ( If You Meet The Buddha On The Road , Kill Him ! by Sheldon Kopp ) from Peter that he had originally ordered for Olivia 's doppelgänger from the parallel universe . 
 
 = = Production = = 
 
 " The Firefly " was co @-@ written by co @-@ showrunners J.H. Wyman and Jeff Pinkner , while being directed by Supernatural veteran Charles Beeson . On October 20 , 2010 , TV Guide announced that Back to the Future star Christopher Lloyd had been cast in an upcoming episode as " Walter 's musical hero " . Noble explained Lloyd 's role : " We all know how much Walter loves music , right ? Well this fellow was one of his icons . He adored this man . So Walter gets to be a bit of a fanboy " . Lloyd began shooting the episode in late October . Soon before the episode aired , Lloyd told reporters " I was very excited for this role . My character is going through an experience he never expected to happen to him , and he 's adjusting to that . " Lloyd also added he felt welcomed in as a part of the ensemble cast . In a conference call interview with journalists , John Noble explained that " probably the best fun that I 've had [ on Fringe ] was doing the stuff with Chris Lloyd , because it was two crazy old guys just trying desperately to communicate with each other . We had a lot of laughs . There was a common thread of trying to find the music again , because Chris ' character had forgotten how to play the piano , so we go through this journey of bringing the music back to him , and [ it 's a ] thrill to Walter . This happens all the way through this very complicated episode " . 
 The band name of Lloyd 's character Roscoe Joyce , " Violet Sedan Chair , " is a fictional band that Walter Bishop had mentioned the previous season , in the episode Grey Matters . J.J. Abrams had also named @-@ dropped the fictional band two years earlier in an issue of Wired for which he had guest @-@ edited , alluding to the band 's album , Seven Suns , recorded in the 1970s . Several months prior to the broadcast of " The Firefly " , a number of vinyl records of Seven Suns were shipped to a select number of independent record stores across the United States , which have been discovered by some people . The album does contain twelve songs in the style of psychedelic and folk . The album itself has been briefly shown in the series . 
 As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children , focusing on the science seen in " The Firefly " , with the intention of having " students learn about pharmacology and the interactions that occur between a living organism and chemicals that affect normal or abnormal biochemical functions . " 
 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 
 Walter explains that the red and blue sunglasses he uses in order to see Roscoe Joyce 's aura were sent to him by his friend , Doctor Jacoby from Washington State . This is a reference to the television series Twin Peaks , set in Washington State where Doctor Lawrence Jacoby is the local psychiatrist who also owns a pair of the same sunglasses . Reviewers also contrasted the casting of Christopher Lloyd , better known for his role of the scientist " Doc " Brown from the Back to the Future trilogy which took place in 1985 , to that of a character involved with time travel involving the year 1985 . Some journalists have speculated that the episode 's title was in reference to Joss Whedon 's Firefly series , which while critically acclaimed was cancelled mid @-@ season after being scheduled in the Friday night death slot . However , though " The Firefly " was the first Fringe episode to be first aired in the new Friday night slot , the producer had already selected the title of the episode prior to the Fox Network rescheduling . 
 
 = = Reception = = 
 
 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 
 In November 2010 , Fox announced that Fringe was being moved to Friday nights as a part of the network 's midseason overhaul , to air after the fourth season of their reality series Kitchen Nightmares . The move meant that Fringe would be airing against Supernatural , a show with a similar science fiction genre , though this competition did not begin until Fringe 's third Friday episode " Concentrate and Ask Again " . Fox 's popular reality series American Idol took Fringe 's timeslot , as it was shifted a day later to Wednesdays and Thursdays . Executive producer J.H. Wyman stated in an interview that they were excited and believed Friday nights are " open territory that can be conquered ... [ We believe ] we can actually deliver like The X @-@ Files did . ... I think we both agree it 's a good opportunity " . Wyman elaborated that the show 's high DVR numbers proved that though fans were watching the show , they did not want to do so on Thursdays . Co @-@ executive producer Jeff Pinkner felt that if the show " can build a fan base on and carve out some territory on Friday night , we can be there for years " . 
 The episode was originally going to air on January 28 until it was moved to a week earlier , on January 21 behind the season premiere of Kitchen Nightmares . " The Firefly " was the first Fringe episode to broadcast in its Friday slot , and many journalists considered the pending viewership numbers critical for the future of the show . The episode was the most watched show of the night , earning a 1 @.@ 9 / 6 share or about 4 @.@ 88 million viewers in the 18 – 49 age group . This figure was slightly higher than the average viewership for Fringe in the first half of the 2010 @-@ 2011 television season , and 18 % higher than the previous episode , " Marionette " . When time shifted viewership over the following three days is considered , the episode received a 42 % ratings increase with a 2 @.@ 7 rating share , and within 7 days after its airing , reported a total of 6 @.@ 7 million viewers with 2 @.@ 8 rating , representing a 37 % increase from the live broadcast . Fringe and its lead @-@ in show , Kitchen Nightmares , resulted in Fox 's highest rated Friday night with entertainment programs since 2008 . 
 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 
 " The Firefly " was well received by critics who considered the episode to be backed by a strong script . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly considered " The Firefly " as one of the series ' " finest episodes " , calling on the show 's many qualities : 
 The pull of family ; the knotty complexity of romance ; the way sci @-@ fi can provide fresh metaphors for the most frequently explored ideas and emotions ; the way we encounter humor and surprise even in the midst of anguish and regret — this is the stuff of which Fringe is made . 
 The A.V. Club 's Zack Handlen rated the episode an " A " in considering the " elegance " of the complicated Rube Goldberg @-@ like plot , and praised the " beautiful , beautiful writing " in the reveal of the connection between Walter 's actions and Roscoe 's loss . Time 's James Poniewozik also enjoyed the elegant plot , calling the episode " an impressive outing for the series to welcome back its fans with " ; Poniewozik also appreciated John Noble 's performance as he " made Walter 's regret , and the toll it has taken , real — while also pulling off an amusing turn as an overawed , elderly rock fanboy " . 
 Andrew Hanson of the Los Angeles Times , though somewhat confused to the cause @-@ and @-@ effect of the Observer 's plot , he still found the show enjoyable , and called it " the Fringe version of the butterfly effect " , a trope often used in other shows to show the impact of small changes in the characters ' lives . IGN 's Ramsey Isler gave the episode a rating of 7 @.@ 5 / 10 , stating that was " an important part of the setup for the second half of the season " with strong character development , but felt the pacing was slow and needed more action . Television Without Pity graded the episode a " B + " . The A.V. Club staff highlighted the episode in their review of the best television shows of 2011 . 
 
 = = = Awards and nomination = = = 
 
 At the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards , John Noble submitted " The Firefly " , along with " Entrada " and " The Day We Died " , for consideration in the Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series category , but did not receive a nomination .
