= TV Everywhere = 
 
 TV Everywhere ( also known as authenticated streaming or authenticated video on @-@ demand ) refers to a business model wherein access to streaming video content from a television channel requires users to " authenticate " themselves as current subscribers to the channel , via an account provided by their participating pay television provider , in order to access the content . 
 Under the model , broadcasters offer their customers the ability to access content from their channels through internet @-@ based services and mobile apps — either live or on @-@ demand , as part of their subscription to the service . Time Warner Cable first proposed the concept in 2009 ; in 2010 , many television providers and networks began to roll out TV Everywhere services for their subscribers , including major networks such as TBS and TNT ( whose owner was an early supporter of the concept ) , ESPN , and HBO among others . Broadcast television networks also began to adopt TV Everywhere restrictions for their online content . 
 Although providers have touted the advantages of being able to access content across multiple platforms ( including on the internet , and on mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets ) as part of their television subscription , TV Everywhere services have been criticized for being difficult for end @-@ users to set up , while media activists have criticized the concept for being a paywall that extends the existing oligarchy of the subscription television industry to the internet , and considering it to be collusion against " cord cutters " — those who drop cable and satellite entirely in favor of accessing content via terrestrial television , the internet , and subscription video on demand ( SVOD ) services . 
 
 = = Rationale = = 
 
 TV Everywhere services were developed in an attempt to compete with the market trend of " cord cutting " , where consumers drop traditional pay television subscriptions in favor of accessing TV content exclusively through over @-@ the @-@ air television and / or online on @-@ demand services , including Hulu , Netflix , YouTube , and other sources . Authenticated streaming and video on @-@ demand services allow traditional television providers to directly compete with these competitors , and add value to existing television subscriptions in an effort to retain subscribers . 
 In particular , broadcasters and providers have emphasized the use of TV Everywhere services to allow multi @-@ platform access to their content , on devices such as personal computers , smartphones , tablets , and video game consoles . 
 
 = = History = = 
 
 
 = = = Precursors = = = 
 
 ESPN first introduced a TV Everywhere @-@ like concept with ESPN360 , a service which allowed users to stream sports programming from its networks either live or on @-@ demand through a website . However , access to ESPN360 was restricted to the users of internet service providers who had negotiated deals with ESPN to offer the service ; a model closer in nature to cable television carriage . Similar tactics were soon used by several other channels , such as NFL Network ( who used the technique to restrict access to its Game Extra service for Thursday Night Football ) and Epix . David Preschlack , ESPN 's executive vice president for affiliate sales and marketing , foresaw a future in the model , believing that access to exclusive content would soon play a greater role in competition between high @-@ speed internet providers . Although the model was deemed a violation of the principles of net neutrality by critics , the FCC 's policies on net neutrality only apply to ISPs and not content providers . 
 
 = = = Introduction and adoption = = = 
 
 In 2009 , Time Warner Cable announced an initiative known as TV Everywhere , a set of principles which were " designed to serve as a framework to facilitate deployment of online television content in a way that is consumer friendly , pro @-@ competitive . " The concept would enable users of their respective cable television services to access live and on @-@ demand online content from channels that they subscribe to by using an account @-@ based authentication system . TWC CEO Jeffrey Bewkes believed that the TV Everywhere principles were " good concepts " that are " likely to be the general direction for all TV networks and all the distribution connections that are out there . " That summer , both TWC and Comcast began trials of services based on the system ; Turner Broadcasting was an early supporter of the system , providing access to TBS and TNT content as part of the trials . Comcast officially launched a public beta of its TV Everywhere @-@ based portal , Xfinity Fancast , in December 2009 for all double @-@ play television and internet customers . Afterwards , other providers began to follow suit . 
 In 2010 , broadcasters and television providers began a wider roll @-@ out of TV Everywhere @-@ based services ; for the 2010 Winter Olympics , NBC Sports offered live and video on @-@ demand access to events throughout the Games that required users to authenticate for access . Also in February , HBO launched HBO Go , a video on demand service exclusive to HBO subscribers on participating providers . In September 2010 , Disney would begin launching an array of TV Everywhere @-@ based services , including WatchESPN ( allowing users to stream ESPN 's entire suite of channels ) , accompanied by the later launches of similar " Watch " services for Disney Channel and Disney XD . 
 In August 2011 , Fox became the first over @-@ the @-@ air network to restrict on @-@ demand access with a TV Everywhere @-@ based system ; " next day " on @-@ demand episodes ( either through its website or Hulu , itself a joint venture between Fox , NBC , and ABC at the time ) would only be available online to users authenticating themselves as a subscriber to a cable or satellite provider , or those who subscribe to the Hulu Plus service . All other users would be subject to an 8 @-@ day delay . On September 1 , 2011 , fellow Fox property Big Ten Network ( a college sports network dedicated to the Big Ten Conference , operated in partnership with Fox Sports ) also launched a TV Everywhere service known as BTN2Go . 
 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 
 Matt Strauss , Comcast senior vice president of digital and emerging platforms , considered the 2012 Summer Olympics to be a " watershed " event for TV Everywhere services ; NBCUniversal announced that a total of nearly 10 million authenticated devices accessed its online coverage during the Games across both the NBCOlympics.com site and NBC Olympics Live Extra app ; in particular , parent company Comcast accounted for 3 @.@ 3 million devices from 1 @.@ 5 million users . Following the Games , the NBC Olympics Live Extra app was re @-@ launched as NBC Sports Live Extra , serving as a general TV Everywhere app for NBC Sports . TV Everywhere services also began to appear in Canada , with the Canadian launch of HBO Go in 2012 , and the 2013 announcement of TV Everywhere services from Bell Media ( beginning with Bravo Go , and also including CTV Go and TSN Go ) and Shaw Media ( beginning with Global ) . The majority of Canadian broadcasters are vertically integrated ; both Bell and Shaw operate internet service providers and national satellite television services . 
 In May 2013 , ABC released its Watch ABC mobile app , which allows viewers on participating providers to access live streams from participating ABC affiliates . In December 2013 , ABC confirmed that it would impose a similar restriction to Fox for " next day " on @-@ demand episodes beginning on January 6 , 2014 , with 7 @-@ day exclusivity for authenticated users and Hulu Plus subscribers . NBC unveiled its own plans for a similar TV Everywhere app to its affiliate board in April 2014 . 
 In November 2015 , after negotiations surrounding revenue sharing and infrastructural mandates ( including a proposed requirement that the games only be available through the league 's existing apps ) , Major League Baseball reached a three @-@ year deal with Fox to allow it to offer in @-@ market online streaming on Fox Sports Go ( though streamed using MLB Advanced Media infrastructure ) for the 16 teams that it holds regional rights to through the Fox Sports Networks division . In December 2015 , Discovery Communications , a long hold @-@ out on the concept , launched Discovery Go , a centralized TV Everywhere service and mobile app for Discovery Channel , TLC , as well as sister networks American Heroes Channel , Animal Planet , Destination America , Discovery Life , Investigation Discovery , Science Channel , and Velocity . 
 
 = = Reception = = 
 
 The TV Everywhere concept has been met with mixed reception . Some broadcasters were initially hesitant to introduce TV Everywhere services , with concerns that they might affect advertising revenue and not be adequately counted by Nielsen ratings . Media activists have criticized the system for protecting the existing closed , regionalized oligarchy of multichannel television by tying internet @-@ based content to traditional television providers , thus harming competitors that are purely internet @-@ based . Public Knowledge believed that " under the ' TV Everywhere ' plan , no other program distributors would be able to emerge , and no consumers will be able to ' cut the cord ' because they find what they want online . As a result , consumers will be the losers . " 
 In 2010 , Free Press released a report entitled " TV Nowhere : How the Cable Industry Is Colluding to Kill Online TV " , contending that " under TV Everywhere , traditional cable TV distributors will continue to serve only consumers within their current geographically limited footprints , not competing with providers in other areas " and that " by tying programming to local cable subscriptions , while denying content to pure online TV distributors , the incumbent industry hopes to artificially reproduce the lack of competition for TV distribution to which it is accustomed , based on geographical fiefdoms and turf . " The National Cable and Telecommunications Association ( NCTA ) denied many of Free Press ' arguments , stating that " [ TV Everywhere ] is an effort to ensure more content than ever is distributed over the Internet at no extra charge to consumers . " On the other hand , Songwriters Guild of America president Rick Carnes praised the TV Everywhere concept and other recent developments for helping to provide easier , legal access to premium content online . 
 In July 2014 , BTIG analyst Richard Greenfield criticized the video on demand services offered through TV Everywhere systems for being ad @-@ supported . In examples from FX and TNT , he noticed that ads often repeated , and that in TNT 's case , its version of an episode of The Last Ship included 20 minutes of unskippable ads across 45 minutes of programming . In conclusion , he contended that viewers would rather wait for programs to appear on commercial @-@ free SVOD services rather than use TV Everywhere services . 
 
 = = = Viewer awareness = = = 
 
 Despite efforts by broadcasters to educate viewers on TV Everywhere services and how to utilize them ( including Fox , who featured a promotional video with Jane Lynch as her Glee character Sue Sylvester , describing the process as being less painful than waterboarding ) , critics and end @-@ users criticized the registration and authentication processes for being frustrating and difficult . In response , providers took steps to improve their user experiences ; Disney reported that use of its TV Everywhere services increased after it simply changed its process to use the term " verify " instead of " authenticate " , Comcast and Cablevision introduced systems that automatically verify users with their residential gateways , and Synacor ( a provider of authentication platforms used by providers ) added the ability for users to link their provider account to a social network login , such as Facebook or Twitter . 
 For the 2012 Summer Olympics and 2014 Winter Olympics , NBC worked closer with providers to help educate users , and produced customized marketing materials and video tutorials featuring Carson Daly ( 2012 ) and Ryan Seacrest ( 2014 ) to help inform users . As an incentive , NBC also allowed authenticated users to enter a sweepstakes to win a trip to London ( 2012 ) or Rio de Janeiro ( 2014 ) . Still , dissatisfaction with the system and the quality of NBC 's overall coverage led to an increase in the use of virtual private network ( VPN ) services to access the more comprehensive online coverage of the Games being provided by broadcasters in Canada ( CTV in London , CBC in Sochi ) and the United Kingdom ( BBC ) , which did not use authentication , but cannot normally be viewed inside the United States due to territorial rights restrictions . 
 In April 2014 , the Cable & Telecommunications Association for Marketing ( CTAM ) unveiled an industry @-@ wide initiative for marketing and educating subscribers about TV Everywhere services provided by broadcasters and providers ; these efforts include a stylized " tv everywhere " logo which the organization intends providers to use as a unified brand to denote TV Everywhere services . The logo consists of interlocking rectangles , representing multiple " screens " ( platforms ) for viewing content . The association also provided design recommendations for TV Everywhere user experiences , aiming to alleviate the confusion that had been experienced by users during the authentication process . 
 
 = = = Adoption = = = 
 
 In a December 2013 survey of 4 @,@ 205 pay television subscribers , NPD Group found that 21 % of them used a TV Everywhere service at least once per month , and that 90 % of them were satisfied with the experience . NPD analyst Russ Crupnick felt that " aggressive " use of the model was helping to counter cord cutting , which " speaks to the level of engagement they have with programming and a comfort in using the Internet to both access and interact with that programming . " The study also found that 3 out of 10 pay television subscribers who were also subscribed to an SVOD service used TV Everywhere services at least once a week ( in comparison to 2 out of 10 for those who were not ) . 
 Amid criticism of NBC 's coverage , adoption of NBC 's TV Everywhere services during the 2014 Winter Olympics was still significantly large : on February 21 , 2014 , coverage of the Men 's hockey semi @-@ final featuring the U.S. and Canada recorded the largest Live Extra audience in NBC Sports history , with 2 @.@ 12 million unique viewers , augmenting the average NBCSN television audience of 3 @.@ 9 million . ESPN 's coverage of the 2014 FIFA World Cup drew similarly heavy online viewership : during a group stage match between the U.S. and Portugal , at least 1 @.@ 7 million concurrent viewers were using WatchESPN ( though , not all of the viewers were necessarily watching the game ) . 
 In December 2015 , research firm GfK estimated that 53 % of the United States ' pay television subscribers have used a TV Everywhere service — an increase from 42 % in 2012 , that overall use had doubled since 2012 , and 79 % of those surveyed found the login process easy . However , only 25 % of those surveyed were aware of the term " TV Everywhere " or the CTAM logo , leading to the firm believing that consumer awareness and education was still a " critical missing piece " in the adoption of these services . 
 
 = = = Platform non @-@ neutrality = = = 
 
 In 2014 , Comcast was criticized for its decision to arbitrarily block access to HBO Go on PlayStation 3 and Roku devices , but still allowing its use on competing Apple TV and Xbox 360 . Comcast similarly blocked access to Showtime Anytime on Roku as well . A spokesperson for the provider stated that " with every new website , device or player we authenticate , we need to work through technical integration and customer service which takes time and resources . Moving forward , we will continue to prioritize as we partner with various players . " 
 During both the FCC 's net neutrality hearings and comments regarding Comcast 's then @-@ proposed merger with Time Warner Cable ( which , by contrast , allows HBO Go access on all supported devices ) , Roku criticized the provider for contradicting the TV Everywhere concept by discriminating against specific devices , thus prioritizing its own on @-@ demand platform over external services . The company argued that providers could selectively favor certain platforms over others , further stating that " a large and powerful MVPD may use this leverage in negotiations with content providers or operators of streaming platforms , ultimately favoring parties that can either afford to pay for the privilege of authentication , or have other business leverage that can be used as a counterweight to discriminatory authentication . " 
 On December 15 , 2014 , Comcast enabled the ability to use HBO Go and Showtime Anytime on Roku devices . However , Comcast still blocks HBO Go on PlayStation consoles .
