= Ain 't It Fun ( Paramore song ) = 
 
 " Ain 't It Fun " is a song by American rock band Paramore , released as the fourth single from their self @-@ titled fourth studio album Paramore ( 2013 ) . Produced by musician Justin Meldal @-@ Johnsen , the song was recorded in Los Angeles . Development for it began with a keyboard loop recorded by its guitarist , Taylor York . Instruments including xylophone and bass guitar were later brought , along with a six @-@ member gospel choir . York and the band 's vocalist , Hayley Williams , wrote the song based on her experience of relocating and the latter 's subsequent attitude . 
 The song received critical acclaim from music critics , who hailed its musical diversity . It was serviced to mainstream radio in the United States and Italy ; a 12 @-@ inch vinyl of the single was released for Record Store Day 2014 . The song became Paramore 's highest peaking single on the US Billboard Hot 100 , peaking at number 10 and received ' double platinum ' certification from the RIAA having sold over two million singles . Internationally , the song garnered moderate commercial outcomes , reaching the top 40 of Australian , Canadian and Venezuelan charts . On February 8 , 2015 , the song won the Grammy Award for Best Rock Song at the 57th ceremony , becoming Paramore 's first Grammy win , and making Williams the first woman to score that honor since Alanis Morissette in 1999 . 
 " Ain 't It Fun " was performed on television several times , including on The Voice , Late Night with Seth Meyers and American Idol . It was also included in the band 's The Self @-@ Titled Tour ( 2013 – 15 ) . After the original music video directed by Jonathan Desbiens was cancelled , a second visual was directed by Sophia Peer . The latter , released in January 2014 , documents the band attempting to break a series of world records . 
 
 = = Recording and development = = 
 
 The first song completed in Los Angeles for Paramore , " Ain 't It Fun " was produced by musician Justin Meldal @-@ Johnsen . Development for the song started in a hotel room , where Taylor York created an audio loop with his keyboard , which Williams likened to works by Siouxsie and the Banshees and Paula Abdul . Upon hearing it , Hayley Williams proposed that they should write lyrics to it . Later , Williams and York started layering their voices to imitate those of gospel choir members . Six months later , they recorded with a gospel choir composed of six individuals : Brandon Hampton , Joslyn James , Katherine and Sean Dancy , Talitha Manor and Yolanda Harris @-@ Dancy . Williams , who was familiarized with gospel music , linked the inclusion of a gospel choir in the song to her upbringing , in which she frequently went to churches . Williams stated that the song was inspired by the band 's " roots " , explaining that she had grown up with " pop , funk and soul " . 
 Jeremy Davis — the band 's bassist — expounded on what they felt before releasing the song , " After we started writing weird stuff like ' Ain 't It Fun ' , we got nervous . But that was a comfort . We 've grown and we don 't like the same music we liked , so why would [ our fans ] not ? That idea kept us pushing ourselves . " York considered that the decision to bring a gospel choir would have been difficult to approve if the original lineup of the band had remained . The track was mixed by Ken Andrews , and mastered by Ted Jensen at Sterling Sound Studios . 
 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 
 Written in the key of E major , " Ain 't It Fun " paces at a moderate tempo of 104 beats per minute . The song features instrumentation from a " happy " xylophone and a " rubbery " bass guitar . An editor of the Corvallis Gazette @-@ Times described its melody as " cheery " and " propulsive " , while Sean Adams from Drowned in Sound called it " infectious " . Although its main genre is pop rock , Adams and Rebecca Nicholson of The Guardian denoted the song as delving into pop , more than the band 's previous material . The former also compared it to the works of Incubus , while Nicholson stated , " [ it ] sounds as if Alexander O 'Neal has just discovered Refused 's back catalogue " . Theon Weber of Spin labeled it as " bouncy " while denoting it as a new wave song . Writing for The A.V. Club , Annie Zaleski described the song as a mixture of rhythm and blues and pop ; Jon Dolan of Rolling Stone characterized it as " soul @-@ powered " . Cameron Adams from News.com.au described it as a funk rock song , while Scott Heisel from Alternative Press classified it as a " blast of new jack swing " . Barbara Schultz at Common Sense Media categorized it as a " funky alt @-@ rock arrangement " . 
 The gospel choir first appears in the song during its bridge . Referencing the choir 's feature , David Renshaw of NME commented that the song " pull [ s ] a Sister Act 2 . " The vocal ranges of Williams and the gospel choir spans from B3 to C ♯ 5 . The former 's vocal performance was described by Stereogum 's Chris DeVille as having influences of Michael Jackson , whereas Zaleski compared Williams ' vocal style in " Ain 't It Fun " to that of Mariah Carey . Heisel considered that the participation of the choir helped Williams sing " some of her most soulful vocals ever . " Joseph R. Atilano of the Philippine Daily Inquirer further analyzed Williams ' vocal performance in the song : 
 [ ... ] lead vocalist Hayley Williams is starting to show more of her musical chops – from her crooning to the soulful “ touches ” in her singing style , particularly in this single . These nuances in her voice signify to me that , vocally , she has entered her prime already . You can hear these changes specifically in the chorus and refrain sections of this single wherein she sings with greater confidence . Here , the versatility of her voice takes shape and we begin to take serious notice of what she can do more behind the mic . 
 The track 's lyrics , structured in verse – chorus form and written in second person narrative , predominantly feature a sarcastic tone . They were inspired by Williams ' decision to move from Nashville to Los Angeles . She considered this idea after feeling overwhelmed by the repercussion , in Nashville , of Josh and Zac Farro 's departure from Paramore . Williams said , " I took off for L.A. as if it was going to be some kind of paradise or saving grace . I got there and realized that my problems were following me . Okay , so I was having a bad six months ? Get over it . [ sic ] " The song was penned as a message regarding her behavior , in order for her to cope with her decision . She stated , " No one else was saying that to me , so I had to say it to myself . " musicOMH 's Thomas Ingham interpreted its lyrics as focusing on a " serious ' all alone in the world ' " theme , while Corvallis Gazette @-@ Times 's journalist called them " blunt " and wrote that they discuss " growing up " . The writer also believed that its theme would make the song a prominent track at graduation ceremonies . Atilano viewed a contrast between the song 's melody and lyrical content . However , he noted that its " sunny " sonority made it " pleasant " to hear . 
 
 = = Release and live performances = = 
 
 " Ain 't It Fun " was issued as a promotional CD single in the United Kingdom on August 26 , 2013 . The track was serviced to American mainstream stations on February 4 , 2014 , serving as Paramore 's fourth single . In the following month , it was announced that Paramore would participate in the 2014 Record Store Day with the release of a 12 @-@ inch single for " Ain 't It Fun " . The single , designed by Williams to look like a broken vinyl , was released on April 19 . It contains the original version of the song , along with a Dutch Uncles @-@ produced remix of it . In Italy , the song was serviced to contemporary hit radio on March 30 , 2014 by Atlantic . On June 24 , 2014 , Atlantic released an extended play ( EP ) featuring the song 's radio edit as well as three remixes of the song . 
 The song was included in the setlist of the band 's third worldwide tour , The Self @-@ Titled Tour . For each performance of the song , the band was accompanied by a gospel choir , who sang alongside Williams . Jason Lipshutz of Billboard commented , " Williams kept conjuring the refrain [ of " Ain 't It Fun " ] , appearing as if she never wanted the moment to end . Could you really blame her ? " The New Zealand Herald 's Rachel Bache stated that the track " had everyone dancing " . 
 The inaugural televised performance of the song was done on the 2013 iHeartRadio Jingle Ball , wherein it was selected as second song on the band 's setlist . [ a ] The band played the track on the season finale of The Voice 's fifth season , which aired on December 17 of that year . On April 23 , 2014 , they sang it on the Late Night with Seth Meyers program . On May 21 , 2014 , the band performed the song on the American Idol season 13 finale . During the performance , Williams was dressed in a white crop tank , floral @-@ printed pants and platform shoes . Finalist Jena Irene , who preceded Paramore with a live cover of the band 's single " Decode " , sang the second verse of " Ain 't It Fun " alone . She also sang the chorus and bridge of the song with Paramore . The band hosted a concert on Good Morning America , on June 13 , 2014 , in which they performed " Ain 't It Fun " as well . 
 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 
 " Ain 't It Fun " garnered critical acclaim from music critics . Writing for Alternative Press , Scott Heisel felt the song was one of the " moments of diversity that really make Paramore shine " . Billboard 's Brad Wete remarked that the song 's instrumentation helped it pass an " average rock song " status . Matt Collar of AllMusic billed the song as an " immediate classic " . For Stereogum , Chris DeVille opined that the song was " crack " . Jon Dolan from Rolling Stone commented that , on " Ain 't It Fun " , Williams transitions to a new musical genre on Paramore with an " I @-@ will @-@ survive warrior priestess " attitude . Kyle Anderson of Entertainment Weekly , Brian Mansfield from the USA Today newspaper and Consequence of Sound 's Amanda Koellner selected " Ain 't It Fun " as a standout from the album . Koellner commented that " when the band allows each track a little more breathing room , they show some growth and have a good time doing it . " On behalf of The Arts Desk , Lisa @-@ Marie Ferla classified it as Paramore 's " strongest moment " . 
 Melissa Locker of Time described it as having potential for the " perfect summer anthem " . Writing for Drowned in Sound , Sean Adams joked that he would eat his modem if the song did not top " all the major charts worldwide " , receive a Grammy Award and amount a high number of views on YouTube . In contrast , Thomas Ingham of musicOMH criticized its lyrics , deeming it inferior to the track 's composition ; The Observer 's Phil Mongredien wrote that the song 's gospel influences did it " no favours " . Sputnikmusic 's Channing Freeman quipped that previous band members Josh and Zac Farro had left the band upon hearing a demo of " Ain 't It Fun " . Freeman also described the song 's lyrics as " ridiculous " and denounced the inclusion of the gospel choir . The Irish Times ' Tony Clayton @-@ Lea dubbed the song " woefully generic " . 
 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 
 " Ain 't It Fun " debuted at number 95 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart issue dated March 15 , 2014 . On its fifth week of charting , the song entered the top 40 of the Hot 100 , at number 34 . In doing so , Paramore became the band 's first album to yield two top 40 hits , after " Still Into You " peaked at number 24 . The song reached its peak of number 10 on the issue of May 24 , 2014 , becoming Paramore 's highest @-@ peaking song on the chart . According to Billboard , it is Williams ' sixth biggest US commercial success . On the magazine 's component charts , " Ain 't It Fun " reached higher positions — except for its peak of number 23 on the Adult Contemporary chart . For the week ending May 15 , the song topped the Hot Rock Songs chart , displacing " Pompeii " by Bastille — which had remained at the top for 12 weeks . The track also topped the Adult Top 40 , while peaking at number two on the Mainstream Top 40 , only behind " Fancy " by Iggy Azalea and Charli XCX . The song has sold over a million copies in the US as of June 2014 . 
 Internationally , the song attained moderate success . The song entered the ARIA Singles Chart at number 41 , on the week of September 8 , 2013 . Two weeks later , the track reached its peak of number 32 , having left the chart three weeks later . " Ain 't It Fun " spent nine weeks on the Canadian chart , where it reached a peak of number 15 . Not having been released as a single in the United Kingdom , the song became Paramore 's second lowest @-@ peaking track there — reaching number 147 . The song reached the top five on the country 's Rock Chart . In Ireland , the song peaked at number 61 . 
 
 = = Music video = = 
 
 
 = = = Development and release = = = 
 
 Pre @-@ production for the first version of the " Ain 't It Fun " music video started in early July 2013 . Alternative Press reported that Jonathan Desbiens , also known as Jodeb , was commissioned to direct the video . The video shoot continued into August , when Williams posted a picture of the band in the set . Two months later , however , the band posted a statement where they revealed that the video had been cancelled . Williams cited " unhappiness with the direction the video was headed " as an explanatory factor ; in replacement , a video for " Daydreaming " was filmed . 
 A new visual for the song , directed by Sophia Peer , was shot on December 2 of that year in Franklin , Tennessee . Peer stated that she wanted the video to " reflect " the message she retained from the song — " you had to push yourself out of your comfort zone and challenge yourself " . She began by brainstorming ideas for the visual , and she talked to Alexandra Young and the video 's editor Winston Case , who suggested her the concept of breaking world records . Peer selected 30 records for the band to break , nonetheless , they reduced the number due to the short length of the video shoot . The records selected were picked to match " different sections of the song " and were based on other already @-@ existent records . 
 To promote the video , Paramore associated with RecordSetter , convincing fans to create their own world records . No partnerships were established with Guinness World Records ; Peer commented , " RecordSetter is much more inclusive than Guinness , therefore cooler . [ The former 's CEO ] , Dan Rollman , is an inspired individual who has dedicated himself to helping people legitimize their talents and specialties . It is definitely the right place for Paramore fans to play along . " The video was released on January 29 , 2014 ; a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes clip was released on March 3 of that year . 
 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 
 The video starts with Paramore holding electric guitars , heading towards the side of a bridge . They begin smashing clock guitars on a roadside , and a title screen appears , announcing that the band broke the record of smashing 30 clocks with guitars — [ b ] at a time of 31 @.@ 33 seconds . The camera shifts to a room where the group attempts to catch flying feathers ; Davis breaks the record of catching the most ( 18 ) feathers in 30 s . The next scene shows the group wearing eye goggles , in a room with white walls , destroying vinyl records in several ways — such as ripping them , stepping on them or punching them . The band breaks another record , after smashing 58 vinyl records in a minute , the highest number of broken records for that time . While the band is destroying more records , York makes a record as an individual by spinning a record on his finger for 32 @.@ 81 s — the least time ever for that accomplishment . 
 As the second rendition of the chorus begins , they go to an open field where they run through 10 banners in the quickest time ever of 9 @.@ 19 s . Quickly after breaking their sixth world record , Williams breaks her only individual record , of doing the " most cartwheels while wearing boots for 20 seconds " by doing 7 . The band members reunite and start walking backwards for 30 feet , while blindfolded and holding stuffed animals . This achievement is done by York in the fastest time ever of 6 @.@ 14 seconds . For the penultimate record , Davis and York break the record of unwrapping a " mummy " in the least time ; they unwrap Williams , who is covered in toilet paper , in 9 @.@ 75 s . During the closing scene , Williams , York and Davis stand on a moving convertible , with Williams breaking the last record of screaming for the maximum time while in a convertible — for 8 @.@ 48 s . The video concludes as it is revealed that " Ain 't It Fun " itself holds the world record of depicting the most world records — 10 — broken in a music video . 
 
 = = = Response = = = 
 
 MTV 's James Montgomery compared the video to the visual of " Still Into You " — the second single of Paramore . He wrote , " That clip was a revelation , the beginning of a bold new chapter for the band , and [ the video for " Ain 't It Fun " ] keeps that winning streak alive . Montgomery went on to call it " blissed out and buzzy , born of a brilliant concept , and an absolute blast to watch " . Fuse 's Nicole James surmised that the world records were " adorable " , while Steff Yotka of Nylon deemed them " crazy , funny , weird " and concluded that they " make for a truly excellent viewing experience " On the critical side , Mish Way — writing for Vice — opined that the video 's concept did not relate to the song 's theme . Way dubbed the clip a " major fuck @-@ up " but called Williams an " irresistible charm " . 
 
 = = Track listing = = 
 
 
 = = Charts = = 
 
 
 = = Certifications = = 
 
 
 = = = Additional information = = = 
 
 ^ a The iHeart Radio Jingle Ball 2013 occurred on December 14 , 2013 . However , it was not broadcast live — it was recorded and " highlights " of the performances were aired on a special program aired by The CW ( on December 18 ) . 
 ^ b Once Paramore — being one of its members or the entire group — breaks a world record in the " Ain 't It Fun " video , a title screen appears stating the record they have established , as well as displaying the time it took .
