= Drishyam = 
 
 Drishyam ( English : Visual ) is a 2013 Indian Malayalam @-@ language drama thriller film written and directed by Jeethu Joseph . It stars Mohanlal and Meena in the lead roles and features Ansiba Hassan , Esther Anil , Kalabhavan Shajon , Asha Sarath , Siddique , Roshan Basheer and Neeraj Madhav in supporting roles . The film was produced by Antony Perumbavoor for Aashirvad Cinemas . The story follows the struggle of Georgekutty and his family , who come under suspicion when Varun Prabhakar , the son of the Inspector @-@ general of police , goes missing after an attempt to physically harass Georgekutty 's daughter . 
 The film 's principal photography commenced in the first week of October 2013 at Thodupuzha in Kerala and was completed in 44 days . The cinematography was done by Sujith Vaassudev and was edited by Ayoob Khan . The soundtrack of the film was composed by Anil Johnson and Vinu Thomas . 
 Released on 19 December 2013 in Kerala , Drishyam received positive reviews with critics praising the screenplay , the performances and direction . The film grossed over ₹ 750 million worldwide and is the highest @-@ grossing Malayalam film of all time . It ran for more than 150 days in theatres and became the first Malayalam film to collect ₹ 500 million from its theatrical box office collections , remake rights , satellite and television rights . It won numerous accolades including the Kerala State Film Award for Best Popular Film and the Filmfare Award for Best Film – Malayalam and screened at the 45th International Film Festival of India and the 8th Asian Film Festival . The film was remade into four other Indian languages including Telugu , Tamil , Kannada and Hindi . 
 
 = = Plot = = 
 
 Georgekutty ( Mohanlal ) is an orphan who had dropped out of school after his 4th grade . Now he is a businessman running a cable TV service in a rural area . He is married to Rani ( Meena ) and they have two daughters , Anju ( Ansiba Hassan ) and Anu ( Esther Anil ) . His only interest apart from his family is watching films . He spends most of his time in front of the TV in his small office . 
 During a nature camp , Anju gets photographed in the bathroom by a hidden cell phone . The culprit , Varun ( Roshan Basheer ) , is the son of police inspector general Geetha Prabhakar ( Asha Sarath ) . Varun is accidentally killed by Rani and her daughter when he comes to blackmail them . They hide his body in a compost pit , which is witnessed by Anu . Rani tells Georgekutty about the incident and he devises a way to save his family from the law . He removes the broken cell phone and disposes of Varun 's car , which is seen by Constable Sahadevan ( Kalabhavan Shajon ) , who has a grudge against Georgekutty . Georgekutty takes them out on a trip to Thodupuzha to pray in a church , watch a movie and eat at a restaurant . Geetha , seeing that her son has gone missing , starts an investigation . 
 After a preliminary investigation , Geetha calls Georgekutty and family for questioning . Georgekutty , who had predicted that this would happen , had already taught his family how to change their alibi at the time of murder . When questioned individually , they give the same replies . Georgekutty also presents the bill of the restaurant , the movie ticket and the bus tickets as proof of their alibi . Geetha questions the owners of the establishments they have been to and their statements prove Georgekutty 's alibi . However , Geetha realizes later that Georgekutty had faked the evidence and established his alibi on the owners by going on a trip with his family to the same establishments later . 
 Geetha arrests Georgekutty and family and Sahadevan uses brute force to beat the truth out of them . Eventually , Anu gives in and reveals the place where the body is buried . After digging the compost pit , they find the carcass of a calf , indicating that Georgekutty had moved the body . Anu reports to the media and complains against Sahadevan . The constable is suspended and Geetha resigns from her post . 
 Later , Geetha and Prabhakar ( Siddique ) meet Georgekutty to ask forgiveness for their rude and violent behavior . Prabhakar asks Georgekutty if he can tell them about their son . Georgekutty then reveals indirectly that his family has committed a crime . Now in remand , Georgekutty signs a register at the newly constructed local police station . As he leaves , a flashback shows him leaving the incomplete police station with a shovel in hand , indicating that he has hidden Varun 's body in the foundations of the police station itself . 
 
 = = Cast = = 
 
 
 = = Production = = 
 
 
 = = = Development = = = 
 
 In July 2013 , it was reported that Jeethu Joseph will be directing a film titled My Family with Mohanlal in the lead . In August 2013 , Jeethu clarified that the film was titled Drishyam . A thread similar to that of Drishyam has been with the director since the early 1990s . He was inspired by a conversation he had overheard about the plight of two families involved in a legal battle . Jeethu had penned the story of Drishyam even before Memories ( 2013 ) . He says , " I started working on the subject some two years back . But I wanted to stick to the planned order and hence postponed the project till I finished Memories " . The script was initially planned to be filmed by another director but since that director could not find a producer , Jeethu took back the script and decided to direct it himself . Drishyam contrasts from the director 's previous films . He says , " Different films require different treatment . I toiled hard while filming Memories as the film was full of twists and turns and the handling of the subject mattered a lot . But Drishyam is a complete script @-@ oriented film that does not require any special effort . We shot the film sticking completely to the script , and the shooting was completed effortlessly . " 
 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 
 Jeethu had initially approached Mammootty to play the lead , but he was unable to commit and asked Jeethu to proceed with the film with another actor . According to the director , Mammootty was instrumental in casting actress Meena for the film . The director , in an interview with The New Indian Express , stated that he wrote the screenplay with Mohanlal in mind and that the character was tailor @-@ made for Mohanlal . He later added that no changes were made in the script when Mohanlal agreed . 
 Kalabhavan Shajon , who previously worked in the industry as a comedian and the sidekick of the lead actors , was chosen for the main antagonistic role . The director stated , " I had two @-@ three actors in mind , but at last decided to pick Shajon . I was very clear that I did not want anyone who has played negative characters so far to do the role . Shajon was a total revelation . " Roshan Basheer , who debuted through Plus Two ( 2010 ) , was chosen after conducting a screen test . Prithviraj was rumored to play a cameo role , though this was denied by Jeethu . Asha Sarath was later signed for the role of a police officer . Child actors Ansiba Hassan and Esther Anil , along with Siddique , Irshad , Kunchan and Koottickal Jayachandran were also cast to play major supporting roles . 
 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 
 Drishyam commenced principal photography in the first week of October 2013 . Mohanlal joined the sets only from 10 October as he was down with chickenpox . The film was shot at Thodupuzha in Kerala . The road @-@ side house shown in the film , which was a major location , is situated at Vazhithala , near Thodupuzha . The shooting had to be halted for a while as Meena fainted on the location . Drishyam was initially planned to be filmed in 52 days , though it was completed in 44 days . 
 
 = = Themes = = 
 
 A reviewer from The Hindu noted , " The film takes off as a typical family drama . The first half of the film is intentionally slow @-@ paced and shows to the audience the lighter moments in the family of Georgekutty . This half combines the elements of drama and comedy genres . The audience gets completely absorbed in the twist of events that begin to unfold from the end of the first half . The second half is more like a thriller and is about how the family , despite the vengeful villainy of a corrupt cop , stands its ground even as the law takes its course . " When asked whether this change in narrative style post @-@ interval was intentional , Jeethu replied : " I really don 't understand when people say the first half lacked pace . A story or a film has its own way of progression and it does travel in a zig @-@ zag away , capturing all the ups and downs of our lives . Right from the start if you accelerate the pace , sooner or later , the story @-@ telling will lose its steam . " 
 When asked whether he had kicked off a new genre in Malayalam — family thriller , a genre which combines the elements of a family drama and thriller , Jeethu replied , " I still believe it belongs to the genre ' drama ' , not a thriller . " He also stated in another interview , " We usually brand a film as a thriller , simply because there is some mystery in the narrative or the story unfolds through an investigation . But I don 't subscribe to this . Although there are some twists in the tale and some suspense as well , Drishyam is essentially the story of a family . " 
 The film has also been said to be inspired by The Devotion of Suspect X , a Japanese novel written by Keigo Higashino . Ekta Kapoor , who had purchased the Hindi movie rights of the novel , sent a legal notice to the makers of the film . However , the director clarified , " After Ekta 's legal team sent us the letter , I watched the Japanese film , Suspect X , which is an adaptation of the Japanese novel . There could be similarities between my film and that Japanese film , but my film is neither an adaptation nor a copy . The Japanese film is also about a murder cover @-@ up and hence the allegation . Similarities are quite common in the works of creators and that shouldn 't be made into an issue . " Rashomon ( 1950 ) was also cited as an inspiration for the film . 
 The film was criticised for the use of some " sexist dialogues " in the first half which were playing to a certain " new generation " audience . Sowmya Rajendran of Sify criticised the same and stated about one of such scenes in the film , " it is such banter , which we often dismiss with a laugh , that helps perpetuate rape culture . " When asked about this , the director replied , " I firmly believe such conversations are part of our lives . I don 't want to elaborate , but it also throws an insight into each character featured in the sequences . Yes , frankly , I was a bit worried how the family audience would react to those scenes . But then I read out that part of the script to a select group of women and they nodded their heads in approval . " 
 There were also allegations that Drishyam might provoke murder . Additional Director General of Police ( ADGP ) Senkumar claimed that two people accused of murdering a woman from Nilambur in February 2014 admitted that their methods for disposing of the victim 's body and mobile phone SIM card were influenced by the film . The murder of a young girl in Irinjalakkuda by her father and his mistress was also said to be influenced by Drishyam . 
 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 
 The film features a soundtrack composed by Anil Johnson and Vinu Thomas , with lyrics penned by Santhosh Varma . The background score was composed by Anil Johnson . The songs were released on 20 June 2014 by Muzik 247 . 
 Veeyen of NowRunning noted in his review of the film that the songs " have a refreshingly delightful tenor to them that deserve an applause for certain . " The reviewer of IndiaGlitz called the score " refreshing " and stated that it " builds the tempo " for the film . 
 
 = = Release = = 
 
 Drishyam released on 19 December 2013 in India . It also received a theatrical release in the United States , United Kingdom and the United Arab Emirates on 3 January 2014 . The film was passed with an ' U ' ( Universal ) certificate from the Central Board of Film Certification . The film was selected to be screened in the Indian Panorama at the 45th International Film Festival of India . It also screened at the 8th Asian Film Festival held in Jeddah in 2015 , representing India . 
 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 
 Drishyam was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc , DVD and VCD on 9 May 2014 . The film created a new record in the DVD and VCD sales on the first day of release itself . The film 's satellite rights were reported to be bought by Asianet for a record amount of ₹ 6 @.@ 5 crore ( US $ 970 @,@ 000 ) . The record was previously held by Kadal Kadannu Oru Maathukutty ( 2013 ) which was bought for ₹ 5 @.@ 75 crore ( US $ 850 @,@ 000 ) by the same channel . It had its global television premiere on 7 September 2014 at 6 pm . IST . 
 
 = = = Plagiarism allegations = = = 
 
 In August 2014 , film director Sathish Paul filed a copyright infringement suit against the makers , saying that it had similarities to his script titled Oru Mazhakkalathu , written in 2013 . The court passed an order saying that the movie had prima facie similarities to Sathish ' script , but allowed the making of the Tamil version Papanasam to proceed , on the condition that the makers of Drishyam produce a ₹ 10 lakh bank guarantee before the court to ensure the compensation . The case was dismissed in March 2015 as it was proved that Jeethu had written the script in 2011 . 
 
 = = Reception = = 
 
 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 
 Sify 's reviewer rated the film as " Excellent " and stated , " It is not often that you sit in a theatre with bated breath , never wanting to miss a moment of the film on screen . Writer director Jeethu Joseph 's Drishyam is one such film , a gripping tale that leaves you spellbound with its skillful craft . " Veeyen of NowRunning rated the film 3 / 5 and commented , " In Drishyam Jeethu attempts a stunning mix of the real with the imaginary , and the result is an unpredictable cinematic artichoke that takes you by surprise at every turn . " Rating the film 3 @.@ 5 / 5 , Paresh C Palicha of Rediff said , " Drishyam can be credited for bringing Mohanlal back to form and pushing director Jeethu Joseph into the big league as he has made a cracker of a thriller . " Jabir Mushthari of The Hindu wrote : " It takes craft , intelligence , and the superior acumen of a genuine storyteller to pull off a film in such an engaging manner . " He also noted that the film 's " thread and treatment are new to Malayalam cinema in many ways " and its " principles go against the set rules film goers here are familiar with " . 
 Shibu B S of The New Indian Express wrote , " For his latest outing Drishyam , Jeethu attempts a splendid mix of emotions , relationships , suspense and thrill . End result : a spectacular cinematic experience . " Dalton L of Deccan Chronicle gave the film a 3 @-@ star rating , writing , " The limelight belongs entirely to Mohanlal . Like the versatile greats of Hollywood , this actor possesses such a vast repertoire that he isn 't required to always attempt the radically new to stamp his towering persona . " Mythily Ramachandran wrote in her review for Gulf News : " Drishyam is an unforgettable picture , shorn of irrational fight sequences and mindless dance numbers . " Aswin J Kumar of The Times of India said , " Drishyam is an elegantly crafted piece of film which Lal and Joseph can proudly hold close to their hearts . " 
 Unni R. Nair noted in his review for Kerala9.com , " The care with which the script is done , the finesse with which the direction part is executed and the characterization and performance plus the thoughtful placing of the songs makes Drishyam worth real appreciation . That the film has almost zero- ' filmy ' humour is also worth noting . It 's the logical manner in which the story unfolds and the very convincing manner in which the characters behave makes it impressive . " The critic rated the film three in a scale of five . IndiaGlitz 's reviewer rated the film 8 / 10 and stated , " Drishyam is undoubtedly cladded with exceptional story telling combined with bravura performances . An undoubtedly exceptional film as far the content is concerned , the movie is a must watch for all the audiences of family and thriller movies . " In contrast , Gautaman Bhaskaran of Hindustan Times wrote , " Scripted more or less in a convincing manner and mounted with finesse , writer @-@ director Joseph fleshes out his characters . However , Drishyam often seems like a radio play , long dialogues mar its cinematic qualities , and like many other helmers , Joseph too does not know where to end his film . Cinema need not be so explanatory ; certainly this is not how contemporary movies are made . 
 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 
 According to Sify , the film " started on a low key " but " swept the box @-@ office " from its second day of release . The film grossed ₹ 60 million in its first eight days . In less than one month following its release , Drishyam became the highest @-@ grossing Malayalam film of all time , beating the record of Twenty : 20 ( 2008 ) . The film ran for more than 150 days in Kerala , with collections of around ₹ 401 million . 
 The film also grossed around ₹ 100 million from rest of India . It showed for 100 days in Tamil Nadu . It also had a 100 @-@ day theatrical run in multiplexes in Mumbai , Bengaluru , Ahmedabad and Hyderabad . The collection from the overseas markets was more than ₹ 40 million , with around ₹ 10 million from England alone . Drishyam became the second film to complete 100 days in the UAE after Titanic ( 1997 ) . The film completed 100 days in 60 theaters in Kerala and rest of India . 
 Drishyam was the first Malayalam film to collect ₹ 500 million from its theatrical box office collections , remake rights , satellite and television rights . The film collected more than ₹ 600 million in its theatrical run worldwide . 
 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 
 
 = = Remakes = = 
 
 Drishyam was remade into several Indian languages . The remake rights of the film were sold for ₹ 155 million . It was first remade in Kannada as Drishya ( 2014 ) by P. Vasu and starring V. Ravichandran and Navya Nair . The Telugu version titled Drushyam ( 2014 ) directed by Sripriya featured Daggubati Venkatesh , along with Meena reprising her role . Jeethu himself directed the Tamil remake Papanasam ( 2015 ) which stars Kamal Haasan and Gautami . A Hindi remake was also made with the same name in 2015 , directed by Nishikant Kamat and starring Ajay Devgn and Shriya Saran in the lead roles . All these versions were commercially successful .
