Semantic Optimization of Preference Queries ⋆
2 Feb 2004

Jan Chomicki chomicki@cse.buffalo.edu 
Dept. of Computer Science
Engineering University at Buffalo Buffalo
14260-2000NY

Semantic Optimization of Preference Queries ⋆
2 Feb 200476BEC44EB01F0E0EA9607F78613068C0arXiv:cs/0402003v1[cs.DB]
Preference queries are relational algebra or SQL queries that contain occurrences of the winnow operator (find the most preferred tuples in a given relation).We present here a number of semantic optimization techniques applicable to preference queries.The techniques make it possible to remove redundant occurrences of the winnow operator and to apply a more efficient algorithm for the computation of winnow.We also study the propagation of integrity constraints in the result of the winnow.We have identified necessary and sufficient conditions for the applicability of our techniques, and formulated those conditions as constraint satisfiability problems.

Introduction

The notion of preference is becoming more and more ubiquitous in present-day information systems.Preferences are primarily used to filter and personalize the information reaching the users of such systems.In database systems, preferences are usually captured as preference relations that are used to build preference queries [Cho02,Cho03,Kie02,KK02].From a formal point of view, preference relations are simply binary relations defined on query answers.Such relations provide an abstract, generic way to talk about a variety of concepts like priority, importance, relevance, timeliness, reliability etc. Preference relations can be defined using logical formulas [Cho02,Cho03] or special preference constructors [Kie02] (preference constructors can be expressed using logical formulas).The embedding of preference relations into relational query languages is typically provided through a relational operator that selects from its argument relation the set of the most preferred tuples, according to a given preference relation.This operator has been variously called winnow (the term we use here) [Cho02,Cho03], BMO [Kie02], and Best [TC02].(It is also implicit in skyline queries [BKS01].)Being a relational operator, winnow can clearly be combined with other relational operators, in order to express complex preference queries.

Example 1.We introduce an example used throughout the paper.Consider the relation Book(ISBN, V endor, P rice) and the following preference relation ≻ C1 between Book tuples: ⋆ Submitted.Research supported by NSF Grant IIS-0307434.


prefer one Book tuple to another if and only if their ISBNs are the same and the Price of the first is lower.

Consider the instance r 1 of Book in Figure 1.Then the winnow operator ω C1 returns the set of tuples in Figure 2. prefer one Book tuple to another if and only if their ISBNs are the same and the Price of the first is lower and the Rating of the first is not lower, or the Price of the first is not higher and the Rating of the first is higher.

Then ω C2 is equivalent to the following skyline (in the terminology of [BKS01]):
SKYLINE ISBN DIFF, Price MIN, Rating MAX.
The above notation indicates that only books with the same ISBN should be compared, that Price should be minimized, and Rating maximized.In fact, the tuples in the skyline satisfy the property of Pareto-optimality, well known in economics.

Preference queries can be reformulated in relational algebra or SQL, and thus optimized and evaluated using standard relational techniques.However, it has been recognized that specialized evaluation and optimization techniques promise in this context performance improvements that are otherwise unavailable.A number of new algorithms for the evaluation of skyline queries (a special class of preference queries) have been proposed [BKS01,CGGL03,KRR02,PTFS03].Some of them can be used to evaluate general preference queries [Cho03].Also, algebraic laws that characterize the interaction of winnow with the standard operators of relational algebra have been formulated [Cho03,KH02,KH03].Such laws provide a foundation for the rewriting of preference queries.For instance, necessary and sufficient conditions for pushing a selection through winnow are described in [Cho03].The algebraic laws cannot be applied unconditionally.In fact, the preconditions of their applications refer to the validity of certain constraint formulas.

In this paper, we pursue the line of research from [Cho03] a bit further.We study semantic optimization of preference queries.Semantic query optimization has been extensively studied for relational and deductive databases [CGM90].As a result, a body of techniques dealing with specific query transformations like join elimination and introduction, predicate introduction etc. has been developed.We view semantic query optimization very broadly and classify as semantic any query optimization technique that makes use of integrity constraints.In the context of preference queries, we focus on the winnow operator.Despite the presence of specialized evaluation techniques, winnow is still quite an expensive operation.We develop optimizing techniques that:

1. remove redundant occurrences of winnow; 2. recognize when more efficient evaluation of winnow is possible.

More efficient evaluation of winnow can be achieved, for example, if the given preference relation is a weak order (a negatively transitive strict partial order).We show that even when the preference relation is not a weak order (as in Example 1), it may become equivalent to a weak order on the relations satisfying certain integrity constraints.We show a very simple, single-pass algorithm for evaluating winnow under those conditions.We also pay attention to the issue of satisfaction of integrity constraints in the result of applying winnow.In fact, some constraints may hold in the result of winnow, even though they do not hold in the relation to which winnow is applied.Combined with known results about the preservation of integrity constraints by relational algebra operators [Klu80,KP82], our results provide a way for optimizing not only single occurrences of winnow but also complex preference queries.As in the case of the algebraic transformations described in [Cho03], the semantic transformations described in this paper have preconditions referring to the validity of certain constraint formulas.Thus, such preconditions can be checked using well established constraint satisfaction techniques [GSW96] 1 .

The plan of the paper is as follows.In Section 2 we define basic notions.We limit ourselves here to integrity constraints that are functional dependencies.In Section 3 we address the issue of eliminating redundant occurrences of winnow.

In Section 4 we study weak orders.In Section 5 we characterize dependencies holding in the result of winnow.In Section 6 we show how our results can be generalized to constraint-generating dependencies [BCW99].We briefly discuss related work in Section 7 and conclude in Section 8.


Basic notions

We are working in the context of the relational model of data.For concreteness, we consider two infinite domains: D (uninterpreted constants) and Q (rational numbers).Other domains could be considered as well without influencing most of the results of the paper.We assume that database instances are finite.Additionally, we have the standard built-in predicates.


Preference relations
Definition 1. Given a relation schema R(A 1 • • • A k ) such that U i , 1 ≤ i ≤ k, is the domain (either D or Q) of the attribute A i , a relation ≻ is a preference relation over R if it is a subset of (U 1 × • • • × U k ) × (U 1 × • • • × U k ).
Intuitively, ≻ will be a binary relation between tuples from the same (database) relation.We say that a tuple t 1 dominates a tuple t 2 in ≻ if t 1 ≻ t 2 .

Typical properties of the relation ≻ include:

irreflexivity: ∀x.x ≻ x, -asymmetry: ∀x, y. x ≻ y ⇒ y ≻ x, -transitivity: ∀x, y, z.
(x ≻ y ∧ y ≻ z) ⇒ x ≻ z, -negative transitivity: ∀x, y, z. (x ≻ y ∧ y ≻ z) ⇒ x ≻ z, -connectivity: ∀x, y. x ≻ y ∨ y ≻ x ∨ x = y.
The relation ≻ is:

a strict partial order if it is irreflexive and transitive (thus also asymmetric); -a weak order if it is a negatively transitive strict partial order; -a total order if it is a connected strict partial order.

At this point, we do not assume any properties of ≻, although in most applications it will satisfy at least the properties of strict partial order.
Definition 2. A preference formula (pf) C(t 1 , t 2 ) is a first-order formula defin- ing a preference relation ≻ C in the standard sense, namely t 1 ≻ C t 2 iff C(t 1 , t 2 ).
An intrinsic preference formula (ipf) is a preference formula that uses only builtin predicates.

We will limit our attention to preference relations defined using intrinsic preference formulas.

Because we consider two specific domains, D and Q, we will have two kinds of variables, D-variables and Q-variables, and two kinds of atomic formulas:

equality constraints: x = y, x = y, x = c, or x = c, where x and y are D-variables, and c is an uninterpreted constant; -rational-order constraints: xθy or xθc, where θ ∈ {=, =, <, >, ≤, ≥}, x and y are Q-variables, and c is a rational number.

Without loss of generality, we will assume that ipfs are in DNF (Disjunctive Normal Form) and quantifier-free (the theories involving the above domains admit quantifier elimination).We also assume that atomic formulas are closed under negation (also satisfied by the above theories).An ipf whose all atomic formulas are equality (resp.rational-order) constraints will be called an equality (resp.rational-order) ipf.Clearly, ipfs are a special case of general constraints [KLP00], and define fixed, although possibly infinite, relations.By using the notation ≻ C for a preference relation, we assume that there is an underlying preference formula C.


Definition 3. Given an instance r of R and a preference relation
≻ C over R, the restriction ≻ C | r of ≻ C to r is defined as ≻ C | r =≻ C ∩ r × r.

Winnow

We define now an algebraic operator that picks from a given relation the set of the most preferred tuples, according to a given preference formula.

Definition 4. If R is a relation schema and C a preference formula defining a preference relation ≻ C over R, then the winnow operator is written as ω C (R), and for every instance r of R:
ω C (r) = {t ∈ r | ¬∃t ′ ∈ r. t ′ ≻ C t}.
A preference query is a relational algebra query containing at least one occurrence of the winnow operator.

Example 3. Consider the relation Book(ISBN, V endor, P rice) (Example 1).The preference relation ≻ C1 from this example can be defined using the formula C 1 :
(i, v, p) ≻ C1 (i ′ , v ′ , p ′ ) ≡ i = i ′ ∧ p < p ′ .
The answer to the preference query ω C1 (Book) provides for every book the information about the vendors offering the lowest price for that book.


Indifference


Functional dependencies

We assume that we are working in the context of a single relation schema and all the integrity constraints are over that schema.The set of all instances of R satisfying a set of integrity constraints F is denoted as Sat (F ).We say that F entails an integrity constraint f if every instance satisfying F also satisfies f .

A functional dependency (FD) f ≡ X → Y , where X and Y are sets of attributes of R can be written down as the following logic formula:
∀t 1 .∀t 2 . [R(t 1 ) ∧ R(t 2 ) ∧ t 1 [X] = t 2 [X]] ⇒ t 1 [Y ] = t 2 [Y ].
We use the following notation:
ϕ f (t 1 , t 2 ) ≡ t 1 [X] = t 2 [X] ⇒ t 1 [Y ] = t 2 [Y ].
For a set of FDs F , we define
ϕ F ≡ f ∈F ϕ f . The arity of an FD f ≡ X → Y is the cardinality |X ∪ Y | of the set of attributes X ∪ Y .
The arity of a set of FDs F is the maximum arity of any FD in F .

Note that the set of attributes X in X → Y may be empty, meaning that each attribute in Y can assume only a single value.


Eliminating redundant occurrences of winnow

Given an instance r of R, the operator ω C is redundant if ω C (r) = r.If we consider the class of all instances of R, then such an operator is redundant for every instance iff ≻ C is an empty relation.The latter holds iff C is unsatisfiable.However, we are interested only in the instances satisfying a given set of integrity constraints.Therefore, we will check whether the restriction ≻ C | r is empty for every instance r satisfying the given set of integrity constraints.

Definition 5. Given a set of integrity constraints F , the operator ω C is redundant w.r.t. a set of integrity constraints
F if ∀r ∈ Sat(F ), ω C (r) = r. Theorem 1. ω C is redundant w.r.t. a set of FDs F iff the following formula is unsatisfiable: ϕ F (t 1 , t 2 ) ∧ t 1 ≻ C t 2
Proof.Assume that formula in the theorem is satisfiable.Then there are tuples t a and t b such that ϕ F (t a , t b ) and t a ≻ C t b .Thus t b ∈ ω C ({t a , t b }) and thus ω C is not redundant w.r.t.F .For the other direction, assume ω C is not redundant w.r.t.F .Then there is an instance r 0 ∈ Sat (F ) and a tuple t b ∈ r 0 such that t b ∈ ω C (r 0 ).Thus, there must be a tuple t a in r 0 such that t a ≻ c t b .Clearly, ϕ F (t a , t b ) and therefore the formula in the theorem is satisfiable.

Theorem 1 shows that checking for redundancy w.r.t. a set of FDs F is a constraint satisfiability problem.

Example 4. Consider Example 3 in which the FD ISBN → P rice holds.Then
ϕ F ≡ i 1 = i 2 ⇒ p 1 = p 2 and ϕ F (t 1 , t 2 ) ∧ t 1 ≻ C1 t 2 is (i 1 = i 2 ⇒ p 1 = p 2 ) ∧ i 1 = i 2 ∧ p 1 < p 2 .
The last formula is clearly unsatisfiable, and thus the implication in Theorem 1 holds and we can infer that ω C1 is redundant w.r.t.ISBN → P rice.

How hard is it to check for redundancy w.r.t. a set of FDs F ?We assume that the size of a preference formula C (over a relation R) in DNF is characterized by two parameters: width(C) -the number of disjuncts in C, and span(C)the maximum number of conjuncts in a disjunct of C. The paper [GSW96] contains several results about checking satisfiability of conjunctive formulas.For instance, in the case of rational-order formulas, this problem is shown to be solvable in O(n).This implies, for example, the following corollary.
Namely, if C = D 1 ∨ • • • ∨ D m , and each D i = C i,1 ∧ • • • C i,ki , then width(C) = m and span(C) = max{k 1 , . . . , k m }.
Corollary 1.If a preference relation is defined by a conjunctive rational-order ipf (m = 1) and the arity of F is at most 2, then checking ω C for redundancy w.r.t.F can be done in time O(n 2 |F | ) .

An analogous result can be derived for equality formulas.From now on we will only present detailed complexity analysis for rational-order formulas.

We have defined weak orders as negatively transitive strict partial orders.Equivalently, they can be defined as strict partial orders for which the indifference relation is transitive.Intuitively, a weak order consists of a number (perhaps infinite) of linearly ordered layers.In each layer, all the elements are mutually indifferent and they are all above all the elements in lower layers.

Example 5.In the preference relation ≻ C1 in Example 3, the first, second and third tuples are indifferent with the fourth and fifth tuples.However, the first tuple is preferred to the second, violating the transitivity of indifference.Therefore, the preference relation ≻ C1 is not a weak order.Example 6.A preference relation ≻ C f , defined as
x ≻ C f y ≡ f (x) > f (y)
for some real-valued function f , is a weak order but not a total order.


Computing winnow

Many algorithms for evaluating winnow are possible.However, we discuss here those that have a good blocking behavior and thus are capable of processing very large data sets.

We first review BNL (Figure 3), a basic algorithm for evaluating winnow, and show that for preference relations that are weak orders a much simpler and more efficient algorithm is possible.BNL was proposed in [BKS01] in the context of skyline queries.However, [BKS01] also noted that the algorithm requires only the properties of strict partial orders.BNL uses a fixed amount of main memory (a window).It also needs a temporary table for the tuples whose status cannot be determined in the current pass, because the available amount of main memory is limited.

BNL keeps in the window the best tuples discovered so far (some of them may also be in the temporary table).All the tuples in the window are mutually indifferent and they all need to be kept, since each may turn out to dominate some input tuple arriving later.For weak orders, however, if a tuple t 1 dominates t 2 , then any tuple indifferent to t 1 will also dominate t 2 .In this case, indifference is an equivalence relation, and thus it is enough to keep in main memory only a single tuple top from the top equivalence class.In addition, one has to keep track of all members of that class (called the current bucket B), since they may have to be returned as the result of the winnow.The new algorithm WWO (Winnow for Weak Orders) is shown in Figure 4.

It is clear that WWO requires only a single pass over the input.It uses additional memory (whose size is at most equal to the size of the input) to keep track of the current bucket.However, this memory is only written and read once, the latter at the end of the execution of the algorithm.Clearly, for weak orders WWO is considerably more efficient than BNL.Note that for weak orders BNL 1. clear the window W and the temporary table F ; 2. make r the input; 3. repeat the following until the input is empty:

(a) for every tuple t in the input:

t is dominated by a tuple in W ⇒ ignore t, t dominates some tuples in W ⇒ eliminate the dominated tuples and insert t into W , -if t and all tuples in W are mutually indifferent ⇒ insert t into W (if there is room), otherwise add t to F ; (b) output the tuples from W that were added there when F was empty, (c) make F the input, clear the temporary table.does not simply reduce to WWO.Note also that if additional memory is not available, WWO can execute in a small, fixed amount of memory by using two passes over the input: in the first, a top tuple is identified, and in the second, all the tuples indifferent to it are selected.

In [CGGL03] we proposed SFS, a more efficient variant of BNL for skyline queries, in which a presorting step is used.Because sorting may require more than one pass over the input, that approach will also be less efficient than WWO for weak orders.


Relative weak orders

Even if a preference relation ≻ C is not a weak order in general, its restriction to a specific instance or a class of instances may be a weak order, and thus WWO may be applied to the computation of winnow.Again, we are going to consider the class of instances Sat (F ) for a set of integrity constraints F .Definition 6.A preference relation ≻ C is a weak order relative to a set of integrity constraints F if ∀r ∈ Sat (F ), ≻ C | r is a weak order.Theorem 3.An irreflexive preference relation ≻ C is a weak order relative to a set of FDs F iff the following formula is unsatisfiable:
ϕ F (t 1 , t 2 ) ∧ ϕ F (t 2 , t 3 ) ∧ ϕ F (t 1 , t 3 ) ∧ t 1 ≻ C t 2 ∧ t 1 ∼ C t 3 ∧ t 2 ∼ C t 3 .
Example 7. Consider Example 3, this time with the 0-ary FD ∅ ⇒ ISBN .(Such a dependency might hold, for example, in a relation resulting from the selection σ ISBN =c for some constant c.)Note that
(i, v, p) ∼ c (i ′ , v ′ , p ′ ) ≡ i = i ′ ∨ p = p ′ .
We construct the following formula, according to Theorem 3:
i 1 = i 2 ∧i 2 = i 3 ∧i 1 = i 3 ∧i 1 = i 2 ∧p 1 < p 2 ∧(i 1 = i 3 ∨p 1 = p 3 )∧(i 2 = i 3 ∨p 2 = p 3 )
which is unsatisfiable.Therefore, ≻ C1 is a weak order relative to the FD ∅ ⇒ ISBN , and for every instance r satisfying this dependency, ω C1 (r) can be computed using the single-pass algorithm WWO.


Theorem 4. If:

the cardinality of the set of FDs F is |F | and its arity is at most k; -the given preference relation is defined using an ipf C containing only atomic constraints over the same domain and such that width(C) ≤ m, span(C) ≤ n; -the time complexity of checking satisfiability of a conjunctive ipf with n conjuncts is in O(T (n)), then the time complexity of checking whether ≻ C is a weak order relative to
F is in O(m n 4m k k|F | T (max(k|F |, m, n))).
Corollary 2. If a preference relation is defined by a conjunctive rational-order ipf (m = 1) and the arity of F is at most 2, then then the time complexity of checking whether ≻ C is a weak order relative to F is in O(n 5 2 |F | ).


Propagation of integrity constraints

The study of propagation of integrity constraints by relational operators is essential for semantic optimization of complex queries.We need to know which integrity constraints hold in the results of such operators.The winnow operator returns a subset of a given relation, thus it preserves all the functional dependencies holding in the relation.However, we also know that winnow returns a set of tuples which are mutually indifferent.This property can be used to derive new dependencies that hold in the result of winnow without necessarily holding in the input relation.(New dependencies can also be derived for other relational operators, for example selection, as in Example 7.)

Theorem 5. Let f be an FD and ≻ C an irreflexive preference relation over R.

The following formula
t 1 ∼ C t 2 ∧ ¬ϕ f (t 1 , t 2 )
is unsatisfiable iff for every instance r of R, ω C (r) satisfies f .

Proof.We will call the FDs satisfying the condition in Theorem 5 generated by ≻ C and denote the set of all such dependencies by G C .It is easy to show that G C is closed w.r.t.FD implication.Assume f ∈ G C .Then the formula in the theorem is satisfiable.Assume it is satisfied by tuples t a and t b (t
a = t b because otherwise ¬ϕ(t a , t b ) is false). Thus r 0 = {t a , t b } ∈ Sat(f ). But t a ∼ C t b , t a ≻ C t a , and t b ≻ C t b . Thus r 0 = ω C (r 0 ) ∈ Sat (f ).
In the other direction, assume that there is an instance r 0 such that ω C (r 0 ) ∈ Sat (f ).By the properties of FDs, we can assume that ω C (r 0 ) consists of two distinct tuples t a and t b .By Proposition 1, we know that t a ∼ C t b .Thus the formula is satisfied by t a and t b .

Example 8. Consider Example 3. Then the formula from Theorem 5 is
(i 1 = i 2 ∨ p 1 = p 2 ) ∧ i 1 = i 2 ∧ p 1 = p 2
which is clearly unsatisfiable.Thus, the FD ISBN → P rice holds in the result of ω C1 , even though it might not hold in the input relation.


Theorem 6. If:

the arity of f is k; -the given preference relation is defined using an ipf C containing only atomic constraints over the same domain and such that width(C) ≤ m, span(C) ≤ n; -the time complexity of checking satisfiability of a conjunctive ipf with n conjuncts is in O(T (n)),

then the time complexity of checking checking the condition in Theorem 5 is in O(kn 2m T (max(k, m))).

Corollary 3. If a preference relation is defined by a conjunctive rational-order ipf (m = 1) and the arity of f is at most 2, then the time complexity of checking the condition in Theorem 5 is in O(n 2 ).


Constraint-generating dependencies

Functional dependencies are a special case of constraint-generating dependencies [BCW99].

Definition 7. A constraint-generating dependency (CGD) can be expressed a formula of the following form:
∀t 1 . . . . ∀t n . [R(t 1 ) ∧ • • • ∧ R(t n ) ∧ γ(t 1 , . . . t n )] ⇒ γ ′ (d C 2 ≡ ∀t 1 .∀t 2 . R(t 1 ) ∧ R(t 2 ) ⇒ t 1 ∼ C t 2 and d C 3 ≡ ∀t 1 .∀t 2 .∀t 3 . R(t 1 ) ∧ R(t 2 ) ∧ R(t 3 ) ⇒ ¬(t 1 ≻ C t 2 ∧ t 1 ∼ C t 3 ∧ t 2 ∼ C t 3
).Then we have the following properties that generalize Theorems 1, 3, and 5.
t 1 ≻ Cα t 2 ≡ α(t 1 ) ∧ ¬α(t 2 ).
This is a very common preference relation expressing the preference for the tuples satisfying some property over those that do not satisfy it.The corresponding indifference relation ∼ Cα is defined as follows:
t 1 ∼ Cα t 2 ≡ α(t 1 ) ∧ α(t 2 ) ∨ ¬α(t 1 ) ∧ ¬α(t 2 ). Theorem 7 implies that ω Cα is redundant w.r.t. a set of CGDs F iff F implies the CGD ∀t 1 .∀t 2 . R(t 1 ) ∧ R(t 2 ) ⇒ α(t 1 ) ∧ α(t 2 ) ∨ ¬α(t 1 ) ∧ ¬α(t 2 ).
The latter dependency is satisfied by an instance r of R if and only if all the tuples in r satisfy α or none does.In both cases ω Cα (r) = r.

The paper [BCW99] contains an effective reduction using symmetrization from entailment of CGDs to validity of ∀-formulas in the underlying constraint theory.(A similar construction using symbol mappings is presented in [ZO97].)This immediately gives the decidability of the problems discussed in the present paper for equality and rational-order constraints (as well as other constraint theories for which satisfiablity of quantifier-free formulas is decidable).A more detailed complexity analysis can be carried out along the lines of Theorems 2, 4, and 6.

For theorems 7,8 and 9 to hold for a class of integrity constraints, two conditions need to be satisfied: (a) the class should be able to express constraints equivalent to d C 2 and d C 3 , and (b) the notions of entailment and finite entailment (entailment on finite relations) for the class should coincide.If (b) is not satisfied, then the theorems will still hold if reformulated by replacing "entailment" with "finite entailment".Thus, assuming that (a) is satisfied, the effectiveness of checking the preconditions of the above theorems depends on the decidability of finite entailment for the given class of integrity constraints.


Related work

The basic reference for semantic query optimization is [CGM90].The most common techniques are: join elimination/introduction, predicate elimination and introduction, and detecting an empty answer set.[CGK + 99] discusses the implementation of predicate introduction and join elimination in an industrial query optimizer.Semantic query optimization techniques for relational queries are studied in [ZO97] in the context of denial and referential constraints, and in [MW00] in the context of constraint tuple-generating dependencies (a generalization of CGDs and classical relational dependencies).FDs are used for reasoning about sort orders in [SSM96].

Two different approaches to preference queries have been pursued in the literature: qualitative and quantitative.In the qualitative approach, represented by [LL87,KG94,KKTG95,BKS01,GJM01,Cho02,Cho03,Kie02,KH02,KK02], the preferences between tuples in the answer to a query are specified directly, typically using binary preference relations.In the quantitative approach [AW00,HKP01], preferences are specified indirectly using scoring functions that associate a numeric score with every tuple of the query answer.Then a tuple t 1 is preferred to a tuple t 2 iff the score of t 1 is higher than the score of t 2 .The qualitative approach is strictly more general than the quantitative one, since one can define preference relations in terms of scoring functions However, not every intuitively plausible preference relation can be captured by scoring functions.

Example 11.There is no scoring function that captures the preference relation described in Example 1.Since there is no preference defined between any of the first three tuples and the fourth one, the score of the fourth tuple should be equal to all of the scores of the first three tuples.But this implies that the scores of the first three tuples are the same, which is not possible since the second tuple is preferred to the first one which in turn is preferred to the third one.This lack of expressiveness of the quantitative approach is well known in utility theory [Fis99,Fis70].The importance of weak orders in this context comes from the fact that only weak orders can be represented using real-valued scoring functions (and for countable domains this is also a sufficient condition for the existence of such a representation [Fis70]).In the present paper we do not assume that preference relations are weak orders.We only characterize a condition under which preference relations become weak orders relative to a set of integrity constraints.

Algebraic optimization of preference queries is discussed in [Cho03,KH02,KH03].


Conclusions and further work

We have presented some techniques for semantic optimization of preference queries, focusing on the winnow operator.The simplicity of our results attests to the power of logical formulation of preference relations.However, our results are applicable not only to the original logical framework of [Cho02,Cho03], but also to preference queries defined using preference constructors [Kie02,KK02] and skyline queries [BKS01,CGGL03,KRR02,PTFS03] because those queries can be expressed using preference formulas.Further work can address, for example, the following issues:

identifying other semantic optimization techniques for preference queries, -expanding the class of integrity constraints by considering, e.g., tuple-generating dependencies and referential integrity constraints, -identifying weaker but easier to check sufficient conditions for the application of our techniques, -considering other preference-related operators like ranking [Cho03].

Figure2.

Figure1.The Book relation


Theorem 2 .
2
If: -the cardinality of the set of FDs F is |F | and its arity is at most k; -the given preference relation is defined using an ipf C containing only atomic constraints over the same domain and such that width(C) ≤ m, span(C) ≤ n; -the time complexity of checking satisfiability of a conjunctive ipf with n conjuncts is in O(T (n)), then the time complexity of checking ω C for redundancy with respect to F is in O(m k k|F | T (max(k|F |, n))).


Figure3.

Figure3.BNL: Blocked Nested Loops




Theorem 7. ω C is redundant w.r.t. a set of CGDs F iff F entails d C 2 .Theorem 8.If ≻ C is irreflexive, then ≻ C is a weak order relative to a set of CGDs F iff F entails d C 3 .Theorem 9.If ≻ C is irreflexive, then a CGD f is entailed by d C 2 iff for every instance r of R, ω C (r) satisfies f .Example 10.Consider the following preference relation ≻ Cα where α is a selection condition over the schema R:




Every preference relation ≻ C generates an indifference relation ∼ C : two tuples t 1 and t 2 are indifferent (t 1 ∼ C t 2 ) if neither is preferred to the other one, i.e., t 1 ≻ C t 2 and t 2 ≻ C t 1 .For every preference relation ≻ C , every relation r and every tuple t 1 , t 2 ∈ ω C (r), we have t 1 = t 2 or t 1 ∼ C t 2 .
Proposition 1.



t 1 , . . .t n ) where γ(t 1 , . . .t n ) and γ ′ (t 1 , . . .t n ) are constraints over some constraint theory.We give here some examples of CGDs.Consider the relation Emp with attributes Name, Salary, and Manager, with Name being the primary key.The constraint that no employee can have a salary greater that that of her manager is a CGD: ∀n, s, m, s ′ , m ′ .[Emp(n, s, m) ∧ Emp(m, s ′ , m ′ )] ⇒ s ≤ s ′ .It turns out that the problems studied in the present paper can be viewed as specific instances of the entailment (implication) of CGDs.To see that, let's define two special CGDs d C 2 and d C 3 for a given preference relation ≻ C (and the corresponding indifference relation ∼ C ):
CGDs are equivalent to denial constraints.Example 9. Similarly, single-tuple constraints (CHECK constraints in SQL2) are a special caseof CGDs. For example, the constraint that no employee can have a salary over$200000 is expressed as:∀n, s, m. Emp(n, s, m) ⇒ s ≤ 200000].
A formula is valid iff its negation is unsatisfiable.

A Framework for Expressing and Combining Preferences. R , E L Wimmers, ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data. 2000

Constraint-Generating Dependencies. M Baudinet, J Chomicki, P Wolper, Preliminary version in ICDT'95. 199959

The Skyline Operator. S Börzsönyi, D Kossmann, K Stocker, IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE). 2001

Implementation of Two Semantic Query Optimization Techniques in DB2 Universal Database. J Chomicki, P Godfrey, J Gryz, D Liang, Q Cheng, J Gryz, F Koo, C Leung, L Liu, X Qian, B Schiefer, IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE). 2003. 1999International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB)

Logic-Based Approach to Semantic Query Optimization. U S Chakravarthy, J Grant, J Minker, ACM Transactions on Database Systems. 1521990

Querying with Intrinsic Preferences. J Chomicki, International Conference on Extending Database Technology (EDBT). Springer-Verlag20022287

Preference Formulas in Relational Queries. J Chomicki, ACM Transactions on Database Systems. 284December 2003

Utility Theory for Decision Making. P C Fishburn, 1970Wiley & Sons

Preference Structures and their Numerical Representations. P C Fishburn, Theoretical Computer Science. 2171999

Preference Queries in Deductive Databases. K Govindarajan, B Jayaraman, S Mantha, New Generation Computing. 2001

Solving Satisfiability and Implication Problems in Database Systems. S Guo, W Sun, M A Weiss, ACM Transactions on Database Systems. 2121996

PREFER: A System for the Efficient Execution of Multiparametric Ranked Queries. V Hristidis, N Koudas, Y Papakonstantinou, ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data. 2001

Database Reasoning -A Deductive Framework for Solving Large and Complex Problems by means of Subsumption. W Kießling, U Güntzer, 3rd. Workshop On Information Systems and Artificial Intelligence. Springer-Verlag1994777

Optimizing Preference Queries for Personalized Web Services. W Kießling, B Hafenrichter, IASTED International Conference on Communications, Internet and Information Technology. GermanyNovember 2002. 2002-12, July 2002Institute of Computer Science, University of Augsburg

Algebraic optimization of relational preference queries. W Kießling, B Hafenrichter, 2003. 20031Institut für Informatik, Universität AugsburgTechnical Report

Foundations of Preferences in Database Systems. W Kießling, International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB). 2002

Preference SQL -Design, Implementation, Experience. W Kießling, G Köstler, International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB). 2002

Fixpoint Iteration with Subsumption in Deductive Databases. G Köstler, W Kießling, H Thöne, U Güntzer, Journal of Intelligent Information Systems. 41995

G Kuper, L Libkin, J Paredaens, Constraint Databases. Springer-Verlag2000

Calculating Constraints on Relational Tableaux. A Klug, ACM Transactions on Database Systems. 51980

Determining View Dependencies Using Tableaux. A Klug, R Price, ACM Transactions on Database Systems. 71982

Shooting Stars in the Sky: An Online Algorithm for Skyline Queries. D Kossmann, F Ramsak, S Rost, International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB). 2002

Preferences: Putting More Knowledge Into Queries. M Lacroix, P Lavency, International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB). 1987

Optimizing Queries in Extended Relational Databases. M Maher, J Wang, International Conference on Database and Expert Systems Applications (DEXA). 2000

An Optimal and Progressive Algorithm for Skyline Queries. D Papadias, Y Tao, G Fu, B Seeger, ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data. 2003

Fundamental techniques for order optimization. David E Simmen, Eugene J Shekita, Timothy Malkemus, ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data. 1996

Which Are My Preferred Items?. R Torlone, P Ciaccia, Workshop on Recommendation and Personalization in E-Commerce. May 2002

Implication and Referential Constraints: A New Formal Reasoning. X Zhang, Z M Ozsoyoglu, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering. 961997